VILLAGE CODE
OF
GERMANTOWN HILLS, IL
Code current through:
Ord. 884, passed 7-24-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Germantown Hills, as supplemented,
contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 884, passed July 24, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. _862___
 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE COMPENSATION OF THE VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND
TRUSTEES
 
 
WHEREAS, this Ordinance is enacted in compliance with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5, et
seq.,
 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Germantown Hills, Illinois, as follows:
 
Section 1. The compensation of the Village President shall be a salary of four
thousand ($4,000.00) each fiscal year.
 
Section 2. The compensation of each Village Trustee shall be one-hundred
twenty-five ($125.00) for each meeting of the Board of Trustees attended, if
public notice of the meeting was given.
 
Section 3. The compensation established by the Ordinance shall apply to the
Village President and Trustees who are elected at the general municipal
elections in 2025 and thereafter, until changed by proper Ordinance passed and
approved according to law.
 
Section 4. The compensation established by this Ordinance shall be in addition
to reimbursement of proper expenses actually incurred during the course of
performing the duties of Village President and Trustees.
 
Section 5. Ordinance No. 624 continues to be in effect for those Trustees who
are not up for re-election at the general municipal election in 2025, but
Ordinance No. 624 will cease to have any effect following the general municipal
election in 2027.
 
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval according to law.
 
PASSED by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Germantown Hills, Illinois,
and APPROVED by its President this _16th___ day of February ____, 2023.
 
                     APPROVED:
 
 
                     ____________________________
                      Village President
 
ATTEST:
 
___________________________
Village Clerk
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 714
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS
   ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS
   WHEREAS, the ordinances of the village of Germantown Hills have, heretofore,
existed only as a collection of separate ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, the village board of the village of Germantown Hills has determined
that it is in the best interest of the village and its citizens to codify the
village's ordinances.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the president and board of trustees of the
village of Germantown Hills, Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1. The code which is presented to the village board this 13th day of
December, 2012, and published by Sterling Codifiers and incorporated herein by
reference is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
village code of the village of Germantown Hills.
   Section 2. The code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the Germantown
Hills Village Code and is hereby published by authority of the board of
trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation
of the village as provided in section
1-1-3 of the Germantown Hills village code.
   Section 3. All general ordinances of the village passed prior to September
13, 2012, are hereby repealed, except such as are included in the Germantown
Hills village code, subject to the saving clause set forth under title 1,
chapter 2 of the village code of Germantown Hills.
   Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval in the manner provided by law.
   Section 5. This ordinance is hereby ordered to be published in pamphlet form
by the village clerk and said clerk is hereby ordered to keep at least three
copies hereof available for public inspection in the future and in accordance
with the Illinois municipal code.
   PASSED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS,
ILLINOIS, AND APPROVED BY ITS PRESIDENT THIS 13TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2012.
         APPROVED:
            Village President
ATTEST:
   Village Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
GERMANTOWN HILLS VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of Germantown
Hills. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the GERMANTOWN HILLS
VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and
shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village
as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2012 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2012 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2012 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in
actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the
village clerk when directed so to do by order of the village board of trustees.
(2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village; and
   L.   All special ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (2012 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2012 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code,
or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The village board hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the village president and board of trustees may
be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be held,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform
some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the village of Germantown Hills".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the
village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD, THE BOARD OR BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the village
board of trustees of the village of Germantown Hills.
CODE: The village code of the village of Germantown Hills.
COUNTY: The county of Woodford, state of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" of the village of Germantown Hills shall begin
each May 1 and shall end each April 30 of the following year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Germantown Hills, county of Woodford, state of
Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (Ord. 197, 6-17-1982; amd. 2012 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2012
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Violation: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any
person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and provisions of
this code shall be fined in an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate
offense.
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in
subsection A1 of this section, the circuit court may impose a period of
"conditional discharge", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4,
or "court supervision", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21,
for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to
perform community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any
other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set
forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to
time.
      3.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this subsection,
to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
      4.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The village attorney may retain attorneys and
private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment
of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the
village with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the
village attorney under this subsection A4 shall be charged to the offender.
   B.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense. (2012 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2012 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE PAYMENT FOR CERTAIN VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Application Of Provisions
1-4A-2: Ticket For Violation
1-4A-3: Payment Of Fine
1-4A-4: Failure To Pay Fine
1-4A-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The procedures established in this article shall apply to violations of the
following village regulations, including amendments of those regulations from
time to time, and to such other regulations as the village may determine to add
by amendment of this article (individually a "substantive regulation" or
collectively the "substantive regulations"):
   A.   Title 4, chapter 4 of this code regulating open burning and
recreational burning within the village, as amended from time to time.
   B.   Title 7, chapter 1, article B of this code regarding mailboxes, as
amended from time to time. (Ord. 609, 4-24-2008)
   C.   Title 8, chapter 2 of this code pertaining to sediment control, runoff
control, and soil stabilization during construction projects. (Ord. 609, 4-24-
2008; amd. 2012 Code)
1-4A-2: TICKET FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Issuance: The village clerk or a deputy in the county sheriff's office,
under contract with the village, at the request of a member of the corporate
authorities of the village, or at the request of the village clerk, or on his
or her own initiative, shall issue tickets for violations of any of the
substantive regulations. If the ticket is for violation of a substantive
regulation other than a parking regulation, the village clerk or the deputy
shall hand the original ticket to the violator and if served by a deputy, the
deputy shall deliver a copy to the village clerk. If the ticket is for
violation of a parking regulation, the deputy shall place the original ticket
under a windshield wiper of the offending vehicle and shall deliver a copy to
the village clerk. (Ord. 542, 2-24-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Form Of Ticket: The village clerk, in consultation with the village
attorney, shall design and arrange to be printed an appropriate form of ticket
that complies with this article and the provisions of the substantive
regulations. In so doing, fines shall be designated for violations of the
substantive regulations in accordance with the penalty provisions of each
respective substantive regulation in a fashion that informs the violator of the
financial benefit of paying the ticket at the village hall no more than thirty
(30) days after issuance of the ticket. (Ord. 542, 2-24-2005)
1-4A-3: PAYMENT OF FINE:
Fines shall be payable to the "Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village
hall, 216 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL 61548. (Ord. 542, 2-24-2005)
1-4A-4: FAILURE TO PAY FINE:
If the village determines to file an action in the county circuit court against
a violator who has not paid the fine stated in a particular substantive
regulation within thirty (30) days after issuance of a ticket, the violator,
upon a plea or finding of guilty, shall pay the higher fine stated in the
particular substantive regulation, plus all applicable court costs. The village
attorney shall file such actions in the county circuit court upon the direction
of the village president. (Ord. 542, 2-24-2005)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Compensation
1-5-1: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Established:
      1.   President: The compensation of the village president shall be a
salary of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) each fiscal year.
      2.   Trustees: The compensation of each Village Trustee shall be one-
hundred twenty-five ($125.00) for each meeting of the Board of Trustees
attended, if public notice of the meeting was given.
   B.   Effect Of Provisions: The compensation established by this section
shall apply to the village president and trustees who are elected at the
general municipal elections in 2025 and thereafter, until changed by proper
ordinance passed and approved according to law.
   C.   In Addition To Expenses: The compensation established by this section
shall be in addition to reimbursement of proper expenses actually incurred
during the course of performing the duties of village president and trustees.
(Ord. 624, 11-13-2008; amd. Ord. 862, 2-16-2023)
ARTICLE A. ORDER OF BUSINESS AND CONDUCT AT MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-5A-1: Time And Location Of Meetings
1-5A-2: Call Of Special Meetings
1-5A-3: Roll Call; Quorum; Order Of Business
1-5A-4: President Duties And Privileges
1-5A-5: Member Duties And Privileges
1-5A-6: Motions And Resolutions
1-5A-7: Taking And Entering Votes
1-5A-8: Precedence Of Question
1-5A-9: Adjournment
1-5A-10: Previous Question
1-5A-11: Motion To Lay On The Table
1-5A-12: Motion To Amend
1-5A-13: Reconsideration
1-5A-14: Passage Of Ordinances, Contracts And Appropriations
1-5A-15: Committees And Trustee Positions
1-5A-16: Member Under Influence Of Liquor
1-5A-17: Nonattendance
1-5A-18: General Provisions
1-5A-19: Electronic Participation In Meetings
1-5A-20: Conduct Code
1-5A-1: TIME AND LOCATION OF MEETINGS:
   The regular stated meetings of the Village Board shall be held in the
Village Hall on the third Thursday of each month at six o’clock (6:00) p.m.,
and special meetings shall be held at such place and at such time as, in the
judgment of the president, or any two (2) members of the Board, the same are
necessary or expedient, notice of such special meetings being given to each
member of the Board by the Village Clerk. Such call shall be in writing, duly
signed and presented to the village clerk, who shall proceed immediately to
prepare notices of the special meeting and shall cause them to be served on the
president and members of the board by the village clerk or any person in the
village. Such notices shall describe in brief the nature and object of the
call. No business shall be transacted at any such special meeting except such
as is mentioned in the notice calling the same.
(Ord. 657, 6-24-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 724, 9-26-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; Ord.
881, 5-15-2025)
1-5A-2: CALL OF SPECIAL MEETINGS:
At every special meeting, the call for the same shall be read and afterwards
filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-3: ROLL CALL; QUORUM; ORDER OF BUSINESS:
At the hour selected for a meeting, the village clerk (or someone appointed to
fill his/her place) shall proceed to call the roll of the members, mark the
absentees, and announce whether a quorum (i.e., a majority of all the members
elected) is present. Upon the appearance of a quorum, the board shall be called
to order, the president taking his chair, if present, and the board appointing
a temporary chair if he is absent. If a quorum does not appear, the board shall
not thereby stand adjourned until so voted by the members present. When a
quorum is present, the board shall proceed to do the business before it, which
shall be conducted in the following order unless temporarily suspended by not
less than two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate authorities: (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
   A.   Pledge Of Allegiance;
   B.   Approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting and their amendments;
   C.   Public comment;
   D.   Current agenda items;
   E.   Ongoing agenda items;
   F.   Presentment of bills;
   G.   Reports of standing committees:
      1.   Finance;
      2.   Streets/equipment;
      3.   Personnel;
      4.   Police;
      5.   Parks;
      6.   Sewer;
   H.   Reports of special committees;
   I.   Reports of officers:
      1.   Zoning officer;
      2.   Village clerk;
      3.   Public works;
      4.   Village attorney;
      5.   President;
   J.   Communications to the board;
   K.   Adjournment.
(Ord. 725, 9-26-2013; amd. Ord. 875, 11-21-2024)
1-5A-4: PRESIDENT DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES:
   A.   The village president shall preside at all meetings of the village
board. In the absence of the village president, a village president pro tem
shall be elected from one of the village trustees to act as temporary chair.
   B.   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and may speak
to points of order in preference to other members, and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to an appeal to the board, on which appeal, no
member shall speak more than once without the unanimous consent of the board.
   C.   While the presiding officer is putting the question or while business
is being transacted, no member shall walk across the room or out of the board
meeting except by consent of the presiding officer. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-5: MEMBER DUTIES AND PRIVILEGES:
   A.   When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution or other original matter, he shall briefly state its nature before
presenting the same.
   B.   No member, without leave of the board, shall speak more than once upon
the same subject, until every member desirous of speaking shall have spoken.
   C.   A member called to order by the chair shall immediately cease speaking,
unless permitted to explain. If the member appeals from the decision of the
chair, the board shall decide on the case, but if there is no appeal, the
decision of the chair will be conclusive.
   D.   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private discourse,
nor pass between the speaker and the chair.
   E.   Every member who is present when a question is stated from the chair
shall vote thereon, unless excused by the board, or unless he is directly
interested in the question, in which case, he shall not vote. (Ord. 657, 6-24-
2010)
1-5A-6: MOTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS:
   A.   Any matter before the board may be set down as a special order of
business at a certain time if two-thirds (2/3) of the members present vote in
the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   B.   No motion shall be put or debated unless it is seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate; and
every such motion shall be reduced to writing if required by a member, and the
proposer of the motion shall be entitled to the floor.
   C.   After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it
shall be deemed to be in possession of the board, but may be withdrawn at any
time before decision or amendment by unanimous consent of the board.
   D.   If the question under consideration contains several distinct
propositions, any member may have the same divided when the sense admits of it.
   E.   In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered on the minutes of
the board, the names of the members moving and seconding the same shall be
entered also. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-7: TAKING AND ENTERING VOTES:
   A.   If a member requires it, the yeas and nays upon any question shall be
taken and entered on the minutes.
   B.   The result of all votes by yeas and nays shall be announced by the
village clerk, and no vote shall be changed after the tally list has passed
from the village clerk.
   C.   The president may vote: 1) when the vote of the trustees has resulted
in a tie; 2) when one-half (1/2) of the trustees elected have voted in favor of
an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or 3) when
a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by
state statute or local ordinance to adopt an ordinance, resolution, or motion.
(Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-8: PRECEDENCE OF QUESTION:
   A.   When a blank is to be filled and different sums or times proposed, the
question shall be taken first on the least sum or the longest time.
   B.   When a question is under debate, the only motion in order shall be:
first, to adjourn to a certain day; second, to adjourn; third, to lay on the
table; fourth, the previous question; fifth, to refer; sixth, to amend;
seventh, to substitute; eighth, to postpone indefinitely, or to a certain day.
Numbers two (2), three (3) and four (4) are to be decided without debate. (Ord.
657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-9: ADJOURNMENT:
   A.   A motion to adjourn the board shall always be in order except: first,
when a member is in possession of the floor; second, while the yeas and nays
are being called; third, when the members are voting; fourth, when adjournment
was the last preceding motion; and fifth, when it has been decided that the
previous question shall be taken.
   B.   A motion simply to adjourn cannot be debated or amended, but a motion
to adjourn to a time named may be and is open to debate and amendment. (Ord.
657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-10: PREVIOUS QUESTION:
When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put in this form:
"Shall the main question now be put?". If this is carried, all further
amendments and all further motions and debates shall be excluded, and the
questions put, without delay, upon the pending amendment in proper order, and
then upon the main question. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-11: MOTION TO LAY ON THE TABLE:
   A.   A motion to simply lay a question on the table is not debatable, but a
motion to lay on the table and publish, or any other condition, is subject to
amendment and debate.
   B.   A motion to take subject matter from the table may be proposed at the
same meeting, provided two-thirds (2/3) of the members present voted therefor.
(Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-12: MOTION TO AMEND:
   A.   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an
amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
   B.   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but
an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
   C.   On an amendment to "strike out and insert", the paragraph to be amended
shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be stricken out,
and those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will stand if so
amended shall be read. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-13: RECONSIDERATION:
   A.   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration being once made and decided in the negative shall not be
renewed, nor shall a vote to reconsider be reconsidered.
   B.   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who vote in
the majority. Provided, however, that where a motion is lost by reason of not
receiving a two- thirds (2/3) vote required for its passage, a motion to
reconsider may be made and seconded by those voting in the minority. (Ord. 657,
6-24-2010)
1-5A-14: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, CONTRACTS AND APPROPRIATIONS:
   A.   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of every ordinance
and shall be entered on the record.
   B.   No ordinance shall be repealed or passed, or contract or appropriation
of money made, unless by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected.
(Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
1-5A-15: COMMITTEES AND TRUSTEE POSITIONS:
   A.   Standing Committees And Trustee Positions:
      1.   Standing Committees:
         a.   The following shall be the standing committees of the village
board, each of which shall be comprised of five (5) members of the village
board: (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010)
         Finance
         Parks
         Personnel
         Police
         Sewers
         Stormwater
         Streets/equipment
         (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010; amd. Ord. 741, 2-26-2015)
         b.   The village president shall set the responsibilities of the
standing committees and shall, from time to time, require reports from the
standing committees to the village board.
      2.   Trustee Positions: The village board hereby establishes the
following other standing trustee positions, each of which shall consist of one
trustee, who will be responsible for discharging the functions that are clearly
implied by the name of the position:
         Business liaison
         ESDA liaison
         Planning commission liaison
         Plat officer
         Zoning board of appeals liaison
      3.   Appointment Procedure:
         a.   The village president shall make appointments of trustees to each
standing committee and other positions identified in subsections A1 and A2 of
this section. For each standing committee identified in subsection A1a of this
section, the village president shall designate one of the trustees appointed to
the committee as the chairperson of the committee.
         b.   In making said appointments and in designating a trustee as the
chairperson of a committee, the village president shall first confer informally
with the village board and the trustee considered for the appointment. The
village president shall consider the following factors in deciding on the
appropriate appointment, understanding that no single factor automatically
carries any greater weight than any other factor, and the village president
should use his or her best judgment under all the circumstances and should act
in the best interest of the village and the board as a whole:
            (1)   Interest or lack of interest by a trustee in a particular
appointment.
            (2)   Seniority of a trustee.
            (3)   Length of time a trustee has served in a particular
appointment.
            (4)   Past performance by a trustee in a particular appointment.
            (5)   Experience of a trustee in a particular area, outside of his
or her experience on the board.
            (6)   The ability or inability of particular trustees to work well
together.
            (7)   The possible need for diversity of viewpoints, experience or
seniority of a particular committee.
         c.   Once the Village President has made appointments, those
appointments stand until changed by the Village President in accordance with
the foregoing procedure. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
creating an expectancy or property right in a particular appointment or
position.
      4.   Frequency Of Appointments: The Village President shall make
appointments to each committee and other position identified in subsections A1
and A2 of this section as soon as reasonably practicable after the effective
date hereof. Thereafter, the Village President shall make appointments to each
committee and other position identified in subsections A1 and A2 of this
section as soon as reasonably practicable following the swearing in of Trustees
after elections held regularly in each odd numbered year. Until new
appointments are made, the previous appointments continue in effect. In the
best interests of the Village and the Village Board as a whole, to be
determined by the Village President, the Village President may change the
assignment of Trustees to any particular committee or position (including, but
not limited to, the positions of Chairperson of a committee) at times other
than following the swearing in of newly elected Trustees. In doing so, the
Village President shall follow the procedure in subsection A3 of this section.
   B.   Ad Hoc Committees And Positions: The Village President, in his or her
discretion, may appoint Trustees to such ad hoc committees or positions as may
be appropriate from time to time. In making those appointments, the Village
President shall follow the procedure in subsection A3 of this section.
   C.    Village President As A Member Of All Committees: The Village President
shall be a member of every standing committee and of every ad hoc committee
which may be created from time to time. In the event the chairperson of any
standing committee is absent or otherwise unable to preside over a committee
meeting, the Village President shall act as chairperson for said meeting. When
the Village President is acting as a chairperson for a standing committee
meeting in the above-referenced capacity, he shall have only the powers of a
presiding trustee and a right to vote only in the capacity as trustee on any
ordinance, resolution, or motion.
   D.   Reports Of Chair: The Chair of standing and select committees to whom
references are made shall in all cases report, at least once in each month
unless further time is granted by a vote of the Board, the state of facts, with
their opinion thereon, signed by the members concurring therein. Minority
reports may be received at the same time with majority reports. (Ord. 657, 6-
24-2010)
   E.   Economic Development Council: In addition to the standing committees
described in subsection A1 of this section, the Village shall have an Economic
Development Council (“EDC”).
      1.   The EDC shall have eight (8) to twelve (12) members and consist of
the following:
         a.   The Village President;
         b.   Two (2) Village Trustees;
         c.   The Economic Development Director;
         d.   One (1) or two (2) representatives of the business community;
         e.   One (1) or two (2) Village residents;
         f.   A representative from the Village Planning Commission and/or a
representative from the Village Zoning Board of Appeals;
         g.   A representative from the Germantown Hills School District 69
and/or a representative from the Caterpillar Trail Water District.
      2.   The Village President shall make appointments to the EDC, using the
procedure set forth in subsections A3 and A4 of this section. The Village
President may also consider the suggestions of the bodies from which the
respective members will be selected.
      3.   The EDC shall be charged with promoting economic growth, recruiting
community minded businesses, and assisting existing business. The Village
President may provide such further direction and responsibilities as he or she
sees fit. (Ord. 727, 9-26-2013)
   F.   ESDA: In addition to the standing committees described in subsection A1
of this section, the Village shall have an Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency (“ESDA”) as provided herein and in title 5, chapter 1, article A of this
Code:
      1.   The ESDA shall have twelve (12) to thirteen (13) members and consist
of the following:
         a.   The Village President;
         b.   The ESDA Coordinator, generally the Village Administrator;
         c.   The Village Administrator, if not selected as the ESDA
Coordinator;
         d.   The Superintendent of Public Works;
         e.   The Chief of the Germantown Hills Fire Protection District;
         f.   The Woodford County Sheriff, or his designated deputy;
         g.   The Worth Township Road Commissioner;
         h.   Two (2) Village Trustees;
         i.   One (1) representative of the business community;
         j.   A representative from the Germantown Hills School District 69;
         k.   A representative from the Caterpillar Trail Water District; and
         l.   A member of the Woodford County ESDA.
      2.   The Village President shall make appointments to the ESDA, using the
procedure set forth in subsections A3 and A4 of this section. The Village
President may also consider the suggestions of the bodies from which the
respective members will be selected.
      3.   The ESDA shall be charged with the duties set forth in title 5,
chapter 1, article A of this Code.
(Ord. 778, 5-18-2017; amd. Ord. 883, 7-24-2025)
1-5A-16: MEMBER UNDER INFLUENCE OF LIQUOR:
Any member upon any regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees who
shall, in the judgment of the Board, appear under the influence of liquor to
such a degree that he is incompetent to take part in the deliberations of the
Board shall be expelled from such meeting by a vote of the Board. (Ord. 657, 6-
24-2010)
1-5A-17: NONATTENDANCE:
If any member absents himself from any regular meeting of the Board, unless
excused by the Board, he shall not be compensated for such meeting. (Ord. 657,
6-24-2010)
1-5A-18: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Public Comment At Meetings:
      1.   The purpose of these provisions is to ensure that interested parties
representing various points of view are allowed time to present those
viewpoints while permitting the board to conduct its meetings in an efficient
and effective manner.
      2.   All comments should be addressed to the board as a whole and should
not include any personal attacks.
      3.   The board should refrain from responding, engaging in question and
answer, or debating an issue with the public.
      4.   Each speaker may speak once and shall confine comments to five (5)
minutes or less, restrict remarks to matters relevant to the governance if the
village and avoid repetitious statements. If the village president or his or
her designee, concludes that a speaker has unnecessarily exceeded the five (5)
minutes limitation, is addressing areas not relevant to the governance of the
village, or has been needlessly repetitious the speaker shall immediately
conclude his or her comments.
      5.   Speakers are not permitted to donate their allotted time to other
people.
      6.   The foregoing rules in the subsection A shall apply to all village
board, committee, and other meetings of the village subject to the Illinois
Open Meetings Act.
   B.   Any person called to order shall immediately take his seat until the
point of order is decided. While any person is speaking, no other person shall
engage in conversations with others or pass between the speaker and the Village
President.
   C.   Only matters relevant to Village business shall be discussed. Any
person indulging in personalties or language calculated to injure the feelings
of any other person or the harmony of the Board shall be called to order.
   D.   The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in "Robert's Rules of
Order" shall govern the Board in all cases to which they are applicable and in
which they are not inconsistent with the standing rules of the Board.
   E.   The rules contained in this section may be temporarily suspended by a
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present, but shall not be repealed,
altered or amended, unless notice thereof shall have been given in writing, and
alteration or amendment submitted at least one (1) meeting prior thereto, and
two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected shall concur therein.
(Ord. 657, 6-24-2010; amd. Ord. 875, 11-21-2024)
1-5A-19: ELECTRONIC PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this section, any member of the village
board may electronically attend any open or closed meeting of the village board
via telephone, video, internet connection or other technology which allows
effective audio interaction with the member at a remote location. A member may
electronically attend a meeting of the village board only under the following
conditions:
      1.   The member must notify the village clerk as soon as practicable
before the meeting of the member's request to electronically attend the meeting
so that necessary communications equipment can be made available.
      2.   The member must assert one or more of the following reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting and explain to the village
clerk the factual basis for that assertion:
         a.   The member cannot attend because of the member's illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of conflicting obligations to
his or her employer; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because he or she is otherwise engaged
in business on behalf of the village; or
         d.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency;
or
         e.   The member cannot attend because of unexpected childcare
obligations.
      3.   Any member participating electronically and those members of the
village board who are physically present at the site of the meeting must have
the capability during the meeting to effectively and instantaneously engage in
interactive audio communication with each other. During open meetings, members
of the audience must have the capability to hear all audio interactions among
all the members of the village board who are present either physically or
electronically.
   B.   Within a reasonable time after receiving a request from a member of the
village board to electronically attend a meeting of the village board, the
village clerk shall inform the remaining members of the village board of that
request.
   C.   Acceptance or rejection of a request by a member to electronically
attend a meeting of the village board shall be determined in accordance with
the following procedures:
      1.   After establishing that a quorum is physically present at the
meeting which the member of the village board desires to electronically attend
and establishing that the communications equipment necessary to permit
participation in the manner prescribed by this section is functioning properly,
the presiding officer shall state that:
         a.   A member of the village board has requested permission to
electronically attend the meeting; and
         b.   The member will be authorized to electronically attend the
meeting unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is
made, seconded, and approved by majority of the members of the village board
physically present at the meeting.
      2.   If a motion objecting to the member's participation is made and
approved by a majority of the members of the village board physically present
at the meeting, the member making the request may not electronically attend the
meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion is made
and seconded but not approved by a majority of the members of the village board
physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to
electronically attend the meeting shall be deemed approved by the village
board, and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present.
After such declaration by the presiding officer, the authority of a member to
electronically participate may not be withdrawn by the village board for that
meeting.
   D.   The minutes of any meeting during which a member of the village board
electronically attends shall identify any such member.
   E.   A member permitted to electronically attend a meeting of the village
board shall have the authority to participate in the meeting to the same extent
as those members physically present, subject to the same limitations applicable
to those members physically present. A member attending electronically may
leave a meeting and return to the same extent and under the same conditions as
members who are physically present, provided the member attending
electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning. (Ord. 657, 6-
24-2010; amd. Ord. 869, 10-19-2023)
1-5A-20: CONDUCT CODE:
   A.   Purpose: The public expects the highest standards of professional
conduct from the village president/trustees elected to local government. The
purpose of the conduct code is to establish guidelines for the ethical and
interpersonal conduct of the village president/trustees. The village president/
trustees are answerable to the community through democratic processes, and the
conduct code will assist in providing for the good government of the village.
   B.   Standards Of Conduct: Village president/trustees shall uphold the law
at all times to:
      1.   Seek to advance the common good of the village as a whole while
conscientiously representing the communities they serve;
      2.   Perform the functions of office truly, faithfully and impartially to
the best of their knowledge and ability in accordance with the following core
values:
         a.   Integrity: Giving the village interests absolute priority over
private individual interests.
         b.   Honesty: Being truthful and open.
         c.   Objectivity: Making decisions based on a careful and fair
analysis of the facts.
         d.   Accountability: Being accountable to each other and the public
for decisions taken.
         e.   Leadership: Confronting challenges and providing direction on the
issues of the day.
      3.   Uphold the conduct code as a means of promoting the standards of
behavior expected of the village president/trustees and enhancing the
credibility and integrity of the board in the broader community.
   C.   Village President/Trustees Responsibilities:
      1.   Conduct To Be Observed: Village president/trustees are agents of the
public whose primary objective is to address the needs of the citizens. As
such, they are entrusted with upholding and adhering to the ordinances and
resolutions of the village as well as all applicable state and federal laws. As
public servants, the village president/trustees must observe a high standard of
ethical conduct in their official duties and faithfully fulfill the
responsibilities of their offices, regardless of their personal or financial
interests.
      2.   Dedicated Service: The village president/trustees should faithfully
work toward developing programs to address the needs of the citizens in the
course of their duties. The village president/trustees should strive to perform
at a level which is expected of those who work in the public's interest.
      3.   Conduct At Meetings: Village president/trustees shall respect the
colleagues, staff and members of the public present during board meetings or
other proceedings of the village. Meetings shall provide an environment for
transparent and healthy debate on matters requiring decision making.
      4.   Refrain From Attacking A Trustee's Motives: When a question is
pending, a trustee can condemn the nature or likely consequences of the
proposed measure in strong terms, but he must avoid personalities, and under no
circumstances can he attack or question the motives of another trustee. The
measure, not the trustee, is the subject of debate. If a trustee disagrees with
a statement by another in regard to an event that both witnessed, he cannot
state in debate that the other's statement "is false". But he might say, "I
believe there is strong evidence that the trustee is mistaken". The moment the
chair hears such words as "fraud", "liar", or "lie" used about a trustee in
debate, he must act immediately and decisively to correct the matter and
prevent its repetition.
   D.   Interpersonal Behavior: Village president/trustees shall treat every
person, including other trustees, employees, individuals providing services on
a contract for service, and the public with dignity, understanding and respect
and ensure that their work environment is free from discrimination, bullying
and harassment.
   E.   Community Representation:
      1.   The village president/trustees shall observe a high standard of
professionalism when representing the village and in their dealings with
members of the broader community.
      2.   All committee members will accurately and adequately communicate the
attitudes and decisions of the committees and village board, even if they
disagree with the majority decision of the committee or village board.
   F.   Governmental Relationships: The village president/trustees recognize
the importance of working constructively with other levels of government and
organizations in Germantown Hills and beyond to achieve the goals of the
village.
   G.   Sexual Harassment Policy:
      1.   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall be bound by the
Village's sexual harassment policy, subject to the provisions of Section
1-5A-20.G.2 of this Code.
      2.   Alleged harassment by the President or a Trustee against another
elected official can be reported to the Village President. If the Village
President is the reporting person, or is implicated by the allegation, or the
reporting person is not comfortable reporting to the Village President, then
the report can be made to any Trustee, or the Village Administrator. Any report
under this section must be referred to the Village's legal counsel, who then
must appoint a qualified independent attorney or consultant to review and
investigate the allegations. (Ord. 657, 6-24-2010; amd. Ord. 822, 1-16-2020)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Inauguration Date
1-6-2: Bonds
1-6-3: Personnel Policy Adopted
1-6-4: Social Security
1-6-1: INAUGURATION DATE:
Newly elected officers shall be inaugurated, and their terms of office shall
officially commence, at the beginning of the first regular meeting of the
corporate authorities of the village in the month of May following the regular
municipal election in April at which the officers were elected. (Ord. 622, 9-
25-2008)
1-6-2: BONDS:
   A.   Bond Amounts:
      1.   President: The bond of the village president shall be payable to the
village in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with security
to be approved by the corporate authorities.
      2.   Clerk: The bond of the village clerk shall be payable to the village
in the penal sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), with security
to be approved by the corporate authorities.
      3.   Treasurer: The bond of the village treasurer shall be payable to the
village in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), with security
to be approved by the corporate authorities. It is hereby found and declared
that said amount is not less than three (3) times the latest federal census
population or any subsequent census figure used for motor fuel purposes. (Ord.
42, 6-26-1961; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Filing Bonds: All of said bonds shall be filed with the village clerk
except the bond of the clerk, which shall be filed with the village treasurer.
(Ord. 42, 6-26-1961)
1-6-3: PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED:
The "Employee Policy And Procedures Manual", passed April 26, 2012, as the same
may be amended from time to time by ordinance, is hereby adopted by reference.
(2012 Code)
1-6-4: SOCIAL SECURITY:
   A.   Policy And Purpose: It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose
of the governing body of village to extend to the eligible employees thereof,
effective July 1, 1977, the benefits of the federal old age, survivors, and
disability insurance provisions of the federal social security act and
amendments thereto. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the
village president shall take such action with the social security unit of the
state employees' retirement system of Illinois as may be required by applicable
state and federal laws or regulations.
   B.   Agreement With State: The village president is hereby authorized and
directed to execute an agreement with the social security unit of the state
employees' retirement system of Illinois to secure coverage of eligible
employees as provided in subsection A of this section.
   C.   Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the
purpose provided in subsection A of this section are hereby authorized to be
made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state
and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid to the social security unit
in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws or
regulations.
   D.   Employer Contributions And Administrative Expense: Employer
contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the social security
unit in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations from amounts
appropriated for such purposes.
   E.   Records And Reports: The village clerk shall maintain such records and
submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations. (Ord. 152, 1-19-1978)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE CLERK AND VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Village Clerk
1-6A-2: Village Treasurer
1-6A-3: Assistants To Clerk And Treasurer
1-6A-1: VILLAGE CLERK:
   A.   Appointment: The office of village clerk is an executive office of the
village. The village clerk is appointed by the village president, with the
advice and consent of the village board.
   B.   Duties: In addition to the duties now imposed upon that office by law,
or provided elsewhere in the ordinances of the village, the village clerk shall
perform the following duties:
      1.   Issue notices to the village board, to the members of the different
committees, and to all persons whose attendance will be required before any
such committees, when directed by the president or chair thereof, and issue
notices of special meetings of the village board.
      2.   Turn over all monies received thereby on behalf of the village to
the village treasurer, promptly upon receipt of the same, and with such monies,
give a statement as to the sources thereof.
      3.   Affix the corporate seal of the village to all papers requiring the
corporate seal.
      4.   Keep a full record of all meetings of the village board.
      5.   Keep all records, receive, mark and properly file all papers coming
to the village clerk's office belonging to the village, grant certified copies
from the records or papers of the village, and execute such orders as may be
received from the village board.
      6.   Countersign all warrants and deliver the same when called for,
taking a proper receipt for same, and generally do and perform such other
duties as may be required thereof by the village board, the ordinances of the
village, and the laws of Illinois.
      7.   Be a custodian and keeper of the corporate seal and of all the
books, ordinances, papers, and instruments of the village, except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance; and all the books, ordinances, papers, and
instruments mentioned in this subsection B7 shall at all times be kept open to
inspection by the village president, members of the village board, or any other
officer of the village.
      8.   Index all ordinances by their number or title and attend to the
proper and lawful publication of the same, and keep a list of all committees
appointed by the village board, and of the business, respectively, and from
time to time referred to them, and note, when the committees report, the date
and nature of their reports.
      9.   Attest all deeds, contracts, and leases made by the village board
and, in conjunction with the village president, sign all ordinances, bonds,
licenses, and orders of the village treasurer, and affix the seal of the
village thereto.
      10.   Attend and record all regular, special and committee meetings of
the village board and attend, record and electronically record executive
session meetings as required.
      11.   Serve as a notary for the village.
      12.   Work with the codification company and submit ordinances for code
updating.
      13.   Submit a proposed tax levy to the finance committee for its review
and modification and assist the finance committee in the preparation of the
annual tax levy.
      14.   On or before the last Tuesday in December of each year, file with
the county clerk a certified copy of the annual tax levy for the village.
      15.   Prepare and deliver all licenses and bonds on receipt of the
required sums of money therefor.
      16.   At the end of each fiscal year, make out and publish in a manner
prescribed by the village board, a full and complete statement of the receipts
and expenditures of the village during each year, and submit such statement to
the village board and, at the end of six (6) months, submit to the village
board in writing a detailed report, showing the aggregate of the expenditures
during the past six (6) months, classing such expenditures under the respective
heads thereof.
      17.   Without delay, deliver to the village president all ordinances or
resolutions under his charge which may require approval or other action of the
village president, with all the papers on which the same were founded.
      18.   Issue and attest, under the corporate seal of the village, all
licenses granted by the village president or village board and keep a full
record of all licenses granted, transferred, or revoked by the village board or
the village president, under their authority, with the date that the same were
granted, transferred, or revoked (and if revoked, the cause therefor), with the
number thereof and the full name and residence of the applicants for such
licenses, in a book to be kept for that purpose, and when bonds are required,
the names and addresses of the bondsmen or sureties.
      19.   Cause all ordinances of the village imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment, or forfeiture or making any appropriation to be timely posted and
published in accordance with law.
      20.   Each year, file with the county clerk a certified copy of the
ordinance in which the total amount of appropriations for all corporate
purposes of the village, legally made, are levied and assessed.
      21.   Receive all petitions or other communications addressed to the
village board and read such petitions or communications at the meeting of the
village board next following receipt unless otherwise directed by the village
president.
      22.   Prepare annual liquor licenses.
      23.   Accept service of process of legal papers served on the village and
deliver to the village attorney and to the village president.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Respond to village resident, village trustee and village president
questions and comments in person or on the telephone with information in a
positive and polite manner.
      2.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      3.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      4.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      5.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      6.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      7.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and the village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      8.   Maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      9.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Must have working knowledge of Microsoft Word/Excel and Adobe
Acrobat.
      3.   Computer experience.
      4.   Must be available to attend village board, special and committee
meetings.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
      7.   Must be bondable.
      8.   Must be a notary public.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourages both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
   G.   Compensation: The village clerk shall receive a salary of three hundred
sixty dollars ($360.00) each fiscal year. (Ord. 189, 3-19-1981; amd. 2012 Code)
   H.   Deputy Clerk:
      1.   Appointment And Term: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
3.1-30-10, the village clerk, when authorized by the board, shall appoint one
deputy clerk. The deputy clerk shall serve until resignation, or revocation of
the appointment, or vacation of office by the appointing village clerk. Any
appointment, resignation or revocation of the appointment shall be in writing.
      2.   Powers And Duties:
         a.   The deputy clerk shall have the powers and duties set forth in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-95, as amended. (Ord. 206, 10-18-1982; amd.
2012 Code)
         b.   The powers and duties of deputy clerk shall be exercised only in
the absence of the village clerk from the place where the clerk's office is
maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by the clerk
to the deputy to exercise such powers, or the board of trustees has determined
by resolution that the clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to
perform such functions.
      3.   Provisions On File: One copy of each appointment, resignation, and
revocation of appointment, and one copy of each written direction from the
clerk to the deputy shall be maintained in the village files. (Ord. 206, 10-18-
1982)
1-6A-2: VILLAGE TREASURER:
   A.   Nature Of Job: The office of village treasurer is an executive office
of the village. The village treasurer is appointed by the village president
with the advice and consent of the village board. In the absence of the village
treasurer the village administrator can perform these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties: In addition to the duties now imposed upon this
office by law, or provided elsewhere in the ordinances of the village, the
village treasurer shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Be responsible for coordinating the preparation and publishing of
the annual treasurer's report.
      2.   Be responsible for coordinating and preparing the monthly treasurer
report.
      3.   Be responsible for the coordination and maintaining of all village
funds and issuing receipts.
      4.   Be responsible for the coordination of depositing all funds for the
village.
      5.   Assist in reconciling all village accounts.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      2.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      3.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      4.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      5.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      6.   Will be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      7.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      8.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Must have working knowledge of Microsoft Word/Excel and Adobe
Acrobat.
      3.   Must have bookkeeping or accounting experience.
      4.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      5.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
      6.   Must be bondable.
      7.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 732, 6-12-2014)
1-6A-3: ASSISTANTS TO CLERK AND TREASURER:
   A.   Appointments:
      1.   The village clerk is authorized to appoint a subordinate to be known
as the "assistant clerk" to work on an hourly basis, not exceeding thirty (30)
hours per week, at such compensation as the board of trustees shall establish
from time to time.
      2.   The village treasurer is authorized to appoint a subordinate to be
known as the "assistant treasurer" to work on an hourly basis, not exceeding
ten (10) hours per week, at such compensation as the board of trustees shall
establish from time to time.
   B.   May Be The Same Person: The assistant clerk and the assistant treasurer
may be, but are not required to be, the same person.
   C.   Responsibilities: The assistant clerk and the assistant treasurer shall
be responsible to the village clerk and the village treasurer, respectively,
and the village clerk and the village treasurer shall be responsible for the
fidelity of the assistant clerk and the assistant treasurer, respectively.
   D.   Terms Of Employment; Discharges: The assistant clerk and the assistant
treasurer shall be employed at the pleasure of the village clerk and the
village treasurer, respectively, and may be discharged from employment at any
time for any reason. Also, the assistant clerk or the assistant treasurer, as
the case may be, shall be discharged from employment if the board of trustees,
by ordinance, shall, in the future, revoke the authority granted by this
section.
   E.   Provisions On File: Any appointment authorized by this section, and any
resignation or revocation of appointment, shall be in writing. One copy of each
appointment, resignation or revocation of appointment shall be given to the
village president and maintained in the village files. (Ord. 307, 6-25-1992)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Office Created; Term
1-6B-2: Qualifications
1-6B-3: Appointment
1-6B-4: Oath And Bond
1-6B-5: Duties
1-6B-6: Compensation
1-6B-1: OFFICE CREATED; TERM:
There is created the office of village attorney, and the person appointed
village attorney shall hold his office from the time of his appointment to the
end of the fiscal year during which he is so appointed and until his successor
is appointed and qualified. (2012 Code)
1-6B-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The person appointed village attorney shall be an attorney at law duly licensed
to practice law in all courts of record in the county. In order to be eligible
to the office of village attorney, it shall not be necessary for such appointee
to be a qualified elector of the village nor a resident of the village;
provided, however, that no person shall be eligible to such office of village
attorney who is or has been a defaulter to the village. (2012 Code)
1-6B-3: APPOINTMENT:
The president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall, at
the beginning or during each fiscal year, appoint a village attorney under the
provisions of this article. (2012 Code)
1-6B-4: OATH AND BOND:
Before the village attorney enters upon the duties of his office, he shall take
and subscribe the oath prescribed by law and shall execute a bond, payable to
the village, in the penal sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), with sureties
to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of his office and the payment of all monies received
by him and delivery of all properties received by him or coming into his
possession to the proper officers of the village according to law and the
ordinances of the village. (2012 Code)
1-6B-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the village attorney to be the legal advisor of all the
officers of the village and, when directed or requested by the proper officer
or officers of the village, to draw or pass upon all ordinances, leases, deeds,
contracts or other legal documents or papers pertaining to matters affecting
the village. He shall also, when directed or requested by the proper officer or
officers of the village, prosecute or defend, as the case may be, on behalf of
the village, all cases in which the village may, in any manner, be interested
or involved, and he shall do and render such other legal services as may be
required of him by the proper officer or officers of the village. (2012 Code)
1-6B-6: COMPENSATION:
The village attorney shall receive such compensation for his services as the
president and board of trustees shall fix, or in case there is no fixed
compensation, then such compensation as may, at the time of the rendition of
the services, be reasonable, usual and customary for like services in the
county. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE C. OTHER VILLAGE OFFICIALS
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Zoning Officer
1-6C-2: Planning And Zoning Secretary
1-6C-3: Village Administrator
1-6C-4: Assistant Bookkeeper
1-6C-5: Superintendent Of Public Works
1-6C-6: Chief Wastewater Operator
1-6C-6-1: Public Works Team Lead Maintenance Worker
1-6C-7: Public Works Maintenance Worker
1-6C-8: Erosion Control Administrator
1-6C-9: Illinois Municipal Risk Management Coordinator
1-6C-10: IMRF Authorized Agent
1-6C-11: JULIE Coordinator
1-6C-1: ZONING OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment; Nature Of Job: The zoning officer is appointed by the
village president with the advice and consent of the village board. The zoning
officer shall administer and enforce the zoning laws of the village in
accordance with the provisions of the village zoning ordinance. In the absence
of the zoning officer, the superintendent of public works can perform these
duties.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Review applications for and, if appropriate and in accordance with
the zoning title, issue zoning use permits and timely and periodically monitor
the status of issued permits to confirm compliance.
      2.   Review applications for, and if appropriate and in accordance with
the zoning title, issue zoning compliance certificates.
      3.   Maintain such records as are required to be kept thereby in
accordance with the zoning title.
      4.   Collect fees for the issuance of zoning use permits and the
processing of zoning applications, and promptly turn over all monies received
on behalf of the village to the village treasurer, and with such monies,
provide a statement as to the source thereof.
      5.   Review and act on zoning complaints or potential violations.
      6.   Attend to public inquiries about zoning regulations and provide
information regarding applicable regulations.
      7.   Complete administrative tickets on erosion, mailbox, and open
burning violations.
      8.   Review site plans submitted by property owners or developers.
      9.   Conduct field inspections when needed.
      10.   Send copies of building permits to the county assessment office.
      11.   Complete the building statistics survey monthly and submit.
      12.   Work with the village attorney on zoning violations, variances, and
special use requests.
      13.   Work with business owners regarding lighting, noise, signage,
parking, setbacks and other zoning requirements.
      14.   Schedule special use and variance hearings for the zoning board of
appeals and publish in a newspaper.
      15.   Communicate with architects, engineers, developers, property
owners, elected public officials, attorneys and other organizations on zoning
requests and issues.
      16.   Complete an annual listing of all zoning use permits issued.
      17.   Assign addresses to new homes and businesses.
      18.   Maintain zoning use permits for future reference.
      19.   Coordinate boundary map and plat approval process with the engineer
and plat officer.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Respond to village resident's, village trustees' and village
president's questions and comments in person or on the telephone with
information in a positive and polite manner.
      2.   Thorough knowledge of the village zoning ordinance.
      3.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      4.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      5.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      6.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      7.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      8.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate planning
commission, zoning board of appeals, village committees and village board with
the responsibility to attend village meetings and committee meetings as
required.
      9.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      10.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Knowledge and ability to read and understand zoning maps and
procedures.
      3.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      4.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
      5.   Must be bondable.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourages both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
1-6C-2: PLANNING AND ZONING SECRETARY:
   A.   Nature Of Job: The planning and zoning secretary shall be responsible
for the administrative coordination of the village planning commission and the
village zoning board of appeals.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Publish notification of all hearings and meetings of the planning
commission and the zoning board of appeals in accordance with village
ordinances.
      2.   Attend meetings of the zoning board of appeals and planning
commission and take minutes of such meetings for approval by the respective
governmental bodies.
      3.   Facilitate communication between the planning commission and zoning
board of appeals and the village board.
      4.   Assign a representative to attend meetings and take minutes when
needed.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      2.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      3.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      4.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      5.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      6.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate planning
commission, zoning board of appeals, village committees and village board with
the responsibility to attend appropriate village meetings and committee
meetings as required.
      7.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      8.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Computer experience.
      3.   Must have working knowledge of Microsoft Word/Excel and Adobe
Acrobat.
      4.   Must be available to attend planning and zoning committee meetings.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourages both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
1-6C-3: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: The village administrator is a full time
employee of the village of Germantown Hills and is the person designated by the
village board to be responsible for the day to day administrative operations of
the village as assigned by and under the direction of the village board. The
village administrator is responsible for the efficient and effective operation
of services provided by the village. In the absence of the village
administrator the superintendent of public works will coordinate these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties:
      1.   Maintain files for all village records, correspondence, and general
information other than those that are required to be maintained or are
maintained by the village clerk.
      2.   Maintain confidential files of those deemed necessary by the village
president and village board and assume responsibility for the content of those
files and the security of those files. This will include all confidential
materials and correspondence.
      3.   Maintain sufficient office supplies for the village operations.
      4.   Keep strict, accurate and detailed records of all employment matters
as required by the village personnel policy.
      5.   Receive payroll reports, check calculation of time worked, prepare
payroll and break down payroll expenditures to the respective funds for each
payroll.
      6.   Prepare all federal income tax, social security contributions, and
state withholding forms and requirements and ensure that all appropriate
payments are sent electronically via the internet before due date.
      7.   On a monthly basis, prepare checks for signatures of the designated
officials.
      8.   Prepare state and federal tax forms (W-2 and 1099) and deliver to
employees and vendors prior to January 31 of each year.
      9.   Prepare the necessary transmittals and reports for the year end (W-
2, W-3, 1096 and 1099 forms) to the federal and state agencies by February 28
of each year.
      10.   Together with the finance committee, shall submit to the board a
report of budget estimates of monies necessary to defray the expenses of the
village during the fiscal year for which the appropriations are to be made.
This report shall include other information deemed necessary so that the board
may fully understand the financial necessities of the current year.
      11.   Without delay, deliver to the officers of the village and to all
committees of the board, all resolutions and communications referred to such
officers or committees by the village board.
      12.   Perform other general office duties such as filing, typing,
preparation of board materials, and other duties essential to the operation of
the village office, including covering the functions for telephone answering,
receiving payments for village services, etc.
      13.   Receive and send e-mails from all boards, village residents and
employees.
      14.   Communicates with the village president and the village board to
advise of project status, accomplishments and when needed prepare written
reports.
      15.   Track trustee, planning commission and ZBA terms of office.
      16.   Receives resident's suggestions and complaints and works toward
acceptable solutions with the president, trustees and committees if required.
      17.   Coordinate varied issues with surrounding cities and villages,
Woodford County and assorted state agencies.
      18.   Schedule use of the community center.
      19.   Attend seminars, meetings and training in order to stay updated to
the latest techniques, procedures and regulations.
      20.   Update website as needed.
      21.   Assist with the updating of the village's comprehensive plan.
      22.   Serve as the general supervisor of the village clerk's office and
coordinates the duties of the superintendent of public works in his absence.
      23.   Assist the personnel committee in the performance evaluation of the
village staff.
      24.   Assist village president/village board in the evaluation of
professional services.
      25.   Determine work projects as well as work schedules when needed in
coordination with the superintendent of public works, or in the absence of the
superintendent of public works.
      26.   In the absence of the superintendent of public works, coordinate
daily jobs and job schedules of public works maintenance workers in conjunction
with the public works team lead maintenance worker.
      27.   Coordinate and prepare the pager and holiday rotation schedule for
the year with the superintendent of public works.
      28.   Complete NPDES annual fiscal report.
      29.   Work with the village attorney regarding compliance with the open
meetings act and proper responses to the freedom of information act requests.
      30.   Complete the Illinois department of revenue central registration
forms for new and discontinued businesses.
      31.   Certify annual list of businesses.
      32.   Certify and approve the tax rate computation from Woodford County.
      33.   Complete certification of tax exempt status for business requests.
      34.   Prepare and certify the list of all board members and employees to
the Woodford County clerk for the statement of economic interest requirements.
      35.   Prepare application for grants.
      36.   Assist in the MFT process with the required forms and
certifications.
      37.   Coordinate census process with completion of census payrolls and
mileage reimbursements.
      38.   Update census maps and address list verification along with
annexation information.
      39.   Coordinate annual audit along with completion of audit assessment
forms.
      40.   Prepare financial reports and close out month ends.
      41.   Assist in IDOT audit.
      42.   Complete fiscal year end grinder pump transfers.
      43.   Prepare annual sewer rate information and work with finance and
sewer committees for recommendation to sewer committee.
      44.   Complete detailed sewer rate process.
      45.   Communicate garbage exemptions to board for approval and work with
McCullough Disposal on garbage customers and recycling toters.
      46.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Responds to village resident's, village trustees' and village
president's questions and comments in person or on the telephone with
information in a positive and polite manner.
      2.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      3.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      4.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      5.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      6.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      7.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      8.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Supervisor experience required.
      3.   Computer experience.
      4.   Must have working knowledge of Microsoft Word/Excel and Adobe
Acrobat.
      5.   Must be available to attend village board, special and committee
meetings.
      6.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      7.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
      8.   Must be bondable.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 756, 11-19-2015)
1-6C-4: ASSISTANT BOOKKEEPER:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: The assistant bookkeeper is an employee of the
village of Germantown Hills and is the person designated by the village board
to be responsible to support the village administrator and operations of the
village as assigned by and under the direction of the village board. The
assistant bookkeeper is responsible for supporting the efficient and effective
operation of services provided by the village. The assistant bookkeeper reports
to the village administrator. In the absence of the assistant bookkeeper the
village administrator can perform these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties:
      1.   Responsible for maintaining records for sewer and grinder alarms.
      2.   Responsible for preparing sewer and garbage bills to residents.
      3.   Receives payments from village residents for garbage and sewer.
      4.   Responsible for maintaining the sewer and garbage accounts tracking
residents moving in and out of the village.
      5.   Send delinquency and disconnection notices and filing and releasing
of liens.
      6.   Attend village board/committee meetings when requested or in the
absence of the village clerk. The assistant bookkeeper will attend, record and
electronically record executive session meetings when required.
      7.   Serve as backup to the village clerk/village administrator for any
and all of the duties.
      8.   Maintain official village files and records in the village clerk's
absence.
      9.   Maintain confidential files of those deemed necessary by the village
president and village board and assume responsibility for the content of those
files and the security of those files. This will include all confidential
materials and correspondence.
      10.   Keep strict, accurate and detailed records of all employment
matters as required by the village personnel policy.
      11.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      2.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      3.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      4.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      5.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      6.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      7.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Office and bookkeeping experience.
      3.   Must have working knowledge of Microsoft Word/Excel and Adobe
Acrobat.
      4.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      5.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
      6.   Must be bondable.
      7.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 732, 6-12-2014)
1-6C-5: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy:
      1.   Directs and oversees all aspects of the public works department and
sanitary treatment and collection system. The superintendent of public works
shall plan, organize, implement and supervise activities related to the
sanitary sewer system, village streets and rights of way, parks, stormwater
system, buildings, properties and grounds maintenance. Works under the
direction of the village president/village board who gives guidance regarding
village policy and procedures.
      2.   Responsible for supervising the maintenance of village streets,
rights of way, vehicles and equipment, plus the maintenance and construction of
utilities and other village infrastructure with some participation when needed.
Work includes responsibilities for ensuring the proper materials, tools and
equipment at work sites and performing in accordance with safety regulations.
Supervise work through delegation to the public works team lead maintenance
worker, observation, conferences and reports. The ability to take the
initiative to complete jobs with pride and communicate the presence of a task
that needs to be completed or take the initiative to complete it themselves.
      3.   Oversees the job completion and job performance of public works
maintenance workers and public works team lead maintenance worker, including
daily communication with the public works team lead maintenance worker for
purposes of scheduling daily job assignments, review of daily job assignment
progress and proper job completion, and discussion of performance and
disciplinary matters.
      4.   In the absence of the superintendent of public works the village
administrator will coordinate these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties:
      1.   Supervises and schedules work for public works maintenance workers
in coordination with the public works team lead maintenance worker, and meets
with the public works team lead maintenance worker daily for regular job
assignments.
      2.   Assist the personnel committee in the performance evaluation of
applicable village staff.
      3.   Assist village president/village board in the evaluation of
professional services.
      4.   Supervises and schedules maintenance personnel for the plowing of
snow and dispensing of salt and cinders/sand and participates when needed.
      5.   Causes plans for public works projects to be reviewed, reviews
preliminary plans, updates standards and specifications.
      6.   Makes field design decisions regarding maintenance work on village
structures, wastewater facilities, and parks.
      7.   Works with all committees to prepare annual budgets and determine
resource needs.
      8.   Maintains stockpiles of materials and supplies necessary for public
works responsibilities.
      9.   Controls and oversees the purchasing of materials and equipment
necessary for public works as defined by the village board and finance
committee.
      10.   Oversees independent contractors performing work for the village.
      11.   Works with the village engineer and village attorney to develop
specifications and bid documents for a variety of public works and utility
related designs, construction and maintenance projects; recommends contract
awards, negotiates contract provisions and coordinates, reviews and approves
contractor's performance.
      12.   Prepares reports, analyses, and recommendations for public works
projects.
      13.   Ensures that water, street, stormwater and wastewater systems are
operated in compliance with village, state and federal laws.
      14.   Possesses knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      15.   Investigates, interacts and responds to complaints and concerns by
the public.
      16.   Takes disciplinary action, up to and including termination, to
address performance deficiencies, in accordance with the village's personnel
policy.
      17.   Reviews plans submitted by independent contractors with the village
engineer.
      18.   Reviews plans and monitors developments related to public works and
utility matters and evaluate their impact on the village.
      19.   Represents the village with other governmental agencies on a wide
variety of issues pertaining to public works and utilities.
      20.   Works with developers and builders regarding development matters
including plan review and determining infrastructure needs.
      21.   Recommends updates and revisions of ordinances, policies and
procedures.
      22.   Supervises the operation of village equipment associated with
street maintenance, including the backhoe, trucks and other equipment.
      23.   Supervises the repairs and maintenance of village buildings, parks
and grounds.
      24.   Supervises the maintenance of the sewer collection system, which
includes lift stations, grinder pumps, etc., including testing and readings as
required by the EPA.
      25.   Coordinates light duty work programs in conjunction with the
Illinois municipal risk management coordinator.
      26.   Coordinate the safety and loss control activities of the village.
      27.   Recommend and advise on proposed policies and procedures, which
will help promote safety and minimize liability. Work with Illinois municipal
risk management coordinator in order to minimize village costs and liabilities.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Responds to village resident's, village trustees' and village
president's questions and comments in person or on the telephone with
information in a positive and polite manner.
      2.   Thorough knowledge of street construction and maintenance, sewer
system operation and maintenance, parks and grounds maintenance, and building
maintenance.
      3.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      4.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      5.   Knowledge of the materials, methods and practices used in vehicle
maintenance repair.
      6.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      7.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      8.   Ability to lift and carry heavy objects up to one hundred (100)
pounds.
      9.   Knowledge of the principles and practices of wastewater treatment.
      10.   Ability to function as a work team lead member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      11.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      12.   Will be responsible for providing information to appropriate
village committees and village board with the responsibility to attend
appropriate village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      13.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      14.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Possession of a valid Illinois state CDL license. The village board
may approve an exemption.
      3.   Supervisor experience required.
      4.   Must be available for after hour emergencies.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
      7.   Must be available to attend the village board, special and committee
meetings.
      8.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 754, 11-19-2015)
1-6C-6: CHIEF WASTEWATER OPERATOR:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy:
      1.   Direct and oversee all aspects of the sanitary treatment and
collection system. Work with the superintendent of public works to plan,
organize, implement and supervise activities related to the sanitary sewer
system. Work under the direction of the superintendent of public works who
gives guidance regarding village policy and procedures.
      2.   Responsible for working with the superintendent of public works in
the maintenance and operation of the village sanitary sewer system. Work
includes responsibilities for ensuring the proper materials, tools and
equipment are at work sites and performing in accordance with safety
regulations. The ability to take the initiative to complete jobs with pride and
communicate the presence of a task that needs to be completed or take the
initiative to complete it himself. Take necessary training courses and seminars
in order to stay updated to the latest techniques, procedures and regulations.
      3.   In the absence of the chief wastewater operator, the superintendent
of public works will coordinate duties.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Perform the maintenance and repair of the sewer collection system,
which includes lift stations, grinder pumps, etc., including testing and
readings as required by the EPA under the direction of the superintendent of
public works.
      2.   Monitor the performance of all equipment, gauges, and charts in the
treatment plant and pump stations.
      3.   Record statistical data concerning plant operations.
      4.   Operate, maintain and repair malfunctions at the wastewater
treatment plant.
      5.   Chart lab test results for trend analysis and maintain accurate
results for analysis and test results.
      6.   Collect samples and identify concentrations of chemical, physical or
biological characteristics of wastewater required in accordance with local,
state and federal requirements.
      7.   Gather and test wastewater samples for plant efficiency reports as
required in accordance with local, state and federal requirements.
      8.   Perform quality control tests on lab equipment and lab analysis.
      9.   Evaluate procedures and results for accuracy and determine
appropriate methods.
      10.   Assure the plant operates in required standards.
      11.   Train other personnel on acceptable operations/lab methods and
procedures to assure accuracy of operations and test results.
      12.   Maintain drawings and schematics of the collection system,
electrical and other systems in the treatment facilities and collection system.
      13.   Attend the sewer committee meetings as requested.
      14.   Assigned to work with the village engineer on the treatment
facility and collection system.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Respond to village resident's and superintendent of public works'
questions and comments in person or on the telephone with information in a
positive and polite manner.
      2.   Thorough knowledge of the sewer system operation and maintenance.
      3.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      4.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      5.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      6.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      7.   Ability to lift and carry heavy objects up to one hundred (100)
pounds.
      8.   Knowledge of the principles and practices of wastewater treatment.
      9.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      10.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      11.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and the village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      12.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      13.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Must have a valid Illinois class professional wastewater operator's
license.
      3.   Possession of a valid Illinois state CDL license. The village board
may approve an exemption.
      4.   Must be available for after hour emergencies.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
      7.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourage both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
1-6C-6-1: PUBLIC WORKS TEAM LEAD MAINTENANCE WORKER:
   A.   Nature Of Job:
      1.   Individuals in this position provide a variety of maintenance,
repair and construction tasks for the village, in all areas of village
responsibility, and under the supervision of the superintendent of public
works, who assigns work and evaluates employees in the position. In the absence
of the superintendent of public works the village administrator will coordinate
these duties. In addition to the duties of a public works maintenance worker,
the team lead maintenance worker under supervision from the superintendent of
public works, or village administrator in the superintendent of public works'
absence, is responsible to team lead a crew of public works maintenance workers
in performing maintenance, repair and construction tasks for the village. (Ord.
751, 10-29-2015)
      2.   Responsible for participating in the maintenance of village streets,
rights of way, vehicles and equipment, plus the maintenance and construction of
utilities and other village infrastructure. Work includes responsibilities for
ensuring the proper materials, tools and equipment at work sites and performing
in accordance with safety regulations. Work is performed under the direction of
the superintendent of public works and is reviewed through observation,
conferences and reports. The ability to take the initiative to complete jobs
with pride and communicate the presence of a task that needs to be completed or
take the initiative to complete it themselves. The ability to receive direction
from supervisors and oversee completion of jobs in accordance with said
direction, assume responsibility for the timely and proper completion of jobs
and report to supervisors regarding job progress, and provide general input
regarding employee performance, and/or employee disciplinary matters. The
public works team lead maintenance worker differs from the public works
maintenance worker position in level of responsibility. This is a working level
team lead position. The public works team lead maintenance worker does not
directly supervise public works maintenance workers but may provide direction,
establish priorities, assign tasks, coordinate work projects of the public
works maintenance workers, while fully participating in work projects as
assigned by supervisors. (Ord. 761, 3-24-2016)
   B.   Essential Job Duties: Typical duties include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Performs manual labor associated with the maintenance, rebuilding,
new construction, and the drainage of streets, roads and bridges/culverts.
Utilizes whatever tools are available and proper for work assigned.
      2.   Plows snow and dispenses salt and cinders/sand.
      3.   Operates equipment associated with street maintenance, including the
backhoe, trucks and other equipment.
      4.   Performs basic equipment maintenance; purchase parts or supplies
necessary for maintenance up to a specific amount.
      5.   Repairs and maintains village buildings and grounds. Mows grass,
weeds, and trims. Maintains building and work areas to be clean, safe and
organized. Remove trash from buildings including main office as assigned on a
regular basis.
      6.   Keep the shop/restrooms safe, clean, and organized on a regular
basis at least weekly.
      7.   Assists the superintendent of public works in the operation of the
wastewater treatment plants, performing tasks as assigned, regular and
reoccurring duties, regular testing maintenance, cleaning, rebuilding of unit
and parts, installations and the operating of specific equipment.
      8.   Maintains sewer collections system, which includes lift stations,
grinder pumps, etc.; performs repairs and replacements as needed; does testing
and readings as assigned.
      9.   Performs JULIE locates for collection system under the direction of
JULIE coordinator and/or superintendent of public works.
      10.   Keep the sewer plant safe, clean and organized on a regular basis
at least weekly.
      11.   Maintains parks, playgrounds, greenways, public easements, and
drainageways.
      12.   Repairs and cleans playground equipment.
      13.   Replacement of playground equipment.
      14.   Receive direction from supervisors and oversee completion of jobs
in accordance with said directions.
      15.   Responsible for the timely and proper completion of jobs and
reporting to supervisors regarding job progress.
      16.   Report to supervisors regarding job progress, employee performance,
and/or employee disciplinary matters.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Responds to village resident's, supervisor's, village trustees' and
village president's questions and comments in person or on the telephone with
information in a positive and polite manner.
      2.   Considerable knowledge of the tools, materials, methods and
procedures used in street maintenance and repair.
      3.   Knowledge of the materials, methods and practices used in vehicle
maintenance repair.
      4.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      5.   Some knowledge of basic mechanical repair skills in order to make
repairs to vehicles and equipment.
      6.   Ability to participate in a variety of semiskilled street
maintenance and repair assignments.
      7.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      8.   Ability to lift and carry heavy objects up to one hundred (100)
pounds.
      9.   Ability to perform manual labor work for extended periods under
adverse environmental conditions including, but not limited to, extended
periods of time of walking, standing, shoveling, bending, etc.
      10.   Skill in the operation of hand and power tools.
      11.   Skill in the safe and efficient operation of motorized equipment
under hazardous and emergency conditions.
      12.   Knowledge of the principles and practices of wastewater treatment.
      13.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including supervisor, village trustees and village president.
      14.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      15.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      16.   Ability to supervise and coordinate daily activities of public
works maintenance workers.
      17.   Ability to communicate with supervisors, receive and carry out
directions and instructions and report to supervisors on a daily basis.
      18.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent. The village board may approve an
exemption.
      2.   Must obtain a class 4 wastewater operator Illinois license within
three (3) years of employment. This may be extended upon village board
approval.
      3.   Possession of a valid Illinois state CDL license. The village board
may approve an exemption.
      4.   Required to be on a pager rotation call.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
      7.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 751, 10-29-2015)
1-6C-7: PUBLIC WORKS MAINTENANCE WORKER:
   A.   Nature Of Job: Individuals in this position provide a variety of
maintenance, repair and construction tasks for the village, in all areas of
village responsibility, and under the supervision of the superintendent of
public works, who assigns work and evaluates employees in the position. In the
absence of the superintendent of public works the village administrator will
coordinate these duties. In addition, individuals in this position accept
direction, prioritization, task assignments and work project coordination from
the public works team lead maintenance worker. (Ord. 755, 11-19-2015)
   B.   Distinguishing Characteristics: Responsible for participating in the
maintenance of village streets, rights of way, vehicles and equipment, plus the
maintenance and construction of utilities and other village infrastructure.
Work includes responsibilities for ensuring the proper materials, tools and
equipment at work sites and performing in accordance with safety regulations.
Work is performed under the direction of the superintendent of public works and
is reviewed through observation, conferences and reports. The ability to take
the initiative to complete jobs with pride and communicate the presence of a
task that needs to be completed or take the initiative to complete it
themselves. (Ord. 762, 3-24-2016)
   C.   Essential Job Duties: Typical duties include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Performs manual labor associated with the maintenance, rebuilding,
new construction, and the drainage of streets, roads and bridges/culverts.
Utilizes whatever tools are available and proper for work assigned.
      2.   Plows snow and dispenses salt and cinders/sand.
      3.   Operates equipment associated with street maintenance, including the
backhoe, trucks and other equipment.
      4.   Performs basic equipment maintenance; purchase parts or supplies
necessary for maintenance up to a specific amount.
      5.   Repairs and maintains village buildings and grounds. Mows grass,
weeds, and trims. Maintains building and work areas to be clean, safe and
organized. Remove trash from buildings including main office as assigned on a
regular basis.
      6.   Keep the shop/restrooms safe, clean, and organized on a regular
basis at least weekly.
      7.   Assists the superintendent of public works in the operation of the
wastewater treatment plants, performing tasks as assigned, regular and
reoccurring duties, regular testing maintenance, cleaning, rebuilding of unit
and parts, installations and the operating of specific equipment.
      8.   Maintains the sewer collections system, which includes lift
stations, grinder pumps, etc.; performs repairs and replacements as needed;
does testing and readings as assigned.
      9.   Performs JULIE locates for the collection system under the direction
of JULIE coordinator and/or superintendent of public works.
      10.   Keep the sewer plant safe, clean and organized on a regular basis
at least weekly.
      11.   Maintains parks, playgrounds, greenways, public easements, and
drainageways.
      12.   Repairs and cleans playground equipment.
      13.   Replacement of playground equipment.
   D.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Responds to village resident's, supervisor's, village trustees' and
village president's questions and comments in person or on the telephone with
information in a positive and polite manner.
      2.   Considerable knowledge of the tools, materials, methods and
procedures used in street maintenance and repair.
      3.   Knowledge of the materials, methods and practices used in vehicle
maintenance repair.
      4.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      5.   Some knowledge of basic mechanical repair skills in order to make
repairs to vehicles and equipment.
      6.   Ability to participate in a variety of semiskilled street
maintenance and repair assignments.
      7.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      8.   Ability to lift and carry heavy objects up to one hundred (100)
pounds.
      9.   Ability to perform manual labor work for extended periods under
adverse environmental conditions including, but not limited to, extended
periods of time of walking, standing, shoveling, bending, etc.
      10.   Skill in the operation of hand and power tools.
      11.   Skill in the safe and efficient operation of motorized equipment
under hazardous and emergency conditions.
      12.   Knowledge of the principles and practices of wastewater treatment.
      13.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including supervisor, village trustees and village president.
      14.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      15.   Ability to accept direction, prioritization, task assignments and
work project coordination from the public works team lead maintenance worker.
      16.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      17.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   E.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent. The village board may approve an
exemption.
      2.   Must obtain a class 4 wastewater operator Illinois license within
three (3) years of employment. This may be extended upon village board
approval.
      3.   Possession of a valid Illinois state CDL license. The village board
may approve an exemption.
      4.   Required to be on a pager rotation call.
      5.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      6.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
      7.   Must agree to a preemployment background check.
   F.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   G.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 755, 11-19-2015)
1-6C-8: EROSION CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: The erosion control administrator is the person
appointed by the village board to administer the erosion control ordinance. In
the absence of the erosion control administrator the village administrator will
coordinate these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties:
      1.   Responsible for administering and enforcing the erosion control
ordinance.
      2.   Responsible for making periodic inspections of all work authorized
by permits issued in accordance with the erosion control ordinance to ensure
that construction is in compliance.
      3.   Responsible for investigating violations of the erosion control
ordinance and cause violations to be corrected.
      4.   Prepare a noncompliance report of violations to be corrected.
      5.   Prepare stop work orders when needed.
      6.   Communicate with contractors/homeowners on inspections,
installations, violations, etc.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Responds to village resident, village trustee and village president
questions and comments in person or on the telephone with information in a
positive and polite manner.
      2.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      3.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      4.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      5.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      6.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      7.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      8.   Will be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      9.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      10.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      3.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourage both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 732, 6-12-2014)
1-6C-9: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RISK MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: To oversee and coordinate the safety and loss
control activities of the village, to file and review claims, and to maintain
contact with claim and loss control personnel. In the absence of the IMRMC, the
superintendent of public works can perform these duties.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   Submit insurance claims reports to Illinois risk management for
employee claims and village property claims.
      2.   Review and certify property coverage lists to Illinois risk
management.
      3.   Prepare risk management hours report and submit quarterly to
Illinois risk management.
      4.   Recommend and advise on proposed policies and procedures which will
help promote safety and minimize liability. Work with the superintendent of
public works in order to minimize village costs and liabilities.
      5.   Complete annual OSHA log.
      6.   Process workers' compensation and disability claims.
      7.   Coordinate light duty work programs in conjunction with the
superintendent of public works.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      2.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      3.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      4.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      5.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      6.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and the village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      7.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      8.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications: High school diploma or equivalent.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourages both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
1-6C-10: IMRF AUTHORIZED AGENT:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: The IMRF authorized agent shall perform all
duties required for compliance with the provisions of the Illinois municipal
retirement fund. In the absence of the IMRF authorized agent, the assistant
bookkeeper can perform these duties.
   B.   Duties:
      1.   The completion and timely filing of all forms for new employees,
termination forms for employees who resign or retire, and disability forms.
      2.   Complete IMRF monthly wages and contribution report.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      2.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      3.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      4.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including the village trustees and the village president.
      5.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      6.   Be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and the village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      7.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      8.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position if the work is similar, related, or a logical assignment
to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Computer experience.
      3.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      4.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village is an equal opportunity
employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities act (ADA), the
village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals with
disabilities and encourages both prospective and current employees to discuss
potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential function or
requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should an
incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to a
disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (2012 Code)
1-6C-11: JULIE COORDINATOR:
   A.   Nature Of Job; Vacancy: Serve as the main contact between the village
and JULIE. Responsible for coordinating the marking of sewer mains within the
village limits. In the absence of the JULIE coordinator the village
administrator will coordinate these duties.
   B.   Essential Job Duties:
      1.   Responsible for coordinating the marking of sewer mains within the
village limits.
      2.   Discuss and cooperate in the solution of any problem that may arise
between that member and the JULIE system.
      3.   Distribute all relevant JULIE information to the alternate
coordinator and other key personnel within the company.
      4.   To notify JULIE of changes to the contact information for the
coordinator or any alternate coordinators.
      5.   Certify village hours and schedules to JULIE annually.
   C.   Job Requirements:
      1.   Respond to village resident, village trustee and village president
questions and comments in person or on the telephone with information in a
positive and polite manner.
      2.   Must be able to perform and/or manage multiple tasks, projects, and
priorities concurrently.
      3.   Must be efficient, a self-starter, an independent worker, a detail
person, and possess good work habits.
      4.   Knowledge of safety principles and practices.
      5.   Ability to follow oral and written instructions.
      6.   Ability to function as a work team member through effective
communication including village trustees and village president.
      7.   Ability to perform village functions and services with priority and
loyalty to the village.
      8.   Will be responsible for providing information to appropriate village
committees and village board with the responsibility to attend appropriate
village meetings and committee meetings as required.
      9.   Must maintain proper personal hygiene and a proper and professional
appearance.
      10.   Ability to assume additional duties or responsibilities as may be
required by circumstances, emergencies or other situations.
The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types
of work that may be performed. The omission of specific duties does not exclude
them from the position, if the work is similar, related, or a logical
assignment to the position.
   D.   Qualifications:
      1.   High school diploma or equivalent.
      2.   Applicants are subject to a preemployment physical and drug
screening.
      3.   Employees are subject to random drug/alcohol screening.
   E.   Interpretation:
      1.   This job description does not constitute an employment agreement
between the employer and employee and is subject to change by the employer as
the needs of the employer and requirements of the job change.
      2.   This job description should not be interpreted as all inclusive. It
is intended to identify the essential functions and requirements of this job.
Incumbents/applicants may be requested to perform job related responsibilities
and tasks other than those stated in this section.
   F.   Village Compliance With ADA: The village of Germantown Hills is an
equal opportunity employer. In compliance with the Americans with disabilities
act (ADA), the village will provide reasonable accommodations to qualified
individuals with disabilities and encourages both prospective and current
employees to discuss potential accommodations with the employer. Any essential
function or requirement of this position will be evaluated as necessary should
an incumbent/applicant be unable to perform the function or requirement due to
a disability as defined by the Americans with disabilities act. Reasonable
accommodations for the specific disability will be made for the incumbent/
applicant when possible. (Ord. 732, 6-12-2014)
CHAPTER 7
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-7-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-7-2: Definitions
1-7-3: Interpretation
1-7-4: Prohibited Acts
1-7-5: Penalties
1-7-6: Amendments
1-7-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-7-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 430/10-40.
1-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 528, 5-
20-2004)
1-7-3: INTERPRETATION:
Other than ordinance 432, this chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or
modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of
village officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances
or policies are less restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
1-7-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by an officer or any employee of the village is
hereby prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the village under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act by any officer or employee of the village is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
1-7-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act. (Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
1-7-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
1-7-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   B.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 528, 5-20-2004)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC RECORDS; VILLAGE DIRECTORY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Requests For Public Records; State Regulations Adopted
1-8-2: Village Directory
1-8-3: Display And Availability Of Provisions
1-8-1: REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS; STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The Illinois freedom of information act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et
seq., as may from time to time be amended, is hereby adopted by reference and
shall govern the village responses to requests for public records. (2012 Code)
1-8-2: VILLAGE DIRECTORY:
The village clerk shall prepare and keep current a village directory setting
forth a brief statement of the purpose of the village government, a block
diagram giving its functional subdivisions, the total amount of its operating
budget, the location of its office, the approximate number of full and part
time employees, and the identification and membership of its boards and
commissions. (Ord. 228, 6-20-1984)
1-8-3: DISPLAY AND AVAILABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
Copies of the village directory set forth in section
1-8-2 of this chapter and the public records provisions of section
1-8-1 of this chapter shall be prominently displayed at the village hall, shall
be made available for inspection and copying without charge, and shall be
mailed upon request. (Ord. 228, 6-20-1984)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE TAXES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
1-9-2: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
1-9-3: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
1-9-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate; Exemptions: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the
village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-1.6 of the Illinois municipal
code; except, that this tax shall not be imposed on the sales of food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
   B.   Monthly Returns Required: Every such person engaged in such business in
the village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the
report to the state department of revenue required by section 3 of the
retailers' occupation tax act 1 .
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month. (2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/3.
1-9-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate; Exemptions: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at the rate
of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property
transferred by said servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property
or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-1.7 of the Illinois municipal
code; except, that this tax shall not be imposed on the sales of food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
   B.   Monthly Return Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to
account for municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the village
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by section 9 of the service occupation tax
act 1 .
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the receipts from transfers of tangible personal property or real estate
incident to a sale of service during the preceding month. (2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 115/9.
1-9-3: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Illinois Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax Law, as set forth in
Sections 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22), as the
same may be amended from time to time.
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (“Department”). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
department. The department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22 and the provisions of this section. (Ord. 817,
9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 10
BIDDING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Contracts For Public Improvements
1-10-2: Responsible Bidder
1-10-3: Public Improvements Definition
1-10-4: Emergency Purchases; Report Required
1-10-1: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
Any contract for public improvements anticipated to cost more than twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be awarded in the following manner: (Ord.
718, 6-27-2013; amd. Ord. 729, 1-24-2014; Ord. 789, 9-26-2017)
   A.   In accordance with any procedure authorized or required by applicable
State or Federal law; or
   B.   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, pursuant to a solicitation for bids
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Any such
solicitation shall include a general description of the supplies, materials,
equipment, work or services sought by the Village, shall state where
specifications and all related documentation may be secured, the time and place
for opening bids and such other information as the Village Board deems
appropriate.
All such contracts shall be awarded by the Village Board to the lowest
responsible bidder whose bid is determined to serve the best interest of the
Village, taking into consideration the quality of the articles or services to
be supplied, or the work to be performed, conformity with specifications,
price, delivery terms, the service reputation of the vendor or contractor and
such other factors as the Village Board deems appropriate. Any other provisions
of this chapter or this Code to the contrary notwithstanding (and except as
otherwise required by State or Federal law), the Village Board may by ordinance
or resolution adopted by an affirmative vote of four (4) of the Trustees enter
into any contract without the solicitation of bids or quotations, with an
entity that meets the "responsible bidder" criteria described in section
1-10-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 718, 6-27-2013)
1-10-2: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER:
With respect to construction projects of more than twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) involving the construction of new facilities, the renovation of
current facilities or road construction, the term "responsible bidder" means a
bidder who is capable of meeting all of the specifications for the construction
project, who meets the following criteria and who submits evidence satisfactory
to the Village that the bidder meets such criteria: (Ord. 718, 6-27-2013; amd.
Ord. 752, 10-29-2015; Ord. 789, 9-26-2017)
   A.   The bidder is in compliance with all applicable laws prerequisite to
doing business in the State of Illinois;
   B.   The bidder has obtained a Federal employer tax identification number
or, in the case of an individual contractor, a social security number;
   C.   The bidder is in compliance with the equal opportunity employer
provisions of section 2000(e) of chapter 21, title 42 of the United States Code
and Federal executive order no. 11246 as amended by Federal executive order no.
11375;
   D.   The bidder provides certificates of insurance demonstrating that the
bidder has obtained the following forms of insurance coverage which will be
effective during the term of the construction project:
         Comprehensive general liability;
         Workers' compensation;
         Completed operations;
         Motor vehicle;
         Hazardous occupation; and
         Where appropriate, products liability.
   E.   The bidder is in compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act and pays wages, and provides or pays for medical and
hospitalization insurance and retirement for those trades covered by the
Prevailing Wage Act in the amounts determined in accordance with the Prevailing
Wage Act. All such bidders awarded a contract for a construction project and
their subcontractors shall provide certified payrolls to the Village in
accordance with the provisions of the Prevailing Wage Act; and
   F.   The bidder and all subcontractors performing work on the construction
project must participate in an active apprenticeship and training program
approved and registered with the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training for each trade which performs work on the
construction project. (Ord. 718, 6-27-2013)
1-10-3: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS DEFINITION:
The term "public improvements", as used in this chapter, shall have the same
meaning ascribed to that term in division 9 of article 8 of the Illinois
Municipal Code 1 , and as such may be interpreted by the courts of the State of
Illinois. (Ord. 718, 6-27-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1 et seq.
1-10-4: EMERGENCY PURCHASES; REPORT REQUIRED:
In the case of the occurrence of any breakage or loss of equipment, or in other
circumstances which could not reasonably be anticipated whereby any necessary
regular service of the Village is, or is about to be, interrupted, or whereby
the Village will suffer any great or continuing loss, the department head, upon
the approval of the Village President, may negotiate any emergency purchase or
contract to restore or maintain such service as to terminate such loss, without
advertising for bids and in such amount as may be necessary in the
circumstances. In case of such emergency purchases involving amounts of more
than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), the department head shall use
reasonable efforts to contract with an entity meeting the "responsible bidder"
criteria as described in section
1-10-2 of this chapter, and shall tender a full report on the case at the next
meeting of the Board of Trustees thereafter. (Ord. 718, 6-27-2013; amd. Ord.
752, 10-29-2015; Ord. 789, 9-26-2017)
CHAPTER 11
TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-11-1: Definitions
1-11-2: Maximum Reimbursement
1-11-3: Expense Reimbursement Request Form
1-11-4: Approval
1-11-5: Reimbursements That Exceed Maximum
1-11-6: Entertainment
1-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose which
is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry out the
responsibilities of village business.
TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and
officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services. (Ord. 775, 2-23-2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
1-11-2: MAXIMUM REIMBURSEMENT:
The village shall only reimburse the following types of travel, meal, and
lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the following
maximum allowable amounts:
   A.   Travel: When using personal vehicles to conduct public business the
employee will be reimbursed at the IRS approved rate, plus tolls and parking. A
mileage reimbursement form will be submitted by the employees and/or officers
for mileage reimbursement only.
   B.   Lodging: The village will reimburse employees for daily lodging
expenses. Lodging expenses will be reimbursed: 1) in accordance with the
applicable per diem rates in compliance with the current edition of IRS
publication 463 entitled "Travel, Entertainment, Gift, And Car Expenses" and as
set forth on the GSA (U.S. general services administration) website at
www.gsa.gov; or 2) the actual cost of lodging arranged by the host for the
seminar/conference attended.
   C.   Meals: The village will reimburse employees for daily meal expenses not
to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) each day. Alcohol is specifically excluded
from reimbursement. (Ord. 775, 2-23-2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
1-11-3: EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUEST FORM:
No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a village
employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "travel, meal, and lodging
expense reimbursement request form", on file in the city, has been submitted
and approved. All documents and information submitted with the form shall be
subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act 1 . (Ord. 775, 2-23-
2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-11-4: APPROVAL:
Reimbursement or prepayment of travel, meal or lodging expenses of any officer
or employee that does not exceed the maximum reimbursement amount allowed under
the regulations adopted under section
1-11-2 of this chapter may only be approved by the village president, the
chairperson of the personnel committee, or the village board. (Ord. 775, 2-23-
2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
1-11-5: REIMBURSEMENTS THAT EXCEED MAXIMUM:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or employee that
exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under
section
1-11-2 of this chapter or b) any member of the village board of trustees may
only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the village board of
trustees. However, in the event of an emergency or other extraordinary
circumstances, the village board of trustees may approve more than the maximum
allowable expenses set forth above. (Ord. 775, 2-23-2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
1-11-6: ENTERTAINMENT:
The village shall not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer for
any activities which would be considered entertainment. Activities which would
otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 775, 2-23-2017, eff. 3-2-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Created; Purpose
2-1-2: Membership; Residency; Appointment
2-1-3: Term Of Office; Vacancies; Compensation
2-1-4: Organization And Procedure
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-6: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision; Official Map
2-1-7: Public Improvements
2-1-8: Secretary; Technical Advisors
2-1-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive village plan for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development or redevelopment of the village and contiguous territory
not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality, a planning commission is hereby created under
authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of Illinois entitled
"Illinois municipal code", approved May 29, 1961, effective July 1, 1961, as
amended. (Ord. 57, 8-19-1965)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; RESIDENCY; APPOINTMENT:
The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall
either reside within the village or within territory contiguous to the village
and not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of
the village and not included within any other municipality. All members shall
be appointed by the village president, subject to confirmation by the board of
trustees, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the
planning commission and subject to the approval of the village board. (Ord.
195, 4-22-1982; amd. 2012 Code)
2-1-3: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES; COMPENSATION:
All members of the planning commission shall serve for a period of three (3)
years which term shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 three (3) years
later. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. All
members of the commission shall serve without compensation; except, that if the
village board of trustees deems it advisable, they may receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by said village board of
trustees and provided in the appropriation ordinance. (Ord. 195, 4-22-1982;
amd. Ord. 261, 11-17-1988)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
There shall be an organizational meeting of the planning commission to be held
annually. At such meeting, the commission shall elect such officers as it may
deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter rules and regulations of
organization and procedure, subject to approval by the village board and
consistent with village ordinances and state laws. The commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection. The commission shall also file an annual report with the village
president and board of trustees setting forth its transactions and
recommendations. (Ord. 57, 8-19-1965; amd. 2012 Code)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   1. To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees a
comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of
the village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-
half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not included
in any other municipality. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the
official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. Such plan shall
be advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by
ordinances duly enacted by the village board of trustees.
      2.   As provided by law, there shall be compliance with all requirements
for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county recorder of
deeds and filing of said plan and ordinances with the village clerk.
      3.   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory, such plan or plans shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as herein defined and shall establish reasonable
requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public
streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of
lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. The
requirements specified herein shall become regulatory only when adopted by
ordinance.
   B.   To designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
   C.   To recommend to the village board of trustees, from time to time, such
changes in the comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed
necessary.
   D.   To prepare and recommend to the village board of trustees, from time to
time, plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of
the official comprehensive plan.
   E.   To give aid to the officials of the village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, or parts
thereof, to further the making of such improvements and generally to promote
the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
   F.   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities
for the general purpose of public understanding.
   G.   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area. (Ord. 57, 8-19-1965)
   H.   To accept and receive a plat of subdivision of land for preliminary
approval and advise and assist the village board in final approval thereof.
(2012 Code)
   I.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted under
authority of an act of the general assembly of the state of Illinois entitled
"Illinois municipal code", approved May 29, 1961, effective July 1, 1961, as
amended, as may be conferred by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 57, 8-19-
1965)
2-1-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION; OFFICIAL MAP:
   A.   At any time before or after the formal adoption of the official
comprehensive plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be
designated by ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included
within the official comprehensive plan, or one or more separate geographical or
functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous
unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate
limits of the village. As provided by law, there shall be compliance with all
requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the county
recorder of deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances, including the
official map, with the village clerk.
   B.   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record
affecting land within the corporate limits of the village or within contiguous
territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
stormwater and floodwater runoff channels and basins, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in
conformity with the applicable requirements of the ordinances, including the
official map. (Ord. 57, 8-19-1965)
2-1-7: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The village clerk shall furnish the planning commission, for its consideration,
a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The planning commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for consideration by the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 57, 8-19-1965)
2-1-8: SECRETARY; TECHNICAL ADVISORS:
   A.   The commission may, at the discretion of the village board of trustees,
employ a paid secretary or staff, or both, whose salaries, wages, and other
necessary expenses shall be provided by the village board of trustees from the
public funds.
   B.   If the planning commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the village board of
trustees and appropriations by the village board of trustees therefor. (Ord.
57, 8-19-1965)
CHAPTER 2
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Established
2-2-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
2-2-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a local liquor control commission. (2012 Code)
2-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   President Serve As; Assistants; Interpretation:
      1.   The village president shall be the liquor control commissioner, and
shall be charged with the administration of all liquor laws.
      2.   The village president, as the liquor control commissioner, may
appoint such persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers vested in him
and in the performance of his duties as may be deemed advisable.
      3.   Whenever in this code there is reference to the local liquor control
commissioner, the term shall include any committee or other agency appointed by
the local liquor control commissioner, and under his direction to act therefor.
   B.   Powers: The local liquor control commissioner shall also have the
following powers:
      1.   To impose fines and grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty
(30) days or revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises
within the village.
      2.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed under this code to determine whether any of the
provisions of this code or any rules or regulations adopted by the village or
by the state of Illinois or the state commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time, to examine said premises of said licensee in
connection therewith.
      3.   To receive complaints from any citizen that any of the provisions of
this code, or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant hereto, have been or
are being violated and to act upon such complaints.
      4.   To receive local license fees provided in this code, and to pay the
same forthwith to the village treasurer.
      5.   To hold hearings, take testimony, examine applicants and do and
perform all acts necessary or incidental to such office. (2012 Code)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required
3-1-2: Application For License
3-1-3: Persons Subject To License
3-1-4: Forms
3-1-5: Signatures
3-1-6: Inspection Or Investigation
3-1-7: Term Of License
3-1-8: Building And Premises
3-1-9: Change Of Location
3-1-10: Nuisance Businesses Prohibited
3-1-11: Posting License
3-1-12: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business for
which a license is required by this code without first having obtained a
license therefor, issued by the authority of the village president and
countersigned by the village clerk. (2012 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for all licenses required by this code shall be made in writing to
the village clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the license desired, the
location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid; and each
application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the
issuing official. (2012 Code)
3-1-3: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation in the village. (2012 Code)
3-1-4: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept
on file by the village clerk. (2012 Code)
3-1-5: SIGNATURES:
Each license issued shall bear the signatures of the village president and the
village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (2012 Code)
3-1-6: INSPECTION OR INVESTIGATION:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license where laws of the village
necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such license,
the village clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making
such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt.
The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection
shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after
receiving the application or a copy thereof. (2012 Code)
3-1-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the
village, where no provision to the contrary is made. (2012 Code)
3-1-8: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no license shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and building to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the village. (2012 Code)
3-1-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed
business or occupation or of any permitted act may be changed, provided ten
(10) days' notice thereof is given to the village clerk. (2012 Code)
3-1-10: NUISANCE BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
No business, licensed or not, shall be conducted or operated as to amount to a
nuisance in fact. (2012 Code)
3-1-11: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
village to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business. (2012 Code)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authority; No Refund Of Fee: Any license may be revoked, or suspended
for a limited time, by the president at any time during the duration of such
license for any violation by the licensee or his agent of any provision of this
code relating to such license, including the failure to secure the same or the
intentional misrepresentation as to any material fact upon the application
therefor, or to the premises occupied or used, or of any state or federal law
relating thereto; and such revocation or suspension may be in addition to any
monetary fine imposed. In case of revocation or suspension of any license, no
part of any license fee shall be refunded by the village.
   B.   Notice Required; Hearing; Board Decision:
      1.   Unless any provision of this code provides to the contrary, no
revocation or suspension of any license issued hereunder shall be deemed
effective until notice thereof has been served personally upon or mailed to the
named licensee at the address specified in the application for the said
license.
      2.   If, within five (5) days of the date of notice of the revocation or
suspension of any license, the named licensee submits to the village clerk in
writing a request for a hearing concerning such revocation or suspension, said
revocation or suspension shall be suspended until such time as the village
board shall grant the licensee a special hearing.
      3.   If the village board, after such hearing, affirms the revocation or
suspension of said license, the same shall become immediately effective; if the
village board, by a majority vote, overrules the revocation or suspension, the
same shall be deemed null and void.
   C.   Grounds For Revocation: Business licenses issued under this code,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the village president and board of
trustees after notice and hearing as provided in subsection B of this section
for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee of this code or state law relating to
the license, the subject matter of the license, or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the
village.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or investigation or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspection, as provided in this code. (2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definition
3-2-2: License And Compliance Required
3-2-3: Ineligibility For License
3-2-4: Application For License
3-2-5: Bond Requirements
3-2-6: Classification Of Licenses
3-2-7: Number Of Licenses
3-2-8: License Fees
3-2-9: Expiration Of License; Renewals
3-2-10: Display Of License
3-2-11: Location Regulations
3-2-12: Sanitary Premises
3-2-13: Days And Hours Of Sales
3-2-14: Employees
3-2-15: Sales To Certain Persons
3-2-16: Misrepresentation Of Age Prohibited
3-2-17: Soliciting Drinks
3-2-18: Records Kept
3-2-19: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-2-20: Penalties
3-2-21:    Public Accommodation (Non-Retail) License
3-2-1: DEFINITION:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words "alcoholic liquor", as used in
this chapter, shall include alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and shall mean
every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or
beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. (Ord. 677,
4-28-2011)
3-2-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any merchant, either by himself or his agent, or any
person acting as an agent, barkeeper, clerk or servant of another, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or otherwise dispense in the village any alcoholic
liquor without first having obtained a license to do so as provided herein. It
shall likewise be unlawful for any such merchant to sell, offer for sale, give
away or otherwise dispense any intoxicating liquors or alcoholic or malt or
vinaceous liquors in violation of the terms and conditions of such license.
(Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license authorized by this chapter shall be issued to:
   A.   A person not of legal age or under any legal disability.
   B.   A person not a resident of the village. This requirement shall not
apply to a corporation.
   C.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   D.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the village president determines, after investigation, that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
   G.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   H.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   I.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such renewal upon a first
application.
   J.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason.
   K.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residency within the village.
   L.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or
organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the business corporation act of 1983
or the limited liability company act to transact business in Illinois. The
village shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this
chapter proof prepared from the secretary of state's website that the
corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified
under the business corporation act of 1983 or the limited liability company act
to transact business in Illinois.
   M.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   N.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or
shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   O.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   P.   Any law enforcing public official, the village president or member of
the board of trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquors.
   Q.   Any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
   R.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   S.   An adult use or a business located in the same building as an adult
use. The following definitions apply to this subsection:
    ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, films, records, recording tapes, videotapes,
or other periodicals for sale or for viewing, either on or off the premises,
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT DEVICE STORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its
stock in trade, any device, appliance, instrument or object which is
represented either by the operator of the establishment or by its packaging,
advertising or other literature furnished therewith as enhancing, assisting,
representing, depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages and which features
entertainers, dancers, waitresses, waiters or any other employees acting in
such a way as to display, depict, describe or relate to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or drive-in theater
with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or a drive-in theater
with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used regularly and routinely for
presenting motion pictures having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
   ADULT USE: An adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, an adult
mini-motion picture theater, an adult entertainment cabaret, a massage
establishment, a body shop or model studio, an adult device store, or an
establishment that conducts a substantial portion of its business through some
combination of any of the foregoing adult uses.
   BODY SHOP OR MODEL STUDIO: Any public or private establishment which
describes itself as a body shop or model studio, or where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas
are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed
or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, or
where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, nude or seminude dancing,
readings, counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that present
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas are provided for observation by or communication to persons paying such
consideration or gratuity.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on, or
permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned in the
definition of massage in this subsection; provided, however, that the term
massage establishment shall not apply to hospitals, physical rehabilitation
centers, nursing homes or sanatoriums. The term massage establishment shall
also not apply to a spa, salon, barbershop, or other establishment focused on
grooming wherein a massage is given by a cosmetologist, barber or masseuse
licensed by the state of Illinois in accordance with such license; and
provided, that such establishment does not permit anyone or any thing to
display or depict specified anatomical areas and does not permit anyone or any
thing to engage, display, or depict specified sexual activity. For purposes of
this definition, a massage means any method of pressure on or friction against
or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of
the external soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the human
body or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance
with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice.
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the
showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following conditions:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         a.   Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
         b.   Buttock; or
         c.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following conditions:
      1.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or flagellation, in addition
to any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
      2.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
      3.   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
      4.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
otherwise set forth in this definition.
   T.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
28-1, or as proscribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.1 or 5/28-3, or
as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions.
   U.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the raffles act or the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act.
   V.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21,
subsection (a). (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for the license required herein shall be made in writing to
the village president, or to the party designated by him, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a
corporation, association or partnership, verified by affidavit, and shall be
submitted and filed with the village president at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the issuance of any license, and shall contain the following information and
statements:
   A.   Name, Age And Address: The name, age and address of the applicant in
the case of an individual; in the case of a copartnership or association, names
and addresses of the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in
the case of a corporation for profit, the date and state of incorporation, the
date of qualification to do business in Illinois (if not an Illinois
corporation), the object for which it was organized, the names and addresses of
the officers, directors and managers, and also the names and addresses of every
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of
the corporation.
   B.   Citizenship: The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and
if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   Character And Object Of Business: The character of the business of the
applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was
formed.
   D.   Length Of Time In Business: The length of time the applicant has been
in business of that character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on
which its charter was issued.
   E.   Amount Of Goods On Hand: The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on
hand at the time the application is made.
   F.   Location And Description: The location and description of the premises
or place of business which is to be operated under the license.
   G.   Disposition Of Other Applications: A statement whether the applicant
has made similar application for a license on premises other than described in
this application, and the disposition of such application.
   H.   Former Conviction Of Felony: A statement that the applicant has never
been convicted of a felony, and is not disqualified to receive a license by
reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, the laws of the state
or other ordinances of the village.
   I.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Previous Licenses: Whether a previous
license by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has
been revoked and the reasons therefor.
   J.   Residence In Village: A statement of the length of time the applicant
has resided in the village prior to the submission of the application.
   K.   Agreement Not To Violate Regulations: A statement that the applicant
will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States, or any
ordinance of the village in the conduct of his place of business.
   L.   Ownership Or Lease Of Premises: A statement that the applicant either
owns the premises for which the license is sought or that he has a lease
thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued. In the case
of a lease, a copy of same shall be submitted with the application.
   M.   Ownership Of Business: A statement that the applicant is a beneficial
owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
   N.   Not A Law Enforcing Official: A statement that the applicant is not a
law enforcing public official. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-5: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Each and every applicant for a license under this chapter shall simultaneously,
with the application therefor and prior to the issuance thereof, execute and
deliver a bond in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the
village as obligee, conditioned for the faithful performance of the provisions
of this chapter and of the laws of the state relating to the sale of alcoholic
liquor, and the payment of all security to be approved by the village president
or such other persons delegated by him to approve the same. The maximum
liability of any and all securities on such bond shall be limited to five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail are divided into the following
classes:
   A.   Class A: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in packages and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
   B.   Class B: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the
premises of alcoholic liquor in packages and also for consumption on the
premises where sold.
   C.   Class C: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale on the
premises of alcoholic liquor, only for consumption on the premises where sold,
and not in packages. Also, at least sixty percent (60%) of the gross revenues
of a class C license must be represented by food sales (including sales of
nonalcoholic beverages). An applicant for a class C license must certify that
this food requirement will be met every calendar quarter of operation. The
holder of a class C license must provide suitable documentation to the village
president, as often as he may reasonably require, to prove that this food
requirement has been met every calendar quarter of operation.
   D.   Class D: Class D licenses shall be issued only to "convenience stores",
which are defined as stores engaging in the retail sale of products customarily
found as part of product sales from grocery, drug (excluding prescriptions) and
hardware stores, and which may or may not also be part of a fuel station that
sells gasoline and other petroleum products. Class D licenses shall authorize
the retail sale on the premises of alcoholic liquor, only in packages, and not
for consumption on the premises, and subject to the further condition that
there be no sales of beer in single, separately sold cans, bottles or other
drinking containers and no sale of other alcoholic liquor in miniature bottles
(those containing 50 milliliters or less). Also, no more than thirty percent
(30%) of the gross revenues of a class D license (or 30 percent of the gross
revenues represented by inside sales, if the convenience store is also part of
a fuel station) shall be represented by sales of alcoholic liquor. An applicant
for a class D license must certify that this limitation will be met every
calendar quarter of operation. The holder of a class D license must provide
suitable documentation to the village president, as often as he may reasonably
require, to prove that this beer and wine sale limitation has been met every
calendar quarter of operation. (Ord. 700, 5-10-2012)
   E.   Class E: Class E licenses, also known as special use permit licenses,
are largely patterned after licenses of the same name as described in the
liquor control act of 1934. Only a holder of a class B or C license is eligible
to apply for a class E license. A class E license shall allow the holder to
transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor inventory from its licensed premises
(i.e., the premises for which the class B or C license was issued) to a single
premises specified in the class E license, and to sell or offer for sale the
transferred alcoholic liquor inventory at retail only on the specified
premises, only for consumption on the specified premises, and not for resale in
any form. The specified premises need not be licensed premises under this
chapter. A class E license shall be used only in instances where the sale or
offer for sale of the transferred alcoholic liquor inventory is incidental to a
specific event on the specified premises, where food is offered for
consumption. A class E license shall allow the holder to provide the services
described herein at the specific event and at the specified premises described
in the application. A class E license shall be granted to license holder no
more than three (3) times per calendar year for a specified location. At least
fifteen (15) days before the start of each specific event at which a class E
license will be used, the holder of the license shall give notice to the
village clerk of the date and hours of the event. An application for a class E
license shall identify the holder of the existing class B or C license and
identify the premises at which the class E license will be used. Otherwise,
except as provided herein, a holder of a class E license shall abide by all
provisions of this chapter. Moreover, a violation of any provision of this
chapter with respect to the use of a class E license shall subject the holder
to potential discipline not only for that license, but also for the class B or
C license that was a precondition for applying for the class E license.
The application and license shall be further subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   All entrances to the specified premises shall be attended at all
times. At least one emergency exit shall be provided.
      2.   Adequate measures shall be taken to prevent the removal of alcoholic
liquor from the specified premises and to constrict noise to the appropriate
area.
      3.   The time period for which a class E license is issued shall not
exceed the lesser of: a) the duration of the special event, or b) three (3)
days; provided, however, that the liquor commissioner may further limit the
hours of operation of the special event as the liquor commissioner deems
necessary or desirable.
      4.   The applicant shall present to the village proof of liability and
dramshop insurance, thereby relieving the village from any and all liability.
Such insurance shall be issued by a reputable insurance company doing business
in the state of Illinois and naming the village as an additional insured. A
copy of the proof of insurance shall be presented to the village clerk at least
fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled event.
      5.   The applicant shall present to the village a security plan outlining
the security arrangements for the special event, which shall be subject to
approval by the liquor commissioner. (Ord. 731, 3-27-2014)
   F.   Class F: Class F licenses shall authorize the sale and service of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises of a banquet facility only as
an incidental part of food service pursuant to a contract or agreement to cater
a private function in the banquet facility. For purposes of this section, a
"banquet facility" means a place available for rental by the general public
designed to accommodate a minimum of one hundred (100) persons safely and in
compliance with the local fire code. The business operating from such a place
is typified by functions such as wedding celebrations or other prearranged
private parties, functions, or events for a specific social or business
occasion, either by invitation or reservation, and not open to the general
public.
   G.   Class G: Class G licenses shall authorize the sale and service of
alcoholic liquors for consumption in a patio dining area on the following terms
and conditions:
      1.   "Patio dining area" means an area located directly adjacent to and
contiguous to an existing licensed facility and generally open and subject to
the direct influence of the outdoor environment which has been established in
accordance with this section.
      2.   Only the current holder of a class B license or a class C license
under this section may apply for and receive a license to establish and operate
a patio dining area which must be located immediately adjacent to a totally
enclosed permanent structure which is the site of a dramshop lawfully operating
under any such liquor license. In addition, at least thirty percent (30%) of
the combined gross revenues of a class B and class G license and sixty percent
(60%) of the combined gross revenues of a class C and class G license must be
represented by food sales (including sales of nonalcoholic beverages). An
applicant for a class G license must certify that this food requirement will be
met every calendar quarter of operation. The holder of a class G license must
provide suitable documentation to the village president, as often as he may
reasonably require, to prove that this food requirement has been met every
calendar quarter of operation.
      3.   All applicants for a license to operate a patio dining area shall
submit to the village president a written application which accurately and
completely describes the proposed patio dining area, its proposed hours of
operation and any other pertinent information, along with scaled plans,
specifications and drawings which demonstrate that the proposed patio dining
area will comply with the terms and conditions of this section and with any
other applicable provisions of local, state or federal law including, but not
limited to, the village zoning title.
      4.   The area of a patio dining area shall be considered to be a portion
of the immediately adjacent dramshop operated by the holder of the underlying
liquor license for purposes of establishing any applicable parking
requirements.
      5.   A patio dining area shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the descriptions, conditions, plans, specifications and
drawings submitted with the application for the license to construct and
operate the patio dining area.
      6.   The patio dining area square footage shall not exceed the square
footage of that portion of the attached totally enclosed permanent structure
from which the holder of the underlying liquor license operates a dramshop. The
patio dining area appearance should be consistent with the character of the
existing structure. The patio dining area shall be constructed with a hard
floor surface, such as decking material, concrete, or paving brick.
      7.   Except for emergency entrances and exits which shall be used only in
the case of a bona fide emergency, no access to a patio dining area is allowed
except through that portion of the attached totally enclosed permanent
structure from which the holder of the underlying liquor license operates a
dramshop. The patio dining area shall not be accessible to any portion of any
building to which it is adjacent other than the building used as a location for
a dramshop by the holder of the underlying liquor license, nor shall a patio
dining area be located such that it is necessary for a patron to travel through
any portion of any other building to obtain ingress or egress.
      8.   A patio dining area shall be completely enclosed by an attractive
fence, wall or other similar barricade having a height of not less than four
feet (4') and which defines the seating area and sets that area apart from the
surrounding property.
      9.   No portion of any patio dining area may be located within two
hundred feet (200') of the lot line of any parcel zoned or used for residential
purposes.
      10.   No alcoholic beverages may be served or consumed within a patio
dining area except between the hours authorized for the sale of alcoholic
liquor as set forth in section
3-2-13 of this chapter. Except for employees of the licensed facility engaged
in employment related activities, no person shall be allowed in the patio
dining area other than during the hours specified in section
3-2-13 of this chapter.
      11.   The issuance of a Class G license shall not diminish the
responsibility of the license holder to comply with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules, or regulations, and specifically those relating to lighting
and noise as set forth in title 9, chapters 10 and 11 of this Code. Failure to
comply shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the Class G license.
      12.   A patio dining area shall not be occupied by any number of persons
in excess of the maximum established by any other applicable law or regulation
including, without limitation, the Building Code of the Village. (Ord. 700, 5-
10-2012)
      13.   A license authorizing the operation of a patio dining area does not
authorize the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any location other
than within the confines of the patio dining area or within the confines of the
attached totally enclosed permanent structure from the licensee operating the
qualifying liquor establishment. (Ord. 700, 5-10-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
      14.   It is unlawful for any person to transfer, pass or deliver
alcoholic beverages from a location within a patio dining area through or over
a fence, wall or other barricade to a person located outside of the patio
dining area. It is unlawful for any license holder or employee to permit any
person to transfer, pass or deliver alcoholic liquor from a location within a
patio dining area through or over a fence, wall or other barricade to a person
located outside of the patio dining area. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
subsection G14 shall not prohibit any person from passing, delivering or
transferring alcoholic liquor between the patio dining area and the wholly
enclosed adjacent Class B or Class C licensed premises for which the Class G
license is issued. (Ord. 700, 5-10-2012)
3-2-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Only two (2) Class A licenses, three (3) Class B licenses, one (1) Class C
license, zero (0) Class D licenses, zero (0) Class F license, two (2) Class G
licenses and one (1) Class PA license shall be issued hereunder. A holder of a
Class B or C license may hold only one (1) Class E license during any calendar
year. (Ord. 700, 5-10-2012; amd. Ord. 722, 8-13-2013; Ord. 721, 8-22-2013; Ord.
744, 2-26-2015; Ord. 777, 4-20-2017; Ord. 782, 7-13-2017; Ord. 800, 2-20-2018;
Ord. 811, 1-29-2019;Ord. 834, 1-26-2021; Ord. 855, 12-15-2022)
3-2-8: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Established: The annual fee required for a Class A license shall be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); for a Class B, C, D, or F license, five
hundred dollars ($500.00); for a Class E license, one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00); and for a Class G license, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00),
payable at the time of application and for each renewal.
   B.   Payment Of Fees; Refunds: All liquor license fees, including renewals,
shall be paid to the Village Treasurer. Indication of the payment of such
license fee shall be attached to every application for a license or for the
renewal of a license to sell alcoholic liquor. In the event the license applied
for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 677, 4-28-
2011)
3-2-9: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
   A.   Each license required by this chapter shall terminate at the end of the
calendar year next following its issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided in
this chapter. The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full
calendar months which have expired in the period. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
   B.   A license issued under this chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license, and only
under the conditions and restrictions imposed in this chapter on the particular
class of license described therein. Such license shall not be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided,
that the executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and
the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic
liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of
the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such
decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of the
license, but not longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or
insolvency of such licensee. If such administrator or executor does not
continue the business under such license, there shall be a refund made of that
portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the executor or
administrator may not operate. Any licensee shall have the right to a renewal
of such license; provided, that he is then qualified to receive a license, and
the premises for which such renewal is sought is suitable for such purpose, but
nothing herein shall be deemed to restrict the right of the village president
to revoke any such license. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   All applications for the renewal of a license shall be made in writing
to the village president at least fifteen (15) days prior to December 31 of
each year. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license issued under this chapter to be framed
and kept in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord.
677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-11: LOCATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Near Certain Establishments: No license shall be issued for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church,
school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or
naval station, or adult use, provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to
hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not
the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any
church or school where the church or school has been established within such
one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license. In the case
of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs
and not to property boundaries. In all other cases, the distance of one hundred
feet (100') shall be measured as required by the Illinois liquor control act of
1934 1 , and as such may be interpreted by the courts of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 748, 5-28-2015)
   B.   Change Of Location: The location described in the license and
application required by this chapter may be changed only upon a written permit
to make such change issued by the village president, and only if the proposed
new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the
laws of the state, the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
3-2-12: SANITARY PREMISES:
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of
such liquor for retail sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-13: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail or
otherwise dispense any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Monday through Sunday;
provided, however, that on New Year's Day, sales may take place until two
o'clock (2:00) A.M., after which time, the holder of a class B, C, or F license
shall have a one hour period to clear the premises of patrons and close the
doors. (Ord. 685, 6-27-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
3-2-14: EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Age Restrictions: Licensees shall be subject to the following:
      1.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall open, draw,
mix or pour any alcoholic liquor.
      2.   No person under the age of nineteen (19) years shall act as a waiter
or waitress or otherwise deliver or serve alcoholic liquor at any licensed
premises.
      3.   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall sell any
alcoholic liquor at any retail operation.
   B.   Citizenship Required; Health Status: It shall be unlawful for any
person licensed under the provisions of this chapter to employ in any premises
used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is not a citizen of
the United States or who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of any such disease to work in or
about any premises, or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 747, 5-28-2015)
3-2-15: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS:
No licensee under this chapter shall sell, give away or deliver alcoholic
liquor or malt or vinaceous beverages to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1. (Ord. 747, 5-28-2015)
3-2-16: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under legal age, as defined by the state of
Illinois, to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or
receiving alcoholic liquor in any tavern, store, or other place in the village
where alcoholic liquor is sold. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-17: SOLICITING DRINKS:
   A.   No licensee under this chapter shall permit any employee or entertainer
in the premises to solicit any patron or customer thereof to purchase alcoholic
or nonalcoholic beverages for himself or herself or any other person on or in
such licensed premises; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
prohibit any waiter or waitress who shall be regularly employed therein from
accepting and serving the order of a patron or customer in the regular course
of his or her employment of such waiter or waitress. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011; amd.
2012 Code)
   B.   No person shall frequent or loiter in any premises licensed under this
chapter for the purpose of soliciting the purchase of alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverages. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-18: RECORDS KEPT:
The village president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all
licenses required by this chapter, issued by him, and all licenses issued shall
be given a number beginning with number one. (Ord. 677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-19: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or for any
violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor but only
in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act. (Ord.
677, 4-28-2011)
3-2-20: PENALTIES:
In addition to the suspension, the local liquor control commission may levy a
fine on the licensee for a violation of any one or more of the provisions of
this chapter. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a
twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each
violation and each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in
fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period
of his license. (2012 Code)
3-2-21: PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION (NON-RETAIL) LICENSE:
   A.   For purposes of this Section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BUSINESS PROPERTY: The building out of and real property upon which the public
accommodation operates.
LICENSED PREMISES: The area within a building for which a license authorizing
the consumption of alcoholic liquor is issued and which is actually used in
connection with the consumption of alcoholic liquor, but specifically excluding
any outside areas such as patios, decks, open porches, roof tops, balconies,
stoops, beer gardens and the like, sidewalks, yards, driveways, parking lots
and similar outside areas.
PA LICENSE: A license authorizing the consumption of alcoholic liquor only
inside the licensed premises of a person or business entity operating as a
public accommodation.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: An event held at a licensed premises which:
   A.   Has a host who is under contract with the licensee;
   B.   Is restricted to invited guests only, and such invited guests are not
charged indirectly or directly;
   C.   The host is the only individual responsible for payment to the
licensee;
   D.   Includes either:
      1.   Seventy-five (75) or fewer people, excluding the licensee's working
staff; or
      2.   Seventy-six (76) to one hundred and twenty-five (125) people,
excluding the licensee's working staff, and a bartender who will be present and
the sole person providing alcoholic liquor to the invited guests; and
   E.   Is not publicly advertised in advance of the event.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION: A facility or business establishment of any kind, whose
goods, services, facilities, privileges or advantages are extended, offered,
sold or otherwise made available to the public.
   B.   Except for licensees under this Chapter, no person, including any
business entity, operating as a public accommodation within the Village, shall
permit or allow any invitee to possess or consume alcoholic liquor on its
business property.
   A public accommodation meeting the following business classification, as
determined by the Village, may apply for a PA License: a ceramic arts hobby
facility/business establishment, a painting arts hobby facility/business
establishment, a culinary arts hobby facility/business establishment, or a
meeting facility available to the general public for rental as a place to
conduct private functions.
   C.   Alcoholic liquor may only be brought onto the licensed premises in its
original package by the person or entity who has rented the licensed premises
to hold an event, gathering or other function, and the alcoholic liquor is
provided only to the person's or entity's invitees.
   D.   No alcoholic beverages can be sold, offered for sale, gifted, given in
return for any donation or any monetary contribution of any kind, or otherwise
provided to invitees, by the licensee or its agents, on the licensed premises
and business property.
   E.   The possession or consumption of any alcoholic liquor on the licensed
premises by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited. The
provisions of Section 3-2-15 apply to licensees and their agents in terms of
not permitting possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors by persons under
twenty-one (21) years of age. Licensees and their agents may not suffer or
permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under
the age of twenty-one (21) years, or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
intoxicated person.
   F.   Consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises may only occur
between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) a.m. and twelve o’clock (12:00) a.m. on
Monday through Thursday; between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) a.m. on Friday
and one o’clock (1:00) a.m. on Saturday; between the hours of six o’clock (6:
00) a.m. on Saturday and one o’clock (1:00) a.m. on Sunday; and between the
hours of ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. on Sunday and twelve o’clock (12:00) a.m. on
Monday. The licensee shall not permit any invitee to remain at the licensed
premises for longer than one-half hour after the aforementioned closing times.
   G.   Licensees are prohibited from providing any outdoor entertainment on
the business property.
   H.   All applicants for the PA License must submit a written application to
the Village President, or the party designated by him/her, as set forth in
Section
3-2-4  for retail licenses, or in such form as approved by the Village
President, or the party designated by him/her. All information required of a
retail license applicant may be required for a PA License applicant.
   I.   All licensees must obtain and continually carry dram shop and/or host
liquor liability insurance coverage, and must provide and submit proof of
insurance when submitting the PA License application.
   J.   A PA License issued under this Section shall be valid from the date of
issuance until the next succeeding December 31, with an annual license fee of
three hundred and fifty dollars ($350.00).
   K.   Except as expressly modified in this Section, licensees of a PA License
are subject to all other provisions of
Chapter 2 of Title 3  of the Village Code.
   L.   PA licensees, except for a culinary arts hobby facility/business
establishment, may not provide beverage service of any type, nor charge for
corkage, provision of glassware or beverage serving items. No PA licensee may
structure any fee or charge that increases based on the amount of alcoholic
liquor served or consumed. Nothing in this section prohibits a PA licensee from
charging an increased flat rate upcharge, over and above the customary room
rental rate, for events which include the service or consumption of alcoholic
liquor.
   M.   PA licensees operating a meeting facility available to the general
public for rental as a place to conduct private functions must keep an event
contract which includes the name(s) of all hosts, date and time of the event,
and number of guests and which is available for inspection by the Village or
its agents for a minimum of one (1) year beyond the event date.
   N.   There shall be no more than one (1) Class PA license for the
consumption of alcoholic liquor in the Village in force at any one time. (Ord.
846, 3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 3
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Permit Required; Exemptions
3-3-3: Ineligibility For Permit
3-3-4: Application For Permit
3-3-5: Permit Fee And Term
3-3-6: Approval Or Denial Of Permit
3-3-7: Revocation Of Permit
3-3-8: Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-3-9: Duty Of Solicitors
3-3-10: Days And Hours Of Soliciting
3-3-11: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-3-12: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, as used herein, shall be
construed to have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any person selling, peddling, soliciting or taking
orders for any goods or services not prohibited by law on behalf of a nonprofit
organization sponsored by or participated in by a local chapter of such
organization; or by a national nonprofit organization not represented locally
but which has filed a statement of registration with the village clerk
specifying the name of the nonprofit organization, its permanent address, the
names of its principal officers and the names of those persons who are
authorized to sell, peddle or solicit or take orders for goods and services
within the village.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Means and includes any person who has obtained a valid
permit as hereinafter provided, and which permit is in the possession of the
solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Means and includes every separate living unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
SOLICITING: Means and includes any one or more of the following activities
conducted on a door to door basis and whose primary means of attracting
potential customers is by knocking on doors or ringing doorbells:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, and services of any kind, character or description whatever, for
any kind of consideration whatever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   D.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious,
political or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project; or
   E.   Seeking to proselytize beliefs by any charitable, religious, political
or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project. (Ord. 690, 8-
25-2011)
3-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
soliciting without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with
this chapter. This section applies to all persons except those seeking to
obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing
for the support or benefit of a "nonprofit organization" as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, and except those seeking to proselytize the beliefs of
any charitable, religious, political or nonprofit association, organization,
corporation or project. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-3: INELIGIBILITY OF PERMIT:
No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other
state or federal law of the United States, within five (5) years of the date of
the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter. Moreover, no permit shall be issued to any
person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein
provided. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Application for the permit shall be made upon a form provided by the
village clerk and filed with the village clerk. The applicant shall truthfully
state in full the information requested on the application, as follows:
      1.   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also, business address if other than residence
address; also, social security number.
      2.   Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if
other than the present address.
      3.   Physical description of the applicant; or photograph on a driver's
license or state identification card.
      4.   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association by
whom the applicant is employed or represents, and length of time of such
employment or representation.
      5.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will be engaged.
      6.   Period of time for which the permit is applied.
      7.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for permit under this chapter, if any.
      8.   Has a permit issued to the applicant, other than any nonprofit
organization or any person seeking to proselytize the beliefs of any
charitable, religious, political or nonprofit association, organization,
corporation or project, ever been revoked?
      9.   Has the applicant, other than an applicant seeking to obtain gifts
or contributions of money, clothing or other valuable thing on behalf of a
nonprofit organization and other than an applicant seeking to proselytize the
beliefs of any charitable, religious, political or nonprofit association,
organization, corporation or project, ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter regulating soliciting?
      10.   Has the applicant, other than an applicant seeking to obtain gifts
or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support
or benefit of any charitable, religious, political or nonprofit association,
organization, corporation or project and other than an applicant seeking to
proselytize the beliefs of any charitable, religious, political or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project, ever been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other
state or federal law of the United States?
   B.   All statements made by the applicant under the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   C.   The village clerk shall cause to be kept in his or her office an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto, and all permits issued under the
provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications.
   D.   Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as
filed, and every permit issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified
with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. (Ord.
690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-5: PERMIT FEE AND TERM:
No permit shall be issued until a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) has been paid
to the village clerk. Each permit issued hereunder shall be for a period of
time not to exceed thirty (30) days, and the permit shall state the expiration
date thereof. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-6: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The village clerk, after consideration of the application and all information
obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant does not
possess the qualifications as herein required. Endorsement shall be made by the
village clerk upon the application of the denial of the application. When the
applicant is found to be fully qualified, the permit shall be issued forthwith.
(Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the village clerk if the holder
of the permit violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a
false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified
for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon
such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the village clerk to
the holder of the permit in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his
or her residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the
giving of such notice, the permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 690, 8-25-
2011)
3-3-8: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following regulations:
   A.   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall
be given in the following manner:
A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows: "No Solicitors Invited".
   B.   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the village clerk to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
   C.   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-9: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises
in the village upon which a "residence" as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter is located, to first examine the notice provided in
section
3-3-8 of this chapter, if any is attached, and if the notice states "No
Solicitors Invited", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   B.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-10: DAYS AND HOURS OF SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of such residence located thereon,
or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the
purpose of "soliciting" as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, on any day of the week prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
or after the later to occur of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. or sunset. (Ord. 690,
8-25-2011)
3-3-11: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of
such residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant
of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in "soliciting" as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in
accordance with the provisions of section
3-3-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
3-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 690, 8-25-2011)
CHAPTER 4
GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: Sales Permitted; Compliance Required
3-4-3: Number Of Days And Frequency Of Sales
3-4-4: Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, a "garage sale" is defined as a sale of
secondhand items or materials owned by an owner or occupant of residential
property, except for such items or materials owned by friends or neighbors
which the seller permits, all of which items or materials are related to
household uses; and which sale is conducted on the seller's residential
property or portions thereof, such as a garage, carport, driveway, patio or
lawn. (Ord. 678, 5-25-2011)
3-4-2: SALES PERMITTED; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Garage sales may be held, permitted or sponsored by an owner or occupant of
residential property on such premises, provided such sales fully comply with
the definition of a "garage sale" set forth in section
3-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 678, 5-25-2011)
3-4-3: NUMBER OF DAYS AND FREQUENCY OF SALES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant of residential property
to hold, permit, or sponsor such a garage sale or sales on such premises which
exceed five (5) consecutive days in length.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for an owner or occupant of residential property
to hold, permit, or sponsor garage sales on such premises more frequently than
once every ninety (90) days. (Ord. 678, 5-25-2011)
3-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating section
3-4-2 of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per each offense. Each day
a violation is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 678, 5-25-2011)
CHAPTER 5
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-5-3: Applicable Principles
3-5-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-5-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-5-6: Late Fees/Payments
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 737-2, 9-25-2014)
3-5-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be three
percent (3%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The ordinance adopting this chapter shall be sent
by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application
notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 737-2, 9-25-2014)
3-5-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 737-2, 9-25-2014)
3-5-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 737-2, 9-
25-2014)
3-5-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 737-2, 9-25-2014)
3-5-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 737-2, 9-25-2014)
CHAPTER 6
NEW ENTERPRISE ZONE
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Property Tax Abatement
3-6-3: Exemption From Nonhome Rule Sales Tax
3-6-4: Incentives Offered By The State Of Illinois
3-6-5: Partial Waiver Of Various Fees
3-6-6: Expedited Plan Review
3-6-7: Administrative Board
3-6-8: Appointment Of Zone Administrator
3-6-9: Designated Zone Organization
3-6-10: Termination; Expiration Of Incentives
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following words or terms shall have the
indicated meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another
meaning is intended:
ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD: The board consisting of one representative of each
participant selected and exercising authority as provided by both section
3-6-7 of this chapter and by the intergovernmental agreement.
CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY: The certificate of eligibility issued by the
village administrator or his designee to a business enterprise which: a)
qualifies for an exemption from the nonhome rule sales tax by virtue of meeting
the criteria for eligibility established at section
3-6-3 of this chapter; and/or b) qualifies for an abatement of real estate
taxes by virtue of meeting the criteria established at section
3-6-2 of this chapter.
DCEO: The Illinois department of commerce and economic opportunity.
ELIGIBLE IMPROVEMENT: Newly constructed improvements to real estate within the
enterprise zone intended to accommodate new or expanded commercial or
industrial operations as determined by the zone administrator.
ENTERPRISE ZONE: That territory described in village of Germantown Hills
ordinance 738 including such additions thereto or deletions therefrom as are or
have been from time to time approved by the village board and certified by DCEO
under authority of 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 655/1 et seq.
ENTERPRISE ZONE ACT: The Illinois enterprise zone act found at 20 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 655/1 et seq.
GERMANTOWN HILLS COMPONENT: That portion of the enterprise zone located within
the corporate limits of the village of Germantown Hills.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT: The agreement dated December 11, 2014, entered
into by and between the city of East Peoria, the village of Washington, the
village of Germantown Hills, the county of Tazewell and the county of Woodford
for the purpose of designating the enterprise zone, seeking its certification
from DCEO and its administration after such certification.
NONHOME RULE SALES TAX: Collectively the nonhome rule municipal retailers'
occupation tax imposed pursuant to section
1-9-1 of this code and the nonhome rule municipal service occupation tax
imposed pursuant to section
1-9-2 of this code.
OWNER: Any person or entity utilizing improvements to real estate within the
enterprise zone to accommodate a new or expanded commercial or industrial
enterprise.
PARTICIPANTS OR PARTICIPANT: Collectively or individually the city of East
Peoria, the village of Washington, the village of Germantown Hills and the
county of Tazewell.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT: A redevelopment project area designed and
currently in effect under authority of the tax increment allocation
redevelopment act found at 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4 et seq.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator appointed from time to time by
the Germantown Hills board of trustees.
ZONE ADMINISTRATOR: The person charged with the general administration of the
enterprise zone as provided by section
3-6-7 of this chapter and by the intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 759, 2-25-
2016)
3-6-2: PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT:
The owner of an eligible improvement may upon payment of the fee provided by
subsection I of this section receive an abatement of real estate taxes levied
by any taxing district which has approved an abatement of such taxes against
eligible improvements subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The abatement shall apply only to the real estate taxes corresponding
to an increase in equalized assessed valuation after an eligible improvement
has been duly assessed. The abatement shall not exceed the amount of such taxes
attributable solely to the eligible improvement.
   B.   The abatement shall apply only to eligible improvements commenced
within the enterprise zone after designation of the enterprise zone by the
participants and certification of the enterprise zone by DCEO after approval of
the enterprise zone by the enterprise zone board created by the enterprise zone
act.
   C.   The abatement for an eligible improvement shall be in effect only for a
period of five (5) years commencing with the first year after the eligible
improvement has been assessed.
   D.   While the abatement is in effect with respect to an eligible
improvement, each underlying taxing district shall each year continue to
receive all real estate taxes corresponding to the equalized assessed valuation
of the parcel upon which the eligible improvement is located and all structures
or parts of structures on the parcel other than the eligible improvement.
   E.   An abatement of real estate taxes shall not take effect after the
expiration of the enterprise zone, but any abatement which commences prior to
expiration of the enterprise zone shall continue for five (5) years even if the
enterprise zone expires during that five (5) year period.
   F.   The abatement of real estate taxes authorized by underlying taxing
districts shall also apply within territory lawfully added to the enterprise
zone subsequent to its initial certification by DCEO and shall also apply
during any lawfully authorized extension of the term of the enterprise zone.
   G.   The abatement of real estate taxes authorized by the taxing districts
shall apply only to commercial and industrial facilities and shall not apply to
single-family residences or to multiple-family residential facilities.
   H.   Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, no real
estate tax abatement shall be available to any eligible improvement located
within the boundaries of any tax increment financing district designated by a
participant.
   I.   No owner shall be eligible to receive the incentives available for an
eligible improvement unless the owner first pays a fee to the participant
having jurisdiction over the location of the eligible improvement in the amount
of 0.5 percent of the cost of building materials incorporated into an eligible
improvement with a maximum fee of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   J.   The village acting through its village administrator shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether or not an improvement within the
Germantown Hills component of the enterprise zone constitutes an eligible
improvement which will receive the incentives available under the terms of this
chapter. Upon a determination by the village that improvements to real estate
within the enterprise zone constitute an eligible improvement which will
receive an abatement of real estate taxes to the extent approved by an
underlying taxing district, the village administrator or his designee (which
may in the discretion of the village administrator be the zone administrator)
shall issue a certificate of eligibility to the owner of the eligible
improvement. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to file the
certificate of eligibility with the county clerk of the county in which the
eligible improvement is located and to verify the application of the abatement.
(Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-3: EXEMPTION FROM NONHOME RULE SALES TAX:
Each owner or occupant of property within the enterprise zone who purchases
building materials to be incorporated into real estate located in the
enterprise zone by remodeling, rehabilitation or new construction, is exempt
from the application of the nonhome rule sales tax provided that all of the
following conditions have been met:
   A.   Only such building materials purchased from retailers located within
the village are eligible for the exemption;
   B.   Such owner or occupant has been issued a certificate of eligibility;
and
   C.   Such owner or occupant completes the purchaser's affidavit included as
part of such certificate.
Such exemption shall not apply to building materials used for remodeling,
rehabilitation, or new construction unless such work is of a nature and scope
for which a building permit is required and has been obtained. The exemption
provided by this section shall be available commencing the first day of the
calendar month following the month in which the enterprise zone is designated
and certified, and shall continue for the term of the enterprise zone. (Ord.
759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-4: INCENTIVES OFFERED BY THE STATE OF ILLINOIS:
Each owner or occupant of an eligible improvement located within the enterprise
zone shall, in addition, be eligible for such incentives as are authorized by
the state of Illinois which incentives may include exemption from sales taxes
for building materials purchased in the state of Illinois and used within the
enterprise zone, an investment tax credit, a job tax credit, various income tax
deductions and such other incentives as the state of Illinois may from time to
time approve. Eligibility for and receipt of such incentives shall be
determined in accordance with procedures established by the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-5: PARTIAL WAIVER OF VARIOUS FEES:
The village of Germantown Hills for the term of the enterprise zone waives the
following fees for eligible improvements within the enterprise zone:
   A.   One-half (1/2) of all building permit fees, demolition fees and
plumbing and electrical fees. (Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-6: EXPEDITED PLAN REVIEW:
The village of Germantown Hills shall expedite the plan review process and the
zoning, variance and special use process with respect to any eligible
improvements within the enterprise zone for the term of the enterprise zone.
(Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-7: ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD:
Under the terms of the intergovernmental agreement, the participants
established an administrative board consisting of four (4) members, one of
which shall be selected by each participant. The representative of the village
on the administrative board shall be appointed by the village president with
the advice and consent of the village board. The administrative board shall
have the following authority and responsibilities:
   A.   Selection of the zone administrator as provided by this chapter and the
intergovernmental agreement;
   B.   Supervision of the performance of the zone administrator with respect
to the duties of the zone administrator as assigned under the terms of this
chapter and the intergovernmental agreement. The administrative board shall
have no authority to supervise the performance of other duties unrelated to the
administration of the enterprise zone which may be performed by the zone
administrator in his or her capacity as an officer or employee of any
participant;
   C.   If deemed necessary by the administrative board in its sole discretion,
the administrative board may suspend the zone administrator from the
performance of duties under the terms of this chapter and the intergovernmental
agreement or terminate the authority of the zone administrator to act under the
terms of this chapter or the intergovernmental agreement;
   D.   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zone administrator may within
a reasonable time appeal that decision in writing to the administrative board.
The administrative board has the authority to reverse, revise or affirm
decisions of the zone administrator; and
   E.   To engage in such other activities as may be necessary to ensure the
proper administration of the enterprise zone.
The administrative board shall operate in accordance with the requirements of
the open meetings act 1 . Decisions by the administrative board shall require
the concurrence of three (3) of the four (4) members of such board. (Ord. 759,
2-25-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
3-6-8: APPOINTMENT OF ZONE ADMINISTRATOR:
The administrative board established as provided at section
3-6-7 of this chapter and in accordance with the intergovernmental agreement
shall select a zone administrator for the enterprise zone. The zone
administrator must be an officer or employee of one of the participants. The
zone administrator shall be the liaison between the participants, DCEO and any
designated zone organization established within the enterprise zone. The zone
administrator shall perform those duties assigned to the administrator under
the terms and conditions of the enterprise zone act including those assigned at
20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 655/8 and 8.2 and at 14 Illinois administrative
code 520.400. Those duties are included among the following duties hereby
assigned to the zone administrator:
   A.   Post a copy of the boundaries of the enterprise zone on official
internet websites of the participants;
   B.   Provide an electronic copy of the boundaries of the enterprise zone to
DCEO;
   C.   Collect and aggregate information regarding the estimated cost of each
commercial or industrial building project undertaken within the enterprise zone
broken down into labor and materials;
   D.   Within sixty (60) days after the completion of any commercial or
industrial building project undertaken within the enterprise zone, determine
the cost of the building project broken down into labor and materials;
   E.   By April 1 of each year file a copy of the fee schedule established
under the terms of this chapter and the intergovernmental agreement with DCEO;
   F.   To the extent required by the enterprise zone act or any other
applicable authority, submit any documentation necessary to qualify an owner to
receive sales tax or other incentives available from the state of Illinois;
   G.   Maintain and update the map and description of the enterprise zone to
reflect changes resulting from amendments to the boundaries of the zone made
from time to time by the participants and certified by DCEO; and
   H.   Such other duties as may from time to time be assigned by the
administrative board.
The participants anticipate that a person employed by a participant will be
selected by the administrative board as zone administrator. The participants
acting through the administrative board shall determine the manner in which the
cost of services provided by the zone administrator shall be apportioned among
the participants. (Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
3-6-9: DESIGNATED ZONE ORGANIZATION:
Each participant may in its discretion create a designated zone organization to
assist in the administration of that component of the enterprise zone under the
jurisdiction of the participant. Two (2) or more participants may jointly
create a designated zone organization to assist in the administration of those
components of the enterprise zone under the jurisdiction of the creating
participants. Substantially all of the members of any designated zone
organization shall be residents of the enterprise zone. The board of directors
of a designated zone organization shall be elected by members of the
organization. Any designated zone organization shall satisfy the criteria set
forth at section 501(c)(3) or section 501(c)(4) of the internal revenue code. A
designated zone organization shall exist primarily for the purpose of
performing within all or any portion of the enterprise zone the various
functions set forth at section 8 of the enterprise zone act. However, no
designated zone organization shall have authority to perform any function
identified at section 8 of the enterprise zone act unless a participant has by
ordinance delegated such authority to the designated zone organization to be
exercised within the participant's component of the enterprise zone. (Ord. 759,
2-25-2016)
3-6-10: TERMINATION; EXPIRATION OF INCENTIVES:
The enterprise zone shall expire on December 31, 2030. All incentives and
exemptions available in the enterprise zone shall expire on December 31, 2030;
provided, however, that any abatement of real estate taxes as provided by
section
3-6-2 of this chapter which commences prior to the expiration of the enterprise
zone shall continue for five (5) years even if the enterprise zone expires
during that five (5) year period. (Ord. 759, 2-25-2016)
CHAPTER 7
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-7-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-7-4: Violations
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization,
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Shall have the meaning ascribed to that
CANNABIS:                               term in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A.101-0027) (410 ILCS 705/1-
                                        10).
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 819, 11-21-
                                        2019; amd. Ord. 832, 1-21-2021)
 
3-7-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, the following Adult-Use
Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited in the Village of Germantown
Hills. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or
aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of Germantown Hills of
any of the following:
   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser
   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor
   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter. (Ord. 819, 11-
21-2019; amd. Ord. 832, 1-21-2021)
3-7-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 819, 11-
21-2019; amd. Ord. 832, 1-21-2021)
3-7-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019; amd. Ord. 832, 1-21-
2021)
TITLE 4
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Definitions
4-1-2: Nuisances Prohibited
4-1-3: Enumeration Of Nuisances; Enumeration Not Exclusive
4-1-4: General Enforcement Of Nuisances
4-1-5: Investigations; Entry Powers
4-1-6: Abatement, Enforcement And Penalties
4-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section unless expressly stated otherwise:
DEBRIS: Means and includes, but is not limited to, building materials, such as
lumber, windows, cement blocks, piping, wiring, junk, trash, abandoned,
discarded, or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers, and ashes.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food, or wastes from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
NUISANCE: Any thing, act, omission, occupation or condition which shall exist
or continue for such a length of time as to:
   A.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the health, safety, peace or
welfare of the public;
   B.   In any way render the public insecure in life or property;
   C.   Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
   D.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or render
dangerous for passage any street, sidewalk, alley, navigable body of water or
other public way or place; or
   E.   Cause diminution in the value of neighboring property or to the
detriment of the property of others.
OWNER: The record titleholder of the property on which the nuisance exists as
reflected in the office of the Woodford County recorder of deeds.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity, or
manager or person in control thereof, including any lessee, tenant, occupant or
person in control of the property on which the nuisance exists.
PROPERTY: The real estate on which the nuisance exists.
REASONABLE NOTICE TO ABATE: Service of a notice to abate on the person or owner
by: a) personal service, as authorized by law or this chapter for personal
service of ordinance violations and complaints; b) certified mail addressed to
the owner at the address to which the most recent tax bill was sent for the
general taxes on the property for the taxable year immediately preceding the
service of the notice to abate; or c) as otherwise permitted by law. Any notice
to abate served on a person or owner shall include the name of the person or
owner, the date or approximate dates of the violation(s), a short description
of the violation(s), the location of the violation(s), a reference to the
provision(s) of this chapter violated, the date by which the violation(s) must
be abated, and any other information that may be required to apprise the person
or owner of the violation or as required by law.
REFUSE: Combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, felled tree branches, yard trimmings or waste, wood
furniture, and bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to,
metal, tin cans, metal furniture, small quantities of rock and pieces of
concrete, glass, crockery, and other mineral wastes; street rubbish, including,
but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, and
contents of litter receptacles; but "refuse" does not mean earth and waste from
building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from
industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing
wastes, boiler house cinders, scraps, and shavings.
REPEAT OFFENDER: An owner or person who receives two (2) or more notices to
abate within any twelve (12) month period.
UNSAFE OR DILAPIDATED STRUCTURE: Any structure or building that, because of its
general condition, construction, inadequate maintenance, lack of or missing
doors or windows, abandonment, partial demolition or destruction, or any other
cause is:
   A.   Dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare and may cause or aid
in the spread of disease or injury to the occupants thereof or of neighboring
buildings;
   B.   Especially liable to fire, and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
   C.   Especially liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a
collapse or fall of any part of such structure, or is otherwise structurally
unsafe; or
   D.   Available to and frequented by vagrants, transients, malefactors or
disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of such structure.
VILLAGE: The village of Germantown Hills, Illinois.
VILLAGE OFFICER: Any police, fire, health, zoning and building officer and/or
inspector, or any other village official. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-2: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to wilfully
or negligently create, cause, erect, maintain or permit a nuisance to exist
anywhere within the village. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-1-3: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES; ENUMERATION NOT EXCLUSIVE:
   A.   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to the health,
safety, welfare, peace and comfort of the village and its residents for any
person or owner to: (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
      1.   Animals:
         a.   Keep or maintain any animals in an unclean or filthy manner or in
unclean or filthy surroundings, or to keep or maintain any animals, animal
matter or animal carcasses from which emit any particularly putrid, foul or
offensive odors. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
         b.   Keep or harbor any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises
at any time, day or night, or permit any animal to make such noises. (2012
Code)
         c.   For the owner or possessor of any animal to permit the animal to
walk or defecate upon private property without the consent of the occupant
thereof.
         d.   For the owner or possessor of any animal to permit such animal to
damage or destroy any personal property of another person.
         e.   For the owner or possessor of any dog to permit said dog to run
at large.
         f.   For the owner or possessor of any animal to fail to promptly
remove any deposit of such animal's waste wherever it may exist in the village.
      2.   Animal Houses: Locate or maintain, or permit to exist or remain
anywhere within the village, any stable, pigsty, or coop for chickens, ducks,
geese, or other fowl.
      3.   Offensive Odors: Conduct any business or use any premises so as to
create an offensive or foul odor which taints the air and renders it nauseous
to persons in the vicinity.
      4.   Cellars, Vaults And Privies: Cause or permit any cellar, vault,
cistern, drain, privy, yard or other premises whatsoever to become putrid, foul
or offensive or injurious to the public health.
      5.   Stagnant Water: Cause or permit to be collected or to stand upon any
property any foul or stagnant water of any kind.
      6.   Foul Or Noxious Substances: Use, deposit or keep any property,
substance or thing emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous
or noxious odor, effluvia or stench particularly repulsive to the physical
senses and which annoys, discomforts or endangers the welfare, health or safety
of any person.
      7.   Refuse, Rubbish, Garbage And Debris: Deposit, accumulate or cause
the existence of any refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris, bulky or yard wastes or
other materials on any property.
      8.   Petroleum Products: Accumulate or store any petroleum, naphtha,
benzine, coal oil, gasoline, kerosene, turpentine or other petroleum products
or inflammable fluids of any kind, in quantities greater than ten (10) gallons,
on the interior of or within fifty feet (50') of any building exclusively
occupied as a residence; provided, however, that this subsection A8 shall not
apply to licensed gasoline service stations or to fuel used for heating the
nearest adjacent residence.
      9.   Explosives: Deposit, accumulate, store or present, within three
hundred feet (300') of any building occupied as a residence or business, any
powder magazine, nitroglycerine, dynamite or other explosive substance of any
kind. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
      10.   Abandoned Appliances: Cause or permit the existence or storage in
any place accessible to children of any abandoned or discarded refrigerator,
icebox, ice chest, deep freeze or other airtight appliance or container of any
kind, of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, from which
the lids, doors or other covers have not been removed. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012;
amd. 2012 Code)
      11.   Unsafe Or Dilapidated Buildings: Cause or permit the existence of
any unsafe or dilapidated building or otherwise cause or permit an insecure
building, wall, stack, chimney, cornice, sign, awning or other like structure
of any kind which, from manner of construction, age, condition or other
circumstances, is or may become a menace to the health, welfare, or safety of
persons or property.
      12.   Dust, Cinders And Dirt: Cause or permit any dirt, sand, gravel,
cinders, ashes, earth or other similar materials to be hauled, moved, rolled,
compacted, scraped, dragged or otherwise disturbed, including, but not limited
to, causing or permitting such materials to be disturbed through the operation
of a motor vehicle, so as to cause or permit dust to be raised, blown or
stirred through the operation of machinery or otherwise, to the detriment of
any person or property.
   B.   Nuisances enumerated in this section shall not be deemed exclusive, but
are in addition to and to be construed in conjunction with any other nuisances
enumerated in statutes or other provisions of ordinances of the village. (Ord.
695, 3-22-2012)
4-1-4: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT OF NUISANCES:
Any nuisance declared by statute or other provisions of ordinances of the
village may be enforceable under the provisions of this chapter as if
enumerated specifically herein. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS; ENTRY POWERS:
It shall be the duty of a village officer to investigate, confirm and report
any nuisances coming to his/her attention. In order to investigate, confirm and
report nuisances, any village officer, upon proper identification, shall be
permitted, at any reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner, to visit and
enter into or upon any premises or property within the village to make an
examination thereof if he/she has reasonable grounds to believe that a nuisance
exists and as permitted by law. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-1-6: ABATEMENT, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever any village officer determines that a
nuisance exists under this chapter, the proper village officer shall serve the
person or owner who is causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance with
reasonable notice to abate the nuisance. Such a notice shall also state if the
person or owner is a repeat offender.
   B.   Duty To Abate: Any person or owner determined to have created, caused,
permitted, erected, or maintained a nuisance to exist within the village shall
discontinue and abate such nuisance within seven (7) days, or such other time
as may be specified in the notice to abate or required by law, from the date
the notice to abate is served. Any repeat offender who receives a notice to
abate shall discontinue and abate such nuisance within three (3) days from the
time the notice to abate is served, or such other time as may be specified in
the notice to abate or as required by law.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person or owner who is not a repeat offender and who fails to
abate a nuisance within the period specified in a notice to abate shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which said nuisance is permitted to exist,
dating back to the day the notice to abate was served upon said person or
owner.
      2.   A repeat offender shall be fined as follows without regard to
whether the violation is abated:
         a.   For each offense arising from the violations described in a
second notice to abate received within a twelve (12) month period, not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00); and
         b.   For each offense arising from the violations described in a third
notice to abate received within a twelve (12) month period, not less than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00); and
         c.   For each offense arising from the violations described in a
fourth or subsequent notice to abate received within a twelve (12) month
period, not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
A separate offense shall be deemed committed by a repeat offender for each day
during or on which said nuisance is permitted to exist, dating back to the day
the notice to abate was served.
   D.   Optional Settlement Procedure; Court Action:
      1.   Prior to the commencement of any court action, the village may, in
its discretion, provide a violator with an opportunity to settle the matter
through payment of a fine through a representative of the village clerk. Notice
of such an opportunity may be provided with a notice to abate, or separately,
and shall provide an opportunity for payment within a period of time set forth
in the notice. If the village exercises its discretion to provide an
opportunity for settlement, the amounts shall be as follows:
         a.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a person or owner who is not a
repeat offender, but who does not abate a violation within the time period
provided in a notice to abate.
         b.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a repeat offender to settle
violations specified in a second notice to abate within a twelve (12) month
period.
         c.   One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a repeat offender to
settle violations specified in a third notice to abate received within a twelve
(12) month period.
         d.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a repeat offender to settle
violations specified in a fourth or subsequent notice to abate received within
a twelve (12) month period.
      2.   Should a recipient of such notice fail to accept the offer within
the period set forth in the notice, such offer of settlement shall
automatically expire. Where the village chooses not to offer a settlement
opportunity, or the time period provided by such an offer has expired, in
addition to any monetary fine or other penalty which may be imposed or
abatement which may occur for a violation of this chapter, the village may
proceed in Woodford County circuit court (or any other court of competent
jurisdiction) to enjoin, abate, correct, or prohibit continued further
violations or threatened violations of this chapter.
   E.   Abatement By Village: Whenever any nuisance is not abated within the
time provided in the notice, the village may cause the abatement or removal of
such nuisance, as permitted by law.
   F.   Expedited Abatement By Village: Whenever any nuisance: 1) constitutes
or is deemed to be an exigent, imminent or immediate danger to public health,
welfare or safety; or 2) exists on public property, the proper village officer
shall cause such nuisance to be summarily and immediately abated and removed,
regardless of any seven (7) day period or such other time as may be specified
in the notice to abate or required by law; provided, however, that for
abatements under item 1 above, such officer shall have first applied for and
obtained the written permission of the village president or other village
officer duly in charge for such summary abatement.
   G.   Costs A Lien: If the village removes any nuisance in accordance with
this chapter, the person who caused the nuisance to exist or the owner of the
property shall be liable to the village for the reasonable cost thereof;
provided, that where specifically authorized in this chapter or by law, the
village may take steps to perfect and enforce a lien against the property, or
may institute proceedings to collect the cost, or both. The lien shall be
superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes, as
permitted by law. Upon payment of the cost of removal of the nuisance after
notice of lien has been filed, the village shall provide a release of lien. The
lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as permitted by law. (Ord.
695, 3-22-2012)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Nuisance Declared
4-2-3: Storage Or Accumulation Of Waste
4-2-4: Containers
4-2-5: Collection And Disposal Of Waste
4-2-6: Contaminated Recyclable Wastes
4-2-7: Dumping Or Throwing Waste
4-2-8: Abandonment And Storage Of Refrigerators And White Goods
4-2-9: Burning Garbage And Refuse Prohibited
4-2-10: Municipal Waste Disposal Area Screens
4-2-11: Penalties
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AGENT: Any person who shall have the responsibility for the care, control, or
maintenance of any property for an owner.
ASHES: Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
BANNED WASTE: All waste for which disposal by means of landfilling is now or
hereafter prohibited by local, state, or federal law, rule, or regulation.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS: Any solid waste containing a variety
of materials resulting from the construction, demolition, remodeling, or
renovation of residential, commercial, or industrial structures. The term also
includes cement, concrete, asphalt, or masonry debris resulting primarily from
street, sidewalk, bridge, sewer, and water construction, repair, or
replacement, which is defined as "clean fill" by the Illinois environmental
protection agency.
DUMPSTER: A metal container of one cubic yard or more in volume, with an
attached lid, designed for handling by mechanical means.
EXPLOSIVE WASTE: Waste containing any substance or chemical which has a
tendency to explode or cause an explosion.
GARBAGE: Includes and means waste resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food and wastes from the handling,
processing, storage and sale of produce.
HAZARDOUS HOSPITAL WASTE: As defined in the Illinois environmental protection
act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in rules
promulgated thereunder.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: As defined in the Illinois environmental protection act, 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in rules promulgated
thereunder.
HIGHLY FLAMMABLE WASTE: Waste containing any substance or chemical which has a
propensity to ignite greater than that which is customary for municipal waste.
HOUSEHOLD UNIT: Single-family dwellings including house trailers and each unit
of a multiple-family dwelling consisting of two (2), three (3), or four (4)
dwellings. A household unit does not include any other entity including,
without limitation, commercial or retail establishments, industrial facilities,
or public buildings.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Grass, shrubbery, cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and other
materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and
trees.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, ashes, rubbish, debris, general household
waste, and recyclable waste. Municipal waste does not include any white goods,
landscape waste, banned waste, construction or demolition debris, explosive
waste, hazardous waste, hazardous hospital waste, highly flammable waste,
potentially infectious medical waste, radioactive waste, regulated medical
waste, special waste, or tires.
POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MEDICAL WASTE: As defined in the Illinois environmental
protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in
rules promulgated thereunder.
PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC WAY: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
public grounds, or public buildings.
RADIOACTIVE WASTE: Waste containing any substance or chemical which emits
radioactive particles.
RATPROOF: A form of construction which would prevent the entrance and exit of
rats, mice, and other rodents.
RECYCLABLE WASTE: A. Means and includes:
      1.   Newspaper, magazines, including any shiny surface paper, softback
books, and phone books;
      2.   Office, computer, notebooks, and gift wrap paper (with any clips,
spirals, or binders removed);
      3.   Brown kraft paper (e.g., paper grocery bags);
      4.   Unwaxed cardboard;
      5.   Shipboard/chipboard and carrier stock (very thin cardboard),
including, e.g., boxes for cereal, soft drinks, gifts, or facial tissues;
      6.   Aluminum cans, foil and pans, which must be clean;
      7.   Steel or tin cans;
      8.   Glass containers or jars (clear, brown, or green), but not window
glass, dinnerware or ceramics;
      9.   Plastic buckets (up to 5 gallons) and plastic containers #1 through
#5 and #7, i.e., if a container is stamped with any #1 through #5 and #7 inside
a triangle, it is acceptable;
      10.   Junk mail and envelopes (with any plastic cards, stick on labels or
unused stamps removed); and
      11.   Paperback books, but not hardcover books.
Containers from subsections 6 through 9 of this definition must be emptied and
rinsed clean to be considered recyclable waste.
   B.   Recyclable waste does not include:
      1.   Plastic #6 styrofoam, expanded foam, or clear polystyrene;
      2.   Plastic bags;
      3.   Plastic film, including tarps, wraps, sheets, etc.; or
      4.   Motor oil, insecticide, herbicide, or hazardous chemical containers.
REFUSE: Combustible trash including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, and bedding; and noncombustible trash
including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small
quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery, and other mineral
waste; and street rubbish including, but not limited to, street sweepings,
catch basin dirt, and contents of litter receptacles, but not including white
goods as defined in the Illinois environmental protection act, 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in rules promulgated thereunder.
REGULATED MEDICAL WASTE: As defined in 40 CFR section 259.30.
RIGHT OF WAY: Public property dedicated for a public purpose such as vehicular
traffic.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
SPECIAL WASTE: As defined in the Illinois environmental protection act, 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in rules promulgated
thereunder.
TIRE: A hollow ring made of rubber or similar materials which was manufactured
for the purpose of being placed on the wheel rim of a vehicle.
WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, ashes, rubbish, debris, general household waste,
white goods, banned waste, construction or demolition debris, explosive waste,
hazardous waste, hazardous hospital waste, highly flammable waste, landscape
waste, potentially infectious medical waste, radioactive waste, regulated
medical waste, special waste, and tire.
WHITE GOODS: As defined in the Illinois environmental protection act, 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., as amended, or in rules promulgated
thereunder. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
All garbage or refuse which has been stored, dumped, or accumulated in any
structure on any public place or upon any real property, improved or vacant,
stored or allowed to exist in the open on any property, unless necessary for
the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted thereon, is hereby
declared to constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-3: STORAGE OR ACCUMULATION OF WASTE:
No person shall store or permit the accumulation of any waste in any structure,
upon any improved or vacant property, or on any public place or public way in
the village, unless necessary for the operation of a business enterprise
lawfully conducted thereon. This section shall not prohibit the storage of
garbage or refuse in private containers and shall not prohibit the stacking and
storage of wood that is used for fuel. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-4: CONTAINERS:
   A.   Responsibility For Containers; Specifications:
      1.   The occupants of any single-family dwelling shall provide, maintain,
and keep tightly covered or sealed, a ratproof and watertight container for all
garbage. Refuse, if not stored in ratproof and watertight containers, may be
stored in other types of containers, provided it is not mixed with garbage.
      2.   The owner of a two-family or multiple-family household unit (having
4 or less units) shall provide, maintain, and keep tightly covered or sealed,
not less than one ratproof and watertight container for each household unit for
all garbage. Refuse, if not stored in ratproof and watertight containers, may
be stored in other types of containers, provided it is not mixed with garbage.
      3.   Total capacity of any container shall not exceed thirty two (32)
gallons, and a total weight of the container and contents shall not exceed
fifty (50) pounds.
   B.   Placement And Storage: It is the responsibility of all persons
occupying or controlling any household unit to place containers for municipal
waste at street level on the curb line behind the curb, or within three feet
(3') of the street surface when no curb exists, and in a location such that the
containers will not present a traffic hazard. Containers shall not be stored in
the front yard or on a front porch. If containers are stored outside, they
shall be secured and maintained in a stationary manner. Containers shall not be
set out for garbage pick up earlier than three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the date
preceding garbage pick up. Garbage and refuse containers shall be retrieved and
returned to the premises within twenty four (24) hours after garbage pick up.
   C.   Disturbing Containers: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than
the owner, occupant, or members of their families, the owner's agent, or the
garbage contractor employed by the village, to deposit, remove, deface,
destroy, or disturb garbage or refuse containers. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-5: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE:
   A.   No waste shall be disposed of or placed within the village in any
manner or place other than as prescribed by the village board.
   B.   The exclusive method for collection and disposition of municipal waste
for each household unit shall be curbside and recycling pick up by any
contractor employed or engaged for that purpose by the village. No person or
entity who has not contracted with the village may engage in the business of
collecting municipal waste or white goods within the village for any household
unit. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
   C.   There shall be a charge for collection of municipal waste to the owner
and/or occupant of every household unit for which such service is provided by
the village through contracts with a private hauler. Such fee shall be in the
amount of twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per household unit per month, beginning
on November 1, 2023. The collection fee shall be payable monthly as billed by
the village or its billing agent. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added
to all bills not paid by the last day of the month in which the bill is sent.
Failure to pay the fee upon billing by the village or its billing agent may
result, at the village option, in the placement of a lien against the real
estate and/or the filing of a complaint in circuit court seeking personal
judgment against the owner or person interested in the property subject to the
collection fee, plus court costs and reasonable attorney fees, or such other
remedies as may be available to the village. The village hereby imposes an
additional charge for recording a notice of lien in the amount actually charged
by the office of the county recorder of deeds, and an additional charge of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each insufficient funds check to pay for
additional administrative expenses. The election of a particular remedy shall
not constitute a waiver of any other remedy available to the village for
collection of the fee. The owner of the household unit, the occupant thereof,
and the user of the services shall be jointly and severally liable to pay such
collection fee, and the services are furnished to the household unit by the
village only on the condition that the owner of the household unit, occupant
thereof, and user of the garbage and refuse service are jointly and severally
liable. The village, through its contractor, shall provide municipal waste
collection service to the household unit at least once each week and collection
of recyclable wastes that have been separated from garbage or refuse on a
biweekly schedule. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010; amd. Ord. 772, 10-24-2016, eff. 11-1-
2016; Ord. 872, 1-18-2024)
4-2-6: CONTAMINATED RECYCLABLE WASTES:
   A.   Where a household unit's recycle bin contains items that are not
recyclable waste, as such "waste" is defined in section
4-2-1 of this chapter, it is contaminated. Contaminated bins will not be
collected or sorted by the village contractor.
   B.   No household unit shall provide a contaminated recycle bin for
collection. A household unit failing to abide by this section will be notified
of such failure by the contractor's placement of a sticker or other
notification device on the recycle bin and by the noncollection of its
contaminated recyclable waste. The village contractor shall cease collecting
recyclable waste from any household unit that provides a contaminated recycle
bin for collection three (3) times within any twelve (12) month period.
   C.   A household unit wishing to dispute the noncollection of recyclable
waste pursuant to this section may petition the village board for a hearing for
continued service where it must prove it did not violate this chapter by
providing a contaminated recycle bin for collection three (3) times within a
twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-7: DUMPING OR THROWING WASTE:
   A.   1. No person shall throw, deposit, or dump waste, or hire or cause
another to throw, deposit, or dump waste, on any property except in a public
landfill or when authorized by the owner or person in control of such property.
      2.   The owner of any waste shall be responsible for its placement on the
property of others until it is delivered to a public landfill. Proof of
ownership of any waste found on any property of another shall be prima facie
evidence at the trial of a violation of this subsection. Evidence that the
owner of the waste reasonably relied upon his agent or another to deposit his
waste in a public landfill shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution.
      3.   A violation of this subsection by the person who throws, deposits,
or dumps waste, or by persons who hire or cause another to throw, deposit, or
dump waste, will be punishable by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   No person shall throw or deposit any waste from a vehicle upon any
public place except in public containers. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-8: ABANDONMENT AND STORAGE OF REFRIGERATORS AND WHITE GOODS:
   A.   No person shall have abandoned, unattended, or discarded any
refrigerator or other similar appliance which has an airtight door or lid with
a snap lock or other locking device on any lot or in any structure within the
village. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Any authorized village personnel charged with the enforcement of this
section may order, in writing or orally, any person in violation of this
section to promptly comply with the requirements of this section. After the
expiration of twenty four (24) hours and the failure of such person to comply
with the order or the identity or whereabouts of such person has not been
ascertained, the door or lid shall be removed from the refrigerator or
appliance by the village, and the cost thereof shall be charged to that person.
(Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-9: BURNING GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED:
No person shall set fire to or cause or permit to be burned in any yard, lot,
street, or alley any garbage or refuse. No fire may be set or caused or allowed
to burn in or on any public right of way. (Ord. 653, 3-11-2010)
4-2-10: MUNICIPAL WASTE DISPOSAL AREA SCREENS:
All municipal waste disposal areas including, without limitation, areas
containing dumpsters, shall be screened:
   A.   On four (4) sides (including a gate for access) when the end opening is
visible from a public road; or
   B.   On three (3) sides when the opening is not visible from a public road.
The screening shall be a solid fence or wall, made of commercial grade wood,
metal or more substantial material, with a minimum height of six feet (6') and
not greater than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 730, 3-27-2014)
4-2-11: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
the first offense, not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the
second offense, and not less than one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00)
for the third and subsequent offense occurring within one year of the first
offense, with a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
653, 3-11-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 730, 3-27-2014)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCE GREENERY
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Nuisance Declared
4-3-3: Unlawful Growth
4-3-4: Notices
4-3-5: Abatement By Village
4-3-6: Liability For Costs; Lien Provisions
4-3-7: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
NUISANCE GREENERY: Any weeds or grasses exceeding a height of six inches (6"),
or any plants or vegetation, including trees, bushes, shrubs, flowers or
ornamental plants, that unreasonably interfere with the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the village or that unreasonably interfere with the
use of and access to or poses a danger to the streets, rights of way,
sidewalks, and utilities, including sewer lines, water lines, power lines, and
other municipal infrastructure.
OWNER: The record titleholder of property as reflected in the office of the
Woodford County recorder of deeds.
REASONABLE NOTICE TO ABATE: Service of a notice to abate on the owner by: a)
personal service, as authorized by law for personal service of ordinance
violations and complaints; b) certified mail addressed to the owner at the
address to which the most recent tax bill was sent for the general taxes on the
property for the taxable year immediately preceding the abatement of the
nuisance greenery; or c) posting a sign regarding the violation of nuisance
greenery on the property. Any notice to abate served on the owner shall include
the name of the owner, the date of the violation, a short description of the
violation, the location of the violation, a reference to the provision of this
chapter violated, the date by which the violation must be abated, and any other
information that may be required to apprise the owner of the violation or as
required by law.
VILLAGE: The village of Germantown Hills, Illinois. (Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Nuisance greenery within the corporate limits of the village is declared to be
a public nuisance. (Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-3: UNLAWFUL GROWTH:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for an owner of any property within the corporate
limits of the village to permit thereon the presence of nuisance greenery.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property within the corporate
limits of the village to permit the presence of nuisance greenery on any right
of way located between the property line of such property and the roadway
portion of an adjoining roadway, highway, or alleyway, inclusive of all
parkways, sidewalks, and waterways found thereon. When a parcel or right of way
has, because of a dangerously steep slope or gradient or for other similar
reasons, nuisance greenery in a natural state and such area has not been
previously graded, improved, or otherwise maintained, this subsection shall not
apply to that portion at the right of way with such slope or gradient.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property within the corporate
limits of the village to permit the encroachment of vegetation nuisance
greenery, such that the nuisance greenery encumbers or impedes the full use of
any public place or public way adjoining said property. (Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-4: NOTICES:
   A.   Annual Newspaper Notice: At least once annually, as a courtesy reminder
to owners, the village may cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village a notice in substantially the following form:
   LEGAL NOTICE
Take notice that an Ordinance of the VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS,
prohibits the growth of Nuisance Greenery within the Village, namely weeds or
grasses exceeding a height of six (6) inches, or any plants or vegetation
including trees, bushes, shrubs, flowers or ornamental plants, that
unreasonably interfere with the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the Village or that unreasonably interfere with the use of and access to or
pose a danger to the streets, right of ways, sidewalks, and utilities,
including sewer lines, water lines, power lines, and other municipal
infrastructure. Owners in violation of the Ordinance may be required to
reimburse the Village for the reasonable cost of cutting such Nuisance
Greenery, or may be fined not less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25) nor more than
Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750) for each offense, or both. Your cooperation
will be appreciated.
            Board of Trustees
            Village of Germantown Hills, Illinois
   B.   Notice To Abate: If an owner of property permits the presence of or
fails to cause the removal of nuisance greenery thereon, or upon a right of way
located between the owner's property and an adjoining roadway, highway or
alleyway, the village shall provide the owner with reasonable notice to abate
the nuisance greenery. (Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-5: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
After the expiration of five (5) days from the service of the notice described
in subsection
4-3-4B of this chapter, if an owner fails to remove nuisance greenery, the
village may proceed to remove the nuisance greenery, or may prosecute the
owner, or both. (Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-6: LIABILITY FOR COSTS; LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the village removes nuisance greenery in accordance with section
4-3-5 of this chapter, the owner of the property shall be liable to the village
for the reasonable cost thereof, whereupon the village may take steps to
perfect and enforce a lien against the property on which the nuisance greenery
was located, or against the property which adjoins the right of way or public
place on which the nuisance greenery was located, or may institute proceedings
to collect the cost, or both. The lien shall be superior to all prior existing
liens and encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within one year
after such cost and expense is incurred, the village shall file a notice of
lien for the cost and expense incurred by the village in the office of the
county recorder of deeds. Upon payment of the cost of removal of nuisance
greenery after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the
village. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose, as permitted by
law.
   B.   If, for any one property, the village removes nuisance greenery on more
than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village may combine
any or all of the costs of each of those removals into a single notice of lien.
(Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
4-3-7: PENALTY:
Any owner convicted of violating section
4-3-3 of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day
a violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 699, 4-26-2012)
CHAPTER 4
OPEN AND RECREATIONAL BURNING
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: Open Burning
4-4-3: Recreational Burning
4-4-4: Authority To Prohibit Burning
4-4-5: Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
   A.   As used in this chapter, the term “open burning” means the combustion
of any matter whatsoever out of doors, whether or not confined to a barrel or
other container, but shall not include outdoor food preparation using a
barbecue grill or other such similar device.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the term “originated” means created,
generated, or produced, and “originating from” means created, generated, or
produced from the property of origin.
(Ord. 469, 2-22-2001; amd. Ord. 884, 7-24-2025)
4-4-2: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Except as provided in this chapter, open burning is prohibited within
the corporate limits of the village.
   B.   Open burning is permitted only of "landscape waste", which means grass
or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and other materials accumulated as a
result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees, but which shall not
include freshly cut grass clippings. Moreover, there shall be no open burning
of tires, furniture, garbage, refuse or other types of waste other than
landscape waste.
   C.   Open burning of landscape waste must meet the following requirements:
      1.   It shall be permitted only between sunup and sundown, at which time,
the fire must be completely extinguished.
      2.   Open burning of landscape waste is permitted only on the property
where such waste originated, or from any immediately adjacent property.
      3.   It shall be conducted on private, not public, property and only with
the consent of the owner or other person in charge of the property.
      4.   It shall not be done on village streets.
      5.   It shall be conducted a reasonable distance, under the
circumstances, from any structure or overhanging tree.
      6.   It shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire
is extinguished, and a method to extinguish the fire must be readily available
in the vicinity of the fire.
   D.   No open burning shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter on any land
zoned agricultural, commercial or industrial if such open burning is prohibited
under the circumstances by the Illinois environmental protection agency or by
some other state or federal agency, law or regulation.
   E.   A particular act of open burning otherwise permitted by this chapter
may be curtailed, controlled, or stopped by police authorities acting on behalf
of the village where those police authorities determine that excessive fire,
smoke or flying ash constitutes an immediate hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare.
   F.    It is unlawful to transport or cause to be transported any landscape
waste from another property, whether within or outside the jurisdiction, for
the purpose of open burning on a different premises, unless from an immediately
adjacent property. Burning of any landscape waste not originating from the
property where the burning occurs is strictly prohibited, unless said waste is
from an immediately adjacent property.
(Ord. 469, 2-22-2001; amd. Ord. 884, 7-24-2025)
4-4-3: RECREATIONAL BURNING:
Small bonfires for barbecues or other recreational purposes, or for ceremonial
purposes, are permitted at all times subject to the following requirements:
(Ord. 469, 2-22-2001; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   They must not create a visibility hazard on any roadway.
   B.   They must be located a reasonable distance, under the circumstances,
from any structure or overhanging tree.
   C.   They may not use a fuel source that is prohibited to be burned in
section
4-4-2 of this chapter or that is otherwise prohibited by the Illinois
environmental protection agency or by some other state or federal agency, law
or regulation. (Ord. 469, 2-22-2001)
   D.   If they are to be conducted in connection with or as a part of an
organized school, church or community activity or event, the organizer or
sponsor of the activity or event shall notify the local fire chief at least two
(2) days ahead of the activity or event. (Ord. 544, 2-24-2005)
4-4-4: AUTHORITY TO PROHIBIT BURNING:
Notwithstanding sections
4-4-2 and
4-4-3 of this chapter, all open burning or recreational burning may be
prohibited from time to time by order of the village board of trustees, upon
recommendation of the local fire chief, when atmospheric conditions or other
conditions are determined to present a risk to the public health, safety or
welfare. (Ord. 469, 2-22-2001)
4-4-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   This chapter shall be subject to the provisions and procedures
established in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code which provides an
opportunity for administrative payment of tickets for certain ordinance
violations (the "administrative ticket ordinance"). Any person violating this
chapter:
      1.   Shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) if a ticket issued
pursuant to the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to the
"Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village hall (216 Holland Road, Germantown
Hills, IL 61548) no more than thirty (30) days after issuance of the ticket; or
      2.   Shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) if a ticket issued
pursuant to the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to the
"Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village hall more than thirty (30) days
after issuance of the ticket, but before the village files an action for
violation of this chapter in the county circuit court; or
      3.   Shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus all applicable
court costs, if the village files an action for violation of this chapter in
the county circuit court more than thirty (30) days after issuance of the
ticket.
   B.   Each day a violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a
separate violation and may be separately charged. (Ord. 544, 2-24-2005)
CHAPTER 5
INOPERABLE, UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Nuisance Declared; Exemptions
4-5-3: Abatement Procedures
4-5-4: Responsibility For Nuisance
4-5-5: Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle: a) from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed; or
b) on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise treated so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. The term shall not include any motor vehicle which has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. However, a motor
vehicle upon which repairs or services are not concluded within seven (7) days
from the date of the notice specified in section
4-5-3 of this chapter shall not be deemed to be rendered temporarily incapable
of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations and shall be construed to be an inoperable motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE NOT REGULARLY USED: Any motor vehicle which: a) has not been
driven off the premises where it is parked or stored under its own motor power
for a period longer than four (4) months; b) is not registered, licensed, or
properly displaying registration plates or stickers as required under article
IV of chapter 3 of the Illinois vehicle code; or c) exhibits damaged parts or
parts in disrepair, including, but not limited to, broken and missing windows,
body panels with holes, and fluid leaks, which pose an open threat of injury or
contamination for a period longer than fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 695, 3-22-
2012)
4-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED; EXEMPTIONS:
It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for any
person to cause, permit or allow the existence of any inoperable motor vehicle
or motor vehicle not regularly used to exist or be stored upon any public or
private property in view of the general public; provided, however, that nothing
in this chapter shall apply to any motor vehicle or part thereof which is kept
within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty
five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle or parts thereof completely on
the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor
vehicles. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-5-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Notice To Abate: Whenever any village officer determines that a
nuisance, as declared in this chapter, exists, the village officer shall cause
a written notice to abate to be served upon the person who is causing,
permitting or allowing the nuisance to exist. Said notice shall describe the
inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used, and give the
person served seven (7) days from the date of service of the notice to either
abate the nuisance or to request a hearing on the question of whether the
described motor vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not
regularly used, within the meaning of this chapter. Such notice shall be by
means of personal service or by certified or registered mail. Personal service
shall be by any police officer or any person authorized by law to make personal
service.
   B.   Failure To Abate: If the person served with the written notice to abate
fails to request a hearing within the seven (7) day period, it shall be
presumed that the motor vehicle is an inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle
not regularly used, and authorized officials of the village may proceed to
abate the nuisance in the manner provided in this section or permitted by law.
   C.   Hearing:
      1.   If the person served with the written notice to abate requests a
hearing within the seven (7) day period, the chair of the village planning
commission shall act as a hearing officer and shall schedule and conduct a
hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for a hearing.
      2.   Reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the person
requesting the hearing.
      3.   During any such hearing, any person interested in the described
inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used and any
representative of the village may call witnesses and present evidence
concerning the motor vehicle. Any party to the hearing may be represented by
legal counsel at the expense of such party.
      4.   The hearing officer shall, within seven (7) days following the
hearing, make written findings of fact regarding the motor vehicle and
determine whether or not the motor vehicle constitutes an inoperable motor
vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used within the meaning of this chapter.
Such findings of fact and determination shall be served in the same manner as
prescribed in this section for service of a notice to abate.
      5.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle is an inoperable
motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used, then the notice to abate
shall become effective from and after the date such determination is served on
the person who requested the hearing.
   D.   Abatement By Village: Whenever any person causes, permits or allows
such a nuisance to continue or exist after the expiration of seven (7) days
from the service of the notice to abate, or effective date of the notice to
abate if a hearing has been conducted as provided in this section, the village
may, at its option, cause the abatement of the nuisance specified in this
chapter as permitted by law. However, if the nuisance is located on property
other than the public right of way or property in the possession or control of
the village, the village shall, before abating the nuisance, obtain the consent
of the person served with the notice to abate or an order from the Woodford
County circuit court or any other court of competent jurisdiction authorizing
the abatement of the nuisance. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
imposing upon the village a duty to abate the nuisance specified in this
chapter. The action authorized by this subsection shall be in addition to and
without waiver of any other remedies. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-5-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCE:
A person shall fall within that class of persons who shall be deemed to cause,
permit or allow such a nuisance to exist if such person:
   A.   Has an ownership interest in or is in control of the inoperable motor
vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used;
   B.   Causes the inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used
to be deposited at the site in question;
   C.   Has an ownership interest in the real estate upon which the inoperable
motor vehicle or motor vehicle not regularly used is located;
   D.   Has an ownership interest in or operates a business which causes,
permits or allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the
business is operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of
the business owner or operator; or
   E.   Has an ownership interest in real estate upon which a business is being
operated and the operator or owner of said business causes, permits or allows
such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the business is being
operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of the person
having an ownership interest in real estate upon which said business is being
operated. (Ord. 695, 3-22-2012)
4-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall cause, permit or allow such a nuisance to continue or
exist after the expiration of seven (7) days from the date of the notice to
abate shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each such offense. Each day that such nuisance continues or
exists after the expiration of the aforesaid seven (7) days shall be deemed to
be a separate offense. Further, each such inoperable motor vehicle or motor
vehicle not regularly used shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 695, 3-
22-2012)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Created; Purpose; Composition
5-1A-2: Coordinator
5-1A-3: Oath Of Office
5-1A-4: Functions
5-1A-5: Service As Mobile Support Team
5-1A-6: Mutual Aid Agreements
5-1A-7: Emergency Action
5-1A-8: Compensation
5-1A-9: Reimbursement By State
5-1A-10: Purchases And Expenditures
5-1A-11: Office
5-1A-12: Appropriation; Tax Levy
5-1A-1: CREATED; PURPOSE; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created the Germantown Hills Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by explosion of atomic or other means from
without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire,
flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or technological
causes, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Act (EMA). The
ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be
selected pursuant to subsection 1-5A-15F of this Code. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 778, 5-18-2017)
5-1A-2: COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The Coordinator of the Villager ESDA shall be appointed by
the Village President and shall serve until removed by same.
   B.   Duties: The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the Village President as provided by statute.
   C.   Vacancies: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by
him shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this chapter. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976)
5-1A-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Villager ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
I,                     , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Village ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(Ord. 131, 5-28-1976)
5-1A-4: FUNCTIONS:
The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall
be prescribed in and by the State EMA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor and, in addition, shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in the State EMA Act. The Village ESDA shall further assist with the
refinement and implementation of the Village's Emergency Operation Plan. (Ord.
131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 778, 5-18-2017)
5-1A-5: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be designated
as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State EMA as
provided by law. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the Village ESDA organization.
   C.   Any member of the mobile support team who is a Village employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from
the State reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976)
5-1A-6: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Village Board of Trustees and by
the State Director of EMA. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1A-7: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of an explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means
of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure or other natural or technological causes, it shall
be the duty of the Village ESDA to cooperate fully with the State EMA and with
the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 131,
5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1A-8: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if
called for training by the State Director of EMA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village Board
of Trustees. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1A-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The Village Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
EMA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident
to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1A-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   The Village Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the Village
Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the
Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or
other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake,
telecommunications failure or other natural or technological causes.
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator
of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the State EMA Act; provided, that if the Village Board of
Trustees meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1A-11: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided by the Village President for the Village ESDA
as its office. (Ord. 131, 5-28-1976)
5-1A-12: APPROPRIATION; TAX LEVY:
The Village Board of Trustees may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in
the manner provided by law, and may levy, in addition for ESDA purposes only, a
tax not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the State EMA Act; however, that amount collectible under such levy
shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 131, 5-28-
1976; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Definitions
5-1B-2: Declaration Of Emergency
5-1B-3: Imposition Of Curfew
5-1B-4: Emergency Orders
5-1B-5: Duration Of Declaration
5-1B-6: Violation; Penalty
5-1B-7: Effect Of Other Laws
5-1B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY: A. Any riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute, by three (3) or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village, except
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to said civil emergency. (2012 Code)
5-1B-2: DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
   A.   Authority Of Village President: Whenever a "civil emergency", as
defined in section
5-1B-1 of this article, exists, the village president shall declare its
existence by means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency.
   B.   Notice Of Declaration: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized,
the chief of police shall notify the news media situated within the village and
shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the
emergency to be posted at the following places within the village: the village
hall, the police station and the United States post office. (2012 Code)
5-1B-3: IMPOSITION OF CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the village president, he may order
a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the village or to the
village as a whole as he deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of
the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare. (2012 Code)
5-1B-4: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the village president may also, in
the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
   A.   Order the closing of all retail alcoholic liquor businesses, including
taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
alcoholic beverages is permitted.
   B.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
   C.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   D.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   E.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property. (2012 Code)
5-1B-5: DURATION OF DECLARATION:
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty
eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the village
president indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The village
president shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency
at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time the said civil
emergency exists. (2012 Code)
5-1B-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the civil emergency provisions of this article, or the
executive order issued pursuant hereto, shall be guilty of an offense against
the village and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), upon conviction thereof. (2012 Code)
5-1B-7: EFFECT OF OTHER LAWS:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in this code or any rules or regulations pursuant to this code,
giving powers to the police and fire departments, but shall be construed
together with existing ordinances that are now or shall be in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the village. (2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Offenses Involving Animals
5-2-2-1: Prohibited Animals
5-2-2-2: Cruelty
5-2-2-3: Running At Large
5-2-2-4: Dangerous, Vicious Animals At Large
5-2-2-5: Threatening Or Annoying Situations
5-2-2-6: Noisy Conditions
5-2-2-7: Animal Waste
5-2-2-8: Destruction Of Private Property
5-2-2-9: Presence On Certain Public Places
5-2-2-10: Sanitary Conditions
5-2-2-11: Dogs Chasing Vehicles, Bicycles Or Pedestrians
5-2-2-12: Female Dogs In Heat
5-2-2-13: Use Of Animals For Indecent Purposes
5-2-2-14: Diseased, Dying Or Dead Animals
5-2-3: Rabies Control
5-2-3-1: Inoculation Required
5-2-3-2: Tag And Collar
5-2-3-3: Animal Bites
5-2-3-4: Dogs Suspected Of Having Rabies
5-2-3-5: Duties Of Animal Control Officer; K-9 Patrol Or Police Dog Exemption
5-2-3-6: Confinement For Observation
5-2-3-7: Reclamation Of Dog
5-2-3-8: Rabies Epidemic
5-2-3-9: False Reports Prohibited
5-2-4: Vicious Dogs
5-2-4-1: Determination Of Vicious Dog; Appeals Procedure
5-2-4-2: License Requirements
5-2-4-3: Confinement Requirements
5-2-4-4: Impoundment, Destruction And Redemption Procedures
5-2-4-5: Limitations Regarding Vicious Dogs
5-2-4-6: Penalties
5-2-5: Authority To Kill Dangerous Animals
5-2-6: Impoundment And Redemption Procedures
5-2-7: Penalties
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section unless otherwise specified herein:
ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, including all biped and quadruped
organisms other than humans, both domesticated and wild, male and female,
singular and plural.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any law enforcement officer, the administrator,
director, deputies, or agents of the Woodford County animal control department,
or any person designated by the village president to either enforce this
chapter or take action pursuant to the same.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of
either the owner or a person the owner has designated to be in control.
However, if an animal under the control of a village official or veterinarian
escapes and runs loose, it shall not be considered "at large".
BITE OR BITING OR BITTEN: The infliction of a break in the skin or a wound by
the teeth of an animal.
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel or structure at least six
feet (6') in height designed and constructed for the keeping of a vicious dog
and designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards set
forth herein. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure
top attached to the sides, as well as be suitable to prevent the entry of young
children. All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be locked with a key
or combination lock when such animals are within the structure and left
unattended. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the
sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground not
less than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house vicious dogs must
comply with all zoning and building regulations of the village. All such
structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS: Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following:
   A.   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, abusing,
tormenting, knowingly poisoning, knowingly attempting to poison, mutilating or
killing any animal, or causing or knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   B.   Working any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or causing or
knowingly permitting the same to be done.
   C.   Unnecessarily failing to provide an animal in one's charge or custody,
as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, and sanitary, ventilation or
temperature conditions.
   D.   Abandoning any old, lame, infirm, sick or disabled animal by leaving
such animal on any highway or public way or in any other place where it may
suffer injury, hunger, exposure or become a public charge.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, any public grounds or places, or private property not
owned or controlled by the owner.
DOG: Any animal of the canine species.
FIGHT: A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not
include a conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody by an animal control officer or other person/
entity pursuant to this chapter.
K-9 PATROL DOG OR POLICE DOG: A professionally trained dog used by law
enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes and activities. Such dogs are
defined by their law enforcement function and do not include dogs privately
owned by a law enforcement officer that are not trained and used for actual law
enforcement.
LEASH: A cord, chain, rope, strap or other such physical restraint having a
minimum tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300) pounds.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle
designed to prevent the dog from biting any person or animal. The muzzle must
be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but must prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal.
NIP: To pinch or squeeze with teeth without the breaking of skin or tissue.
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department owning,
possessing, harboring, keeping or otherwise in control of an animal within the
village. For purposes of this chapter, the person in possession of an animal
shall be presumed to be its owner.
RUN LINE: A system of tying a dog or other animal in place with either a rope
or chain having a minimum tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300)
pounds and not exceeding ten feet (10') in length. The rope or chain must be
securely fastened to a permanent, nonmovable object and prevent the animal from
climbing, digging, jumping or otherwise escaping under its own volition.
SEVERE INJURY: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring
lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.
TAKE: To obtain possession without consent; to hunt, shoot, pursue, lure, kill,
destroy, capture, gig or spear, trap or ensnare, harass or to attempt to do so.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, bites or attacks a
human being or another animal on either public or private property.
   B.   In addition to subsection A of this definition, any individual dog
designated as a vicious dog pursuant to this chapter, because it:
      1.   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without
provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or
      2.   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dogfighting or is trained for dogfighting; or
      3.   Is reported to be a dangerous animal upon two (2) separate
occasions.
   C.   No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner, anyone assaulting its owner, anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained dog used for law
enforcement or guard duties. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2: OFFENSES INVOLVING ANIMALS:
5-2-2-1: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, keep or permit to be
at large within the village any of the following animals: bees, pigeons,
donkeys, cows, horses, cattle, sheep, ponies, mules, goats, pigs, swine, hogs,
guineas, ducks, geese, chickens, turkeys, minks, skunks, foxes, or any other
livestock or poultry or any wild or vicious animals dangerous to mankind.
   B.   Any animal named in subsection A of this section which is found at
large within the village shall be impounded, if possible; provided, however,
that whenever any animal control officer believes such animal endangers any
person, such animal may be killed by said officer.
   C.   In addition to any other penalties imposed upon any person violating
this section, such person shall also be liable for the costs of impounding or
killing such animal, if necessary. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-2: CRUELTY:
   A.   No person shall and it shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly
treat any animal in the village in any way, and any person who engages in an
act of cruelty to animals shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause, procure or
encourage any fight between animals, either in private or in public. Further,
it shall be unlawful for any person to own or harbor any animal for the purpose
of fighting, or to train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the
purpose of causing such animal to attack without provocation.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or attempt to kill by any
means any game animal or game birds within the village.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any animal
to abandon such animal within the village. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-3: RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   No domestic animal, including horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine,
domestic fowl of the species of chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or hens, goats,
dogs or any other animal, shall be suffered, allowed, or permitted to run at
large within the limits of the village.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any such domestic
animal or fowl which is running at large within the limits of the village. It
shall not be a defense that the owner or possessor of such animal did not allow
or permit the animal to run at large.
   B.   Determination Of At Large Animal: Any animal found upon any public
street, sidewalk, alley, parkway or any unenclosed place shall be deemed
running at large unless such animal is firmly held by a leash or is in an
enclosed vehicle.
   C.   Nuisance Declared; Impoundment: Any domestic animal or fowl found
running at large or a dangerous and/or vicious animal as defined in this
chapter or as defined in 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15 shall be
considered a nuisance and apprehended and impounded and shall be impounded in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-4: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any
kind to run at large within the village. Exhibitions or parades of animals
which are feral naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon
securing a permit from the village clerk. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-5: THREATENING OR ANNOYING SITUATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to permit such
animal to cause reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person or another
animal by attacking or threatening to attack such person or animal, or to
permit such animal to jump upon any person to the annoyance of said person.
(Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-6: NOISY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep any
animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night,
and it shall be unlawful for any such person to permit any animal to make such
noises.
   B.   Complaint: Any person residing in a neighborhood whose quietness has
been disturbed by any animal owned or possessed within the neighborhood may
make a sworn complaint before the village clerk against the owner or possessor
of said animal.
   C.   Nuisance Declared; Impoundment And Redemption: Any animal which
disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of day or night is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be impounded by an animal control officer and
may be redeemed only by paying the appropriate fees as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-7: ANIMAL WASTE:
   A.   Public Property: No person who owns, harbors, keeps, walks or is in
charge of any dog or other animal shall permit or allow said dog or other
animal to defecate on any public property or in any public place unless said
person shall immediately clean up, remove and dispose of said waste in
accordance with this section.
   B.   Private Property: No such person shall permit or allow a dog or other
animal to walk or defecate upon private property without the consent of the
occupant thereof.
   C.   Removal Required: Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, walks or is in
charge of an animal which defecates shall be required to clean up, remove and
dispose of said waste as follows:
      1.   All feces deposited by said animal shall be picked up immediately in
a sanitary manner by shovel or other similar device.
      2.   The fecal material shall be placed in a plastic bag or other
waterproof container, and said plastic bag or container shall be sealed.
      3.   The sealed plastic bag or other waterproof container shall be placed
in a trash can or other proper receptacle used for disposal of wastes. (Ord.
708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-8: DESTRUCTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to permit such
animal to damage or destroy any personal property of another person. (Ord. 708,
9-13-2012)
5-2-2-9: PRESENCE ON CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to permit such
animal to enter any religious premises, public hall, bank building, automobile
gasoline station, public garage or any place where food or beverage is sold or
served during such time as these establishments are open for use to the public
or persons entitled to use the same; provided, however, that the owner of any
of the establishments mentioned in this section may permit a watchdog or
service dog (e.g., a seeing eye dog) to remain therein if such dog is held and
restrained in such a way that such dog cannot injure any patron or come in
contact with any food. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-10: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Animals: Every owner or person in possession of an animal shall
maintain his animal in a clean and sanitary condition.
   B.   Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit
offensive odors to emanate from the premises where the animal is kept. (Ord.
708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-11: DOGS CHASING VEHICLES, BICYCLES OR PEDESTRIANS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog to permit such
dog to chase any motor vehicle, bicycle, or pedestrian traveling upon any
public or private street or sidewalk. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-12: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of any female dog to permit
such female dog to run at large within the village at any time while such dog
is in heat. In addition to any penalty for which the owner shall be liable
under this chapter, such dog shall be impounded. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-13: USE OF ANIMALS FOR INDECENT PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner instigate, cause, procure,
participate in or assist in any indecent, lewd or immoral show, use or
exhibition of any animal. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-2-14: DISEASED, DYING OR DEAD ANIMALS:
   A.   Diseased Animals Generally:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to allow any animal afflicted with any
contagious or infectious disease to run at large or to be exposed in any public
place whereby the health of persons or other animals may be affected; nor shall
such diseased animal be removed or shipped from the premises of the owner
thereof except under the supervision of an animal control officer or a licensed
veterinarian.
      2.   An animal control officer shall cause such disposition of any
diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the
communication or spread of contagion or infection.
   B.   Authority To Kill Diseased Or Injured Animals: Whenever any animal is
in any street or public place within the village and appears, in the estimation
of any animal control officer, to be injured or diseased beyond recovery, and
is not at that time being attended and properly cared for by the owner or other
proper person in control thereof, and whenever such animal has not been removed
to some private premises or other place designated by such officer within one
hour after being found or left in such condition, such animal may be put to
death by such officer or his authorized agent and, unless at once removed by
the owner, shall be treated as any other dead animal found on a street or
public place, as herein provided.
   C.   Removal Of Dead Or Dying Animals: Any person possessing any dead animal
or any animal injured or diseased beyond recovery, which is not killed for meat
or is improper for use as meat, or which is in an offensive condition or sick
with an infectious or contagious disease, shall notify the county animal
control, and upon an order from the same, such person, at his own expense,
shall at once remove or cause the removal of such animal.
   D.   Improper Disposal Of Or Keeping Dead Animals: It shall be unlawful for
any person to abandon, deposit or throw upon any place or street or public
water or to offensively expose or bury anywhere within the village the body or
any part thereof of any dead or fatally diseased or injured animal; nor shall
any person keep any dead animal or any offensive meat, bird, fowl or fish in a
place where the same may be dangerous to the life or detrimental to the health
of any person. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3: RABIES CONTROL:
5-2-3-1: INOCULATION REQUIRED:
Dogs shall be inoculated against rabies as required by 510 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8. It shall be unlawful to permit any animal capable of contracting
the disease of rabies and not on a leash or muzzled to be in any public street,
parkway, sidewalk, or park, or in any store or place of public gathering, or in
any place in the village other than in an enclosed area unless such animal has
been inoculated against the disease of rabies by a licensed veterinarian within
the preceding year. Further, such person shall keep a certificate of a
veterinarian licensed by the state as proof of such inoculation or vaccination.
(Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3-2: TAG AND COLLAR:
   A.   Requirements: The owner of a dog shall provide the dog with a collar or
harness made of leather, metal or other substantial material to which shall be
securely fastened a tag issued by the state rabies inspector, deputy inspector
or any licensed veterinarian showing that such dog has been vaccinated against
rabies during the current or immediately preceding year. A dog found anywhere
within the village not wearing the proper collar and tag shall be impounded.
Any owner not providing such collar and tag shall be subject to the penalties
specified in this chapter. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Unauthorized Removal Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
not authorized by the owner to remove or take away any dog collar or rabies
vaccination tag from any dog; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
apply to any governmental official or animal control officer in the exercise of
his duties. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3-3: ANIMAL BITES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the owner or person receiving notice or having
knowledge that his dog has been bitten by any animal suffering or suspected to
be suffering from rabies, or that his dog has bitten any person, to immediately
notify or deliver his dog to any police officer who shall place the dog in a
licensed veterinary hospital for observation, or such owner shall himself
immediately place his dog in such a hospital for observation and immediately
notify the county animal control of the name and location of such hospital.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog, upon receiving notice or
having knowledge that such dog has bitten any person or that such dog has been
bitten by any animal suffering or suspected to be suffering from rabies, to
sell or give away such dog, or permit such dog to run at large or to be taken
beyond the village except to a veterinary hospital within the county; and it
shall also be unlawful for such owner to refuse to deliver said dog for
observation as provided herein. At the end of the confinement period, the
animal shall be examined by licensed veterinarian. If such animal, during this
period, shall die or shall show definite signs of illness, it shall be the duty
of such owner or person having custody of the animal to turn the animal over to
the county animal control so that it can be determined whether or not such
animal has in fact contracted rabies. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3-4: DOGS SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES:
   A.   Report To County: Every veterinarian or other person discovering or
suspecting any dog to be suffering from rabies shall immediately report this
matter to the county animal control, giving the name and address of the owner
of such dog, if known, and the place where the dog can be found. For the
purposes of this subsection only, any dog which has bitten any person shall be
presumed to be suffering from rabies. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Authority To Kill: Any police officer may kill a dog running at large
which is suspected of suffering from rabies if the dog, in the opinion of the
police officer, cannot be safely taken up and impounded, or if the police
officer deems such killing essential to the safety of any person. (Ord. 708, 9-
13-2012)
5-2-3-5: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; K-9 PATROL OR POLICE DOG EXEMPTION:
   A.   Upon being notified that a dog has bitten any person or is suspected of
suffering from rabies, the animal control officer or the county animal control
shall:
      1.   When the owner of the dog is known, notify such owner and direct
such owner to deliver the dog to a licensed veterinary hospital for
observation; or
      2.   When the owner of the dog is unknown, immediately take said dog and
confine said dog to a licensed veterinary hospital for observation. (Ord. 708,
9-13-2012)
      3.   When a dog is taken under the provisions of subsection B of this
section, attempt to notify the dog's owner of the confinement of such dog
within seven (7) days after the confinement begins. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012; amd.
2012 Code)
   B.   When a person or animal is bitten by a K-9 patrol dog or police dog
that is currently vaccinated against rabies, the dog may continue to perform
its duties for the peace officer or law enforcement agency, and any period of
confinement for observation of the police dog may be under the supervision of a
peace officer. The supervision shall consist of the dog being locked in a
kennel, performing its official duties in a police vehicle, or remaining under
the constant supervision of its police handler. Where such dog is not currently
vaccinated against rabies, the procedure established by section
5-2-3-6 of this chapter shall apply in place of this section. (Ord. 708, 9-13-
2012)
5-2-3-6: CONFINEMENT FOR OBSERVATION:
Any dog that has bitten a person shall be confined according to this section to
observe whether it has rabies, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
   A.   Period Of Confinement: Confinement of a dog for observation under this
section shall be for a period of ten (10) days. The dog shall be examined by
the county animal control or a licensed veterinarian immediately after
confinement has commenced and again at the end of the confinement period.
   B.   Certificate Of Examination: If someone other than a deputy of the
county animal control conducted either of the examinations required by
subsection A of this section, that person shall submit to the county animal
control a certificate immediately following such examination stating whether or
not the dog shows symptoms of rabies.
   C.   Place Of Confinement:
      1.   Where an owner provides a valid certificate demonstrating the dog
has been vaccinated or inoculated for rabies within the time prescribed by law
and dated prior to the biting incident, the dog may be confined in the house of
its owner, who, during the period of confinement, shall ensure the animal does
not come into contact with people or animals that do not reside in the owner's
home, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
      2.   Where no certificate is provided, the animal shall be confined under
the observation of a licensed veterinarian for the period of confinement.
   D.   Outcome Of Confinement:
      1.   If the dog is found rabid, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane
manner. If the dog is destroyed or if it shall die within the ten (10) day
observation period, its head shall be sent by the veterinarian to the
laboratory of the state department of public health.
      2.   If the dog is not found to be rabid by the end of the confinement
period, the owner shall be so notified, and the dog may be released to its
owner and the village clerk so advised.
   E.   Owner Restrictions: An owner of a dog subject to confinement pursuant
to this section may not euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of any
animal known to have bitten a person until after both examinations required by
subsection A of this section have been completed and submitted as required by
subsection B of this section.
   F.   Costs: All costs incurred pursuant to this section are the dog owner's
responsibility and shall be borne by him. Any such amount shall be in addition
to any fines or costs that are imposed for a violation of this chapter. A
person is deemed to have accepted this responsibility by owning, possessing, or
maintaining a dog within the village. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3-7: RECLAMATION OF DOG:
   A.   An owner may reclaim any dog impounded under the provisions of this
chapter within three (3) days after the period of confinement has expired by
paying the costs incurred during the observation period and the costs of a
rabies vaccination shot if the owner cannot prove the dog has been properly
vaccinated as is required by this chapter. If the animal remains unclaimed on
the fourth day, the animal will be moved to the county animal control shelter
(if it is not already kept there), and owners will be subject to county animal
control regulations to reclaim the animal, in addition to owing the village for
all fees, costs, and penalties otherwise incurred under this chapter.
   B.   If the owner or keeper does not claim the dog within this time, then
any person may redeem the dog by making like payments.
   C.   If the dog is not claimed as set forth herein, it shall be destroyed in
a humane manner, and any unpaid costs incurred by a licensed veterinarian in
compliance with this section shall be paid to said veterinarian in an amount
not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00) upon receipt by the village of an
itemized bill setting forth said costs. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-3-8: RABIES EPIDEMIC:
   A.   Proclamation Of Epidemic: Whenever the president shall deem it
necessary to prevent an epidemic of rabies, he may issue a proclamation
requiring the owners of all dogs to keep them securely confined or to keep them
properly muzzled or leashed, so they cannot bite, for such times as may be
designated in the proclamation or until otherwise notified. The president shall
publish such proclamation in a daily newspaper of general circulation within
the village. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
   B.   Prohibitions; Village Action: Following any proclamation of rabies
epidemic under this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any owner to permit his
dog to run at large in violation of the provisions of such proclamation. In
addition to the penalties provided with respect to any such owner for violating
this subsection, a dog running at large without a muzzle during such time shall
be impounded or killed, as circumstances require or permit. (Ord. 708, 9-13-
2012; amd. 2012 Code)
5-2-3-9: FALSE REPORTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any report required by this section
5-2-3 without having a reasonable belief in its truth and accuracy. (Ord. 708,
9-13-2012)
5-2-4: VICIOUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, own, or in any way possess
within the corporate limits of the village a vicious dog, subject to the
exceptions and standards provided by this section
5-2-4. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-1: DETERMINATION OF VICIOUS DOG; APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Determination; Notice Requirements:
      1.   Any animal control officer, or other representative of the county
animal control, who suspects that a dog may be a vicious dog within the meaning
of this chapter, based upon his own observations or the reporting of another,
may conduct an investigation to determine whether or not the dog has committed
any act or displays any characteristics which qualify it as a vicious dog. If,
upon the completion of such investigation, the officer concludes that the dog
is a vicious dog, such officer shall issue a written notice of determination
which includes at least the following:
         a.   A description of the dog.
         b.   Information available concerning the ownership of the dog.
         c.   A statement or conclusion that the dog is a vicious dog within
the meaning of this chapter.
         d.   A description of the investigation conducted by the officer and
what acts or characteristics discovered during the investigation led the
officer to conclude that the dog is a vicious dog.
         e.   Notice to the owner that the vicious dog must be licensed and
housed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
         f.   Notice that the owner may appeal the determination of the officer
to the president or his designee within seven (7) working days after the
determination is served upon the owner.
      2.   The officer shall serve the notice of determination on the owner by
certified mail or hand delivery to the last known address of the owner.
   B.   Appeals Procedure:
      1.   The owner may appeal any determination that the owner's dog is a
vicious dog. An appeal must be directed to the president or his designee and
must be filed by the owner in the office of the village clerk within seven (7)
working days after receipt of the notice of determination which identifies the
dog as a vicious dog. Should the owner fail to appeal the determination within
seven (7) working days, the determination of the investigating officer that the
dog is a vicious dog shall become final. Upon receipt of an appeal, the
president or his designee shall convene a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether the dog in question is a vicious dog.
      2.   The hearing of an owner's appeal shall be held within sixty (60)
days of the date on which the appeal is filed. The president or his designee
shall serve a notice of the time, date and location of the hearing upon the
owner of the alleged vicious dog at least five (5) business days before the
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and shall remain open to the
public. At the hearing, the owner shall have the opportunity to present
evidence to explain why the dog should not be declared a vicious dog. The owner
shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel at the owner's expense.
The officer who made the initial determination that the dog is vicious, and any
other persons having knowledge of the facts and circumstances, may be heard by
the president or his designee and shall be subject to cross examination by the
owner or the owner's attorney. The president or his designee shall decide all
issues for or against the owner of the dog regardless of whether the owner
appears at the hearing.
      3.   Within five (5) working days after the conclusion of the hearing,
the president or his designee shall determine whether or not the dog is a
vicious dog within the meaning of this chapter. The president or his designee
shall notify the owner in writing of his determination. The decision of the
president or his designee shall be final.
   C.   Summary Impoundment: If any officer of the village determines that the
public safety requires the immediate impoundment of a dog as authorized by this
chapter, the officer shall, within a reasonable time, notify the owner of the
facts and circumstances relating to the impoundment. Upon receipt of such
notification, the owner may appeal the determination of the officer to the
president or his designee in accordance with the procedures established in this
section for the identification of vicious dogs. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall possess any vicious dog for a period
of more than fifteen (15) days after the dog's designation as a vicious dog is
final without having first obtained an annual vicious dog license therefor from
the village.
   B.   Application For License: An application for a license to possess a
vicious dog shall be filed with the village clerk and shall provide the
following information:
      1.   Verification of the identity of the owner and current address by
providing a photostatic copy of the owner's driver's license.
      2.   Proof of ownership of the vicious dog.
      3.   A copy of the current immunization and health record of the vicious
dog prepared by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the state of Illinois.
      4.   A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in an amount not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), insuring said person against
any claim, loss, damage or injury to persons, domestic animals or property
resulting from the acts, whether intentional or unintentional, of the vicious
dog.
      5.   Two (2) photographs of the vicious dog to be licensed taken not less
than one month before the date of the application. One photograph shall provide
a front view of the vicious dog and shall clearly show the face and ears of the
vicious dog. One photograph shall show a side view of the vicious dog.
      6.   An annual license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      7.   Such other information as may be required by the village clerk.
   C.   Inspection: Upon receipt of an application, the village clerk shall
forward such application to the village code enforcement inspector, if such a
person exists, who shall cause an inspection of the premises on which the
vicious dog shall be kept to determine that there has been compliance by the
applicant with all provisions of this section
5-2-4 relating to confinement and posting of signs. Should there be no code
enforcement inspector, the village clerk shall perform such actions. Upon
completion of the inspection, the code enforcement inspector or the village
clerk shall notify the village in writing of the results of the inspection.
   D.   Approval Or Denial Of License: Upon receipt of the results of the
inspection, the village clerk shall notify the applicant of the approval or
denial of the license. In the event that the license is denied, the
notification shall be provided in writing, and the reasons for such denial
shall be stated. Upon denial, the owner or keeper of the vicious dog shall,
within forty eight (48) hours, either remedy the reasons for denial, if
possible, and immediately reapply or remove the vicious dog from the village.
Upon approval of the application, the clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant.
   E.   Expiration Of License; Annual Renewal Required: A vicious dog license
expires annually. No one shall own, possess, keep or maintain a vicious dog
without applying annually for a new vicious dog license as provided in this
section to avoid owning, possessing, or maintaining a vicious dog for which the
license has expired. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-3: CONFINEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall possess any vicious dog unless the vicious dog is confined in
accordance with this section. Any owner who has appealed a determination that a
dog is vicious shall temporarily confine such dog in accordance with this
section until a final determination regarding such appeal is issued.
   A.   Confinement Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in
any part of a house or structure that would allow the vicious dog to exit the
structure on its own volition. No vicious dog shall be kept in a house or
structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are
the only obstacles preventing the vicious dog from exiting the structure.
   B.   Confinement In Exterior Area: No person shall confine a vicious dog in
an exterior area unless such vicious dog is confined in a confinement structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with this section; except, that a
vicious dog may be confined outside of a confinement structure in a manner set
forth in this section. Such a confinement structure must be located in an area
enclosed and screened by an opaque privacy fence of six feet (6') in height and
composed of wood, metal, vinyl, or some other material designed to completely
block the view from both within and without the fenced area to the other side
of the fenced area.
   C.   Confinement On Leash And/Or Run Line: No person shall permit a vicious
dog to go outside a confinement structure, house or other structure unless the
vicious dog is securely restrained with a leash no longer than three feet (3')
and fitted with a muzzle or securely restrained on a run line no longer than
ten feet (10') and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog
to be kept on a leash unless a person is in actual physical contact and control
of the leash. Any such leash or run line must be enclosed and screened by an
opaque privacy fence of six feet (6') in height and composed of wood, metal,
vinyl, or some other material designed to completely block the view from both
within and without the fenced area to the other side of the fenced area.
   D.   Conditions To Be Out Of Enclosure Or Off Run Line: The only time that a
vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure or off the run line is when the
dog is in a carrier, crate or other enclosure designed to and capable of safely
confining the dog for transportation: 1) if it is necessary for the owner or
keeper to obtain veterinary care for the vicious dog; or 2) to sell or give
away the vicious dog; or 3) to comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The owner or keeper may also allow the dog out of the enclosure
or off the run line to walk the vicious dog; provided, that said vicious dog is
securely muzzled and restrained with a leash having a minimum tensile strength
of at least three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in
length, and shall be at all times under the direct physical control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-4: IMPOUNDMENT, DESTRUCTION AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any vicious dog which is not properly confined shall be impounded by an
animal control officer; provided, however, that if an animal control officer
reasonably believes that such dog poses an immediate threat of severe injury to
any person, such officer may kill such dog. Any vicious dog found to be running
at large by an animal control officer shall be presumed to be in violation of
this section
5-2-4 and shall be subject to impoundment.
   B.   Any dog which attacks a human being or other domestic animal may be
ordered destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner when, in the court's
judgment or that of a hearing officer, such dog represents a continuing threat
of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals. However, prior to
the destruction of the dog, control of the dog must be transferred to the
county animal control.
   C.   Any vicious dog which has previously been impounded for not properly
being confined or for running at large in violation of this section
5-2-4 or which has previously bitten or attacked a human being or other
domestic animal without provocation, shall be ordered destroyed in an
expeditious and humane manner upon any subsequent violations of this section
5-2-4 or upon any subsequent unprovoked attack or bite.
   D.   Any vicious dog which attacks a human being and causes severe injury
shall automatically be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
   E.   An owner of a vicious dog holding a license pursuant to this section
5-2-4 may redeem an impounded vicious dog if the vicious dog has not caused
severe injury to a person, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Proof of a valid license issued by the village pursuant to this
section
5-2-4; and
      2.   Payment of the cost of keeping the vicious dog during the period of
impoundment and any other costs incurred or imposed by application of the
requirements of this chapter.
      3.   Approval by the president, his designee, the code enforcement
inspector, or the county animal control of the enclosure in which the vicious
dog will be kept. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-5: LIMITATIONS REGARDING VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   Spaying Or Neutering Required: Within ten (10) days of the
determination that a dog is vicious becomes final, the owner of the vicious dog
shall have it spayed or neutered.
   B.   Sale Or Transfer Of Ownership Or Location: No person shall sell,
barter, offer to breed or in any similar way use or dispose of a vicious dog or
its offspring to any person within the village without approval from a court of
competent jurisdiction, or the president or his designee, unless the recipient
resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the
registered owner of such vicious dog or the recipient is a person who does not
reside within the village, provided he or she gives written notice to the
person who will be receiving the vicious dog that such dog has been deemed a
vicious dog under this section
5-2-4. An owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall notify the president or his
designee when he or she moves the vicious dog to a different residence from
where he or she formerly lived, regardless of whether it is inside or outside
of the village.
   C.   Removal Of Offspring From Village: All offspring born of vicious dogs
registered within the village must be removed from the village within six (6)
weeks of the birth of such animals.
   D.   Incidence Reports Required:
      1.   Any person owning or possessing a vicious dog shall report the
incidence of any of the following events:
         a.   The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any vicious dog
shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours.
         b.   The escape from confinement of any vicious dog shall be reported
upon discovery of the escape.
         c.   The biting, nipping, scratching or attacking in another manner of
any person or animal by a vicious dog shall be reported immediately upon
occurrence.
         d.   The birth of any offspring of a vicious dog shall be reported
within forty eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring.
         e.   The permanent removal of any vicious dog from the territorial
limits of the village shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours of such
removal by surrender of the license of the owner to the village clerk.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the report of any
incident required to be reported under this subsection shall be made to the
police department of the village.
      3.   Further, all dog owners, whether or not their dog is licensed as a
vicious dog, receiving notice or having knowledge that their dog has bitten or
attacked a human being or domestic animal without provocation shall immediately
notify an animal control officer of said incident in accordance with this
chapter.
   E.   Sign Requirements: All persons possessing a vicious dog shall display
in a prominent place on the premises where a vicious dog is to be kept a sign
which is readable by the public from a distance of not less than one hundred
feet (100') using the words "Beware Of Dog". A similar sign shall be posted on
any confinement structure.
   F.   Violations; Revocation Of License: A license granted pursuant to this
section
5-2-4 shall be automatically revoked upon a violation by the licensee of any
provision of this section
5-2-4. In the event of a revocation of the license, the license fee shall be
retained by the village, and the vicious dog must be removed from the village
within forty eight (48) hours.
   G.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to any K-9 patrol dogs or
police dog, as defined in section
5-2-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-4-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   Upon conviction of an offense of this section
5-2-4, the court shall assess a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, any
person found guilty of violating this section
5-2-4 in a manner that requires the dog be impounded or destroyed shall also
pay all expenses including shelter, food, veterinary expenses, and other
expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog for the protection of the
public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any
such dog.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog
registered with the village to fail to comply with the requirements and
conditions set forth in this section. Any vicious dog found to be the subject
of a violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and
impoundment. In addition, failure to comply may result in the revocation of the
license of such animal resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from
the village. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-5: AUTHORITY TO KILL DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
An animal control officer is authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any
kind when it is necessary for the protection of any person's health or safety.
(Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-6: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Impoundment: Any domestic animal or fowl found running at large,
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, shall be apprehended and impounded
at the county animal control animal shelter for a period of up to three (3)
days. On the fourth day, if the animal is unclaimed, the animal will be subject
to county animal control regulations to reclaim the animal.
   B.   Redemption Fees: The owner of any impounded animal may redeem the
animal by paying the village a release fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day
the animal is held, plus any other additional applicable fees, costs, charges,
and penalties incurred due to caring for the impounded animal or that otherwise
arise under this chapter, including and in addition to any fees or charges
imposed by the county animal control. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
   C.   Required Inoculation: No animal shall be released from impoundment
until proof of the required rabies inoculation has been presented. Absent such
proof, no such animal shall be released from the shelter until the animal is
properly vaccinated, and until all costs and expenses thereof are paid to the
village clerk and the county animal control, respectively. (Ord. 708, 9-13-
2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Redemption By Owner Or Other Person: No animal will be released to
someone other than the owner, unless it remains unclaimed by said owner or such
owner is unknown. (Ord. 708, 9-13-2012)
5-2-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any person, firm or
corporation who violates, neglects, or refuses to comply with this chapter, or
who resists or opposes the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) and, for each subsequent offense, shall be assessed a fine of not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), and such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   B.   In addition to such fine(s), any person found guilty of violating this
chapter shall be ordered to pay any and all expenses incurred by any person or
entity arising from such violation including, but not limited to, costs and
fees incurred with respect to the capture, care, examination, treatment,
storage, or disposal of an animal, which costs may include, for example,
shelter, food, veterinary expenses, and any other related expenses. (Ord. 708,
9-13-2012)
CHAPTER 3
MISDEMEANOR CODE
SECTION:
5-3-1: Short Title
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Jurisdiction Of Village
5-3-4: Civil Remedies Preserved
5-3-5: Penalty
5-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MISDEMEANOR CODE OF
GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS. (2012 Code)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACT: Includes a failure or omission to take action.
AIR RIFLE: Means and includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, BB gun or pellet gun which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic,
steel, lead, stone or other hard materials with force that reasonably is
expected to cause bodily harm or property damage.
ANOTHER: A "person" or persons as defined in this section other than the
offender.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the village, owned or used by the village and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation, government, partnership
or unincorporated association. The masculine gender shall include the feminine,
and the singular shall include the plural.
POLICE OFFICER: Any person who, by virtue of his office or public employment,
is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duly extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: A person, other than a public officer, who is authorized to
perform any official function on behalf of and is paid by the village or any of
its subdivisions or agencies.
PUBLIC OFFICER: A person who is elected to office pursuant to a statute or
ordinance or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the
qualifications and duties of which are prescribed by statute or ordinance to
discharge a public duty for the village or any of its subdivisions or agencies.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REASONABLE BELIEF OR REASONABLY BELIEVES: The person concerned, acting as a
reasonable person, believes that the described facts exist.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials. (2012 Code)
5-3-3: JURISDICTION OF VILLAGE:
   A.   A person is subject to prosecution in the village for an offense which
he or she commits, while either within or outside the village, by his or her
own conduct or that of another for which he or she is legally accountable, if:
      1.   The offense is committed either wholly or partly within the village;
or
      2.   The conduct outside the village constitutes an attempt to commit an
offense within the village; or
      3.   The conduct outside the village constitutes a conspiracy to commit
an offense within the village, and an act in furtherance of the conspiracy
occurs in the village; or
      4.   The conduct within the village constitutes an attempt, solicitation
or conspiracy to commit in another jurisdiction an offense under the laws of
both the village and such other jurisdiction.
   B.   An offense is committed partly within the village if either the conduct
which is an element of the offense, or the result which is such an element,
occurs within the village.
   C.   An offense which is based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by
the laws of the village is committed within the village regardless of the
location of the offender at the time of the omission. (2012 Code)
5-3-4: CIVIL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
This chapter does not bar, suspend or otherwise affect any right or liability
to damages, penalty, forfeiture or other remedy authorized by law to be
recovered or enforced in a civil action for any conduct which this chapter
makes punishable, and the civil injury is not merged in the offense. (2012
Code)
5-3-5: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter violations of any
provision hereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2012 Code)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Criminal Housing Management
5-3A-2: Trespass To Land And Buildings
5-3A-3: Trespass To Vehicles
5-3A-4: Malicious Mischief Or Destruction To Property
5-3A-5: Tampering With Coin Operated Devices
5-3A-6: Criminal Damage To Property
5-3A-7: Littering
5-3A-1: CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT:
A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having
personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as legal or
equitable owner, or as a managing agent or otherwise, he recklessly permits the
physical condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or
remain in any condition which endangers the health or safety of any other
person. (2012 Code)
5-3A-2: TRESPASS TO LAND AND BUILDINGS:
   A.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass
within the village upon either public or private property. Any of the following
acts shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses, and
appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to
prevent or suppress any violation or violations of the following:
      1.   Any entry upon the premises or part thereof of another, including
any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in violation
of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      2.   The pursuit of a course of action incidental to the making of an
entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry, or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in the
case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof.
   B.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person convicted of trespass involving the use of a motor
vehicle shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense, and seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each additional offense. Each separate
occurrence shall be deemed a new offense.
      2.   Any person convicted of trespass involving the use of a motor
vehicle in any field that is used for growing crops or which is capable of
being used for growing crops, in an enclosed area containing livestock, in an
orchard, or in a barn or other agricultural building containing livestock shall
be fined seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (2012 Code)
5-3A-3: TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or upon any vehicle, aircraft
or watercraft without the consent of the person having the right to the
possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such
vehicles, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person
having such right. (2012 Code)
5-3A-4: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF OR DESTRUCTION TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously tear up,
injure, deface or destroy any sidewalk, curbing or street surface; or any fire
alarm, parking meter, sewer drain or other municipal improvement; or any
building, bridge or other property, real or personal, belonging to the village;
or any property used in any business impressed with a public interest and
usually designated as a public service corporation, i.e., waterworks, gas,
electric light, telephone, street, railroad or steam heating companies. It
shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously interfere or
meddle in any way with the operation of any such business, as enumerated in
this section. (2012 Code)
5-3A-5: TAMPERING WITH COIN OPERATED DEVICES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or attempt to insert, in
any parking meter, vending machine or other coin operated device, any slug,
counterfeit coin or other foreign or metallic substance not a coin of United
States currency.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously injure,
deface, destroy or otherwise tamper with any parking meter, vending machine or
other coin operated device. (2012 Code)
5-3A-6: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously:
   A.   Damage, deform or destroy any real or personal property of another
without the consent of the owner thereof; or
   B.   Deface any real or personal property of another without the consent of
the owner thereof by the use of paint, oil or any other substance. (2012 Code)
5-3A-7: LITTERING:
   A.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Throw or deposit litter in any park within the village except in
public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon
any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided,
all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere; or
      2.   Throw or deposit litter on any private property within the village,
whether owned by such person or not; except, that the owner or person in
control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon any private property; or
      3.   Throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property
within the village, whether owned by such person or not.
   B.   Duty Of Property Owner: The owner or person in control of any private
property shall, at all times, maintain the premises free of litter. Provided,
however, that this subsection shall not prohibit the storage of litter in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
   C.   Penalty: Violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
continued or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC ORDER
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Assault, Battery And Fighting
5-3B-2: Reckless Conduct
5-3B-3: Disorderly Conduct; Breach Of Peace
5-3B-4: Unlawful Assemblies
5-3B-5: Mob Action
5-3B-6: Disturbing Lawful Assemblies
5-3B-7: Disturbing Elections
5-3B-8: Obstructing Stairways Or Exits
5-3B-9: Resisting Arrest
5-3B-10: Interfering With Or Disobeying Government Officials
5-3B-11: False Alarms
5-3B-12: Vagrancy
5-3B-1: ASSAULT, BATTERY AND FIGHTING:
   A.   Definitions:
    ASSAULT: A person, commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving
a battery.
   BATTERY: A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without
legal justification and by any means: 1) causes bodily harm to an individual;
or 2) makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
   B.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a
fight, or to fight, or to commit any assault or assault and battery anywhere
within the village. (2012 Code)
5-3B-2: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly the
acts which cause the harm or endanger the safety of an individual, whether they
are lawful or are unlawful. (2012 Code)
5-3B-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; BREACH OF PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous,
offensive or disorderly conduct; or to be guilty of any conduct calculated to
breach the peace. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   B.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the fire
department of any city, town, village or fire protection district a false alarm
of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such fire exists; or
   C.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release would
endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no
reasonable ground for believing that such bomb, explosive or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place; or
   D.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed, or has
been committed; or
   E.   Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening therein; or
   F.   While acting as a collection agency, as defined in the collection
agency act 1 , or as an employee of such collection agency, and while
attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged
debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
   G.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the department
of children and family services under section 4 of the abused and neglected
child reporting act 2 ; or
   H.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the department
of public health under the nursing home care act 3  or the ID/DD community care
act 4 ; or
   I.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the police
department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district,
or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such assistance is required; or
   J.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under article II
of "an act in relation to victims of violence and abuse", approved September
16, 1984, as amended; or
   K.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
   L.   Calls the number "911" for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or
   M.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a threat of destruction of a
school building or school property, or a threat of violence, death, or bodily
harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or school event,
whether or not school is in session. (2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 425/1 et seq.
2 2. 325 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
3 1. 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.
4 2. 210 ILCS 47/1-101 et seq.
5-3B-4: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to assemble
together for any unlawful purpose or, being assembled, to act in concert to do
an unlawful act against the property of the village or the person or property
of another or against the public peace, or to make any movement or preparation
therefor.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any
assemblage for the purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the
peace or any riotous, offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon premises owned
or occupied by him or under his control within the village. (2012 Code)
5-3B-5: MOB ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in mob action, defined as
follows:
   A.   The use of force, violence or other disruptive conduct by two (2) or
more persons acting together, without lawful authority, so as to constitute a
breach of the peace; or
   B.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   C.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons without authority of law to do
violence to the person or property of another. (2012 Code)
5-3B-6: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt or disturb any
funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, assembly met for worship or any
other assembly met for a lawful purpose by any offensive behavior or by any
disorderly conduct. (2012 Code)
5-3B-7: DISTURBING ELECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance at an election
poll or to interfere with the election process. (2012 Code)
5-3B-8: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, place
of worship, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall or any building
used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such manner that it interferes
with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (2012 Code)
5-3B-9: RESISTING ARREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully resist an arrest
which he knows is being made by a police officer, or by a private person
summoned and directed by a police officer to make an arrest, even if he
believes that the arrest is unlawful and the arrest is in fact unlawful. (2012
Code)
5-3B-10: INTERFERING WITH OR DISOBEYING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To knowingly prevent, obstruct, harass or endanger, by any means, any
police officer, fire officer or other official or employee or any military
personnel on emergency duty within the village, in the lawful performance of
his duties.
   B.   To knowingly or wilfully refuse or neglect to obey, without reasonable
justification therefor, any lawful order or direction of any police officer,
fire officer or other official or employee or any military personnel on
emergency duty within the village. (2012 Code)
5-3B-11: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful to intentionally make, turn in or give any false alarm of
fire or of need of police or ambulance assistance, or to aid or abet in the
commission of such act. (2012 Code)
5-3B-12: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of vagrancy as herein defined.
The following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
   A.   Burglar's Tools: Any person upon whose possession shall be found any
instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets, or any
implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to have
been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony or misdemeanor or
in the violation of any ordinance, and who shall fail to account satisfactorily
for the possession of the same.
   B.   Unlawful Occupancy: Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging
or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop or other
building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot and not
giving a satisfactory account for himself.
   C.   Begging: Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person who
goes about from door to door of private hotels or commercial and business
establishments, or places himself in or upon any public way or public place to
beg or receive alms for himself.
   D.   Illegal Association: Any person who keeps, operates, frequents, lives
in or is employed in any house or other establishment of ill fame, or who
(whether married or single) engages in or commits acts of fornication or
perversion for hire.
   E.   Loitering: Any person found loitering or strolling in, about or upon
any street, alley or other public way or public place, or at any public
gathering or assembly, or in or around any store, shop or business or
commercial establishment, or on any private property or place without lawful
business and conducting himself in a lewd, lascivious manner in speech or
behavior. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES INVOLVING HEALTH AND SAFETY
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Smoking In Public
5-3C-2: Open Burning
5-3C-3: Creating, Maintaining A Nuisance
5-3C-4: Loud, Disturbing, Unnecessary Noises
5-3C-5: Stench Bombs; Nauseous Substances
5-3C-6: Fireworks
5-3C-7: Throwing, Dropping Missiles And Glass
5-3C-8: Use Of Skateboards
5-3C-9: Operation Of ATVs And Off Highway Motorcycles
5-3C-1: SMOKING IN PUBLIC:
   A.   Definitions: "Public place", "place of employment", and "smoke" shall
have the same meanings as defined in the smoke free Illinois act 1  and as may
be amended by state legislation or otherwise implemented by regulations by the
department of public health or other authorized state agency. "Public place"
includes student dormitories as described in section 25 of the act.
   B.   Prohibitions: No person shall smoke in a public place, in any place of
employment, within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or
place of employment, in any enclosed indoor area used by the public or serving
as a place of work or in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the village
unless otherwise exempt under state law.
   C.   Penalty: A person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00). (2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
5-3C-2: OPEN BURNING:
   A.   Dangerous Fires: It shall be unlawful for any person to start by any
means, or to permit another to start, any fire which endangers or damages the
health, person or property of another.
   B.   Bonfires: It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close
to any building or other structure as to endanger such building or structure,
or upon any asphalt street or sidewalk pavement.
   C.   Contained Fires: It shall be unlawful to burn papers, excelsior or
other material within the village which may be blown about by the wind, unless
the same is burned in a stove, fireplace or furnace, or an incinerator with a
trap sufficiently fine to prevent the escape of flyash or ignited particles.
(2012 Code)
5-3C-3: CREATING, MAINTAINING A NUISANCE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain anywhere
within the village any "nuisance" as declared or defined in title 4, chapter 1
of this code, or to permit or direct another to do the same.
   B.   Notice of such nuisance and violation thereof shall be given to the
person responsible or his agent and to the proper village official whose duties
include the abatement of such nuisances. (2012 Code)
5-3C-4: LOUD, DISTURBING, UNNECESSARY NOISES:
The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within
the limits of the village is prohibited. The following acts are declared to be
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   A.   Blowing Horns: The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle or bus so as to create an unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time.
   B.   Radios, Music: The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical
instrument with such volume, particularly between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., as to unreasonably annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, care center,
dwelling, hotel or other such building.
   C.   Yelling And Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing,
particularly on the public streets, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any other time or place so as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the
vicinity.
   D.   Pets: The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which, by causing
frequent or long continued noises, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity.
   E.   Blowing Whistles: The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler, other than to give notice of the time to begin or stop work
or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper village
authorities.
   F.   Exhaust Discharge: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or
motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which effectively
prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   G.   Building Operations: The erection (including excavation), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets or public
places, in any residential area, other than between the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, except in
case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then
only with a written permit from the village clerk.
   H.   Noises Near Certain Premises: The creation of any excessive noise on
any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, place of worship or
court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital or care center,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof.
   I.   Noises To Attract Attention: The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of
noise to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise.
   J.   Loudspeakers Or Amplifiers: The unreasonable use of any amplifiers or
loudspeakers in the course of any public address.
   K.   Operation Of Certain Vehicles And Engines:
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection, the terms "all-terrain
vehicle" and "off highway motorcycle" shall have the meanings ascribed to those
terms by the Illinois vehicle code.
      2.   Prohibitions And Exemptions: Except as provided in this subsection,
the operation of any all-terrain vehicle, off highway motorcycle, snowmobile,
lawn mower or stationary internal combustion engine from sunset to seven fifty
nine o'clock (7:59) A.M. is prohibited. It shall not be a violation of this
subsection for any person to drive or operate any all-terrain vehicle, off
highway motorcycle, snowmobile, lawn mower or stationary internal combustion
engine when:
         a.   Loading or unloading such vehicle onto another vehicle or
transporting the vehicle from one place of storage to another. When loading,
unloading or transporting any such vehicle as authorized by this subsection,
the motor shall be operated at the lowest rate which will allow movement of the
vehicle at walking speed; or
         b.   Such vehicle or engine is being used as a utility vehicle or for
utility purposes which include, but are not limited to, the maintenance of
lawns and gardens, snow removal, agriculture, towing of other vehicles during
parades or inspection of public works in remote areas; or
         c.   Such vehicles or engines are used by law enforcement officers for
law enforcement purposes; or
         d.   There is an emergency.
      3.   Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection
shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense, and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each additional offense. Each separate occurrence shall
be deemed a new offense. (2012 Code)
5-3C-5: STENCH BOMBS; NAUSEOUS SUBSTANCES:
   A.   Prohibited Uses: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop,
pour, deposit or discharge upon the person or the property of another any
liquid, gaseous or solid substance which is injurious to persons or property or
which is nauseous, sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses,
with the intent to unlawfully injure, molest, discomfort or discommode another
in the use, management, conduct or control of his personal property. No person
shall attempt or aid in the attempt or commission of any act prohibited herein.
   B.   Exemptions: The prohibitions of subsection A of this section shall not
apply to police officers acting in the line of duty or to proprietors of
business premises or to their employees using such substances for the
protection of such business premises when the substances referred to herein are
kept solely for the purposes of repelling robbers, thieves, burglars or other
such persons violating the law. (2012 Code)
5-3C-6: FIREWORKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, buy, sell, use, ignite or
explode fireworks of any kind within the village; provided, however, that a
permit may be granted by the board of trustees allowing displays and
exhibitions to be held on holidays or other special occasions when adequate
precautions are taken and facilities provided to prevent injury to persons or
property. (2012 Code)
5-3C-7: THROWING, DROPPING MISSILES AND GLASS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, purposely or recklessly, to cast, throw,
drop or break any stone, rock, brick, glass bottle or other missile or
substance onto any street, alley or other public way or in, at or against any
person, residence, building, car or other property. (2012 Code)
5-3C-8: USE OF SKATEBOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skateboard on any public street in
the village, or on any property owned, operated or maintained by the village. A
violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(2012 Code)
5-3C-9: OPERATION OF ATVs AND OFF HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the terms "all- terrain
vehicle" and "off highway motorcycle" shall have the meanings ascribed to those
terms by the Illinois vehicle code.
   B.   Operation Requirements And Restrictions:
      1.   Streets And Highways:
         a.   No person shall drive or operate any all-terrain vehicle or off
highway motorcycle upon any street or highway, except as otherwise provided in
this subsection B1.
         b.   No person operating an all-terrain vehicle or off highway
motorcycle shall make a direct crossing upon or across any toll road,
interstate highway, or controlled access highway.
         c.   All-terrain vehicles and off highway motorcycles may make a
direct crossing of all other streets and highways, provided:
            (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
            (2)   The all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle is brought
to a complete stop before attempting a crossing; and
            (3)   The operator of the all-terrain vehicle or off highway
motorcycle yields the right of way to all pedestrian and vehicular traffic
which constitutes a hazard; and
            (4)   When crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at
an intersection of the highway with another public street or highway.
      2.   Nature Preserves: No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle or
off highway motorcycle within any nature preserve as defined in section 3.11 of
the Illinois natural areas preservation act 1 .
      3.   Railroad Tracks: No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle or
off highway motorcycle on the tracks or right of way of an operating railroad.
      4.   Tree Nursery Or Planting: No person shall operate any all- terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle in any tree nursery or planting in a manner
that damages or destroys growing stock or creates a substantial risk thereto.
      5.   Private Property: No person shall operate any all-terrain vehicle or
off highway motorcycle on private property without the written or verbal
consent of the owner or lessee thereof. Any person operating an all-terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle upon the lands of another shall stop and
identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly authorized
representative and, if requested to do so by the landowner, shall promptly
remove the all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle from the premises.
      6.   Publicly Owned Lands: No person shall operate any all- terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle on publicly owned lands.
      7.   Frozen Surfaces Of Public Waters: No person shall operate any all-
terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle on the frozen surface of public
waters within one hundred feet (100') of a person not in or upon an all-terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle.
      8.   Distance From Dwellings:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection B8b of this section, no person
shall operate any all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle within one
hundred feet (100') of any dwelling, unless permission to operate the all-
terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle within one hundred feet (100') of the
dwelling has been given by the owner of such dwelling.
         b.   It shall not be a violation of subsection B8a of this section for
any person to drive or operate any all-terrain vehicle or off highway
motorcycle when:
            (1)   Loading or unloading such vehicle onto another vehicle or
transporting the vehicle from one place of storage to another. When loading,
unloading or transporting any such vehicle as authorized by this subsection B8b
(1), the motor shall be operated at the lowest rate which will allow movement
of the vehicle at walking speed; or
            (2)   Such vehicle is being used as a utility vehicle for purposes
which include, but are not limited to, the maintenance of lawns and gardens,
snow removal, agriculture, towing of other vehicles during parades or
inspection of public works in remote areas; or
            (3)   Such vehicles are used by law enforcement officers for law
enforcement purposes; or
            (4)   There is an emergency.
      9.   Firearms Possession: No person, except persons permitted by law,
shall operate or ride any all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle with
any firearm in his or her possession.
      10.   Pollution Standards: No person shall operate any all- terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle emitting pollutants in violation of standards
established pursuant to the environmental protection act 2 .
      11.   Littering: No person shall deposit from any all-terrain vehicle or
off highway motorcycle on the snow, ice or ground surface, trash, glass,
garbage, insoluble material, or other offensive matter.
      12.   Driving Too Fast For Conditions: No person shall operate any all-
terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle at a rate of speed too fast for
conditions. The fact that the speed of the all-terrain vehicle or off highway
motorcycle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit allowed does not
relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any person, vehicle, or object and the duty of all persons to
use due care.
      13.   Careless Operation: No person shall operate any all- terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle in a careless or heedless manner so as to be
grossly indifferent to the person or property of other persons, or at a rate of
speed greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to
bring the all-terrain vehicle or off highway motorcycle to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.
      14.   Reckless Operation: No person shall operate any all- terrain
vehicle or off highway motorcycle in such a manner as to endanger the life,
limb or property of any person.
   C.   Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense, five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the second offense, and seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each additional offense. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed
a new offense. (2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 525 ILCS 5/3.11.
2 1. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS
SECTION:
5-3D-1: Public Intoxication
5-3D-2: Open Container
5-3D-3: Sniffing, Inhaling Intoxicants
5-3D-4: Cannabis, Look Alike Substances And Drug Paraphernalia
5-3D-1: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place to be in such a
state of intoxication that:
      1.   He is unreasonably loud, obscene or disorderly so as to breach the
peace; or
      2.   He is incoherent, incapacitated or asleep so as not to be able to
control, direct or protect himself.
   B.   It shall be the duty of police officers to arrest any such person when
they reasonably believe such condition exists. (2012 Code)
5-3D-2: OPEN CONTAINER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to carry, possess or have any alcoholic
liquor on any public street or public sidewalk in the village or on any
property owned, operated, maintained or possessed by the village unless such
alcoholic liquor is in the original container and with the seal unbroken.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to carry, possess or have any alcoholic
liquor on any property owned, operated, used or possessed by any public school
in the village unless such alcoholic liquor is in the original container and
with the seal unbroken. (2012 Code)
5-3D-3: SNIFFING, INHALING INTOXICANTS:
   A.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sniff, inhale or breathe the
vapors of any glue, kerosene, gasoline, cleaning fluid or other substance not
manufactured or produced for such human consumption for the purpose of becoming
intoxicated.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to command, encourage, request,
aid or abet any other person to violate the provisions of subsection A1 of this
section.
   B.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00); a second or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2012 Code)
5-3D-4: CANNABIS, LOOK ALIKE SUBSTANCES AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions:
    CANNABIS: Means marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indicia, of all strains of cannabis, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
other naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, “cannabis” does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. “Cannabis” does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. “Cannabis” also means cannabis
flower, concentrate and cannabis-infused products.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Includes any controlled substance as defined in
section 102 of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/102, as amended from time to time.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Includes all equipment, products and materials of any
kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section
10 of the "methamphetamine control and community protection act", 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 646/10, which are: 1) possessed or intended for use; 2) being
or have been used; or 3) peculiar to and marketed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the "cannabis control act", 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/
1 et seq., the "Illinois controlled substances act", 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/100 et seq., or the "methamphetamine control and community
protection act", 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq. This includes,
but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   Kits that are: a) possessed or intended for use; b) being used or
have been used; or c) peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices that are: a) possessed or intended for use; b)
being used or have been used; or c) peculiar to and marketed for use to
increase the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      3.   Testing equipment that is: a) possessed or intended for use; b)
being or has been used; or c) peculiar to and marketed for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants that are: a) possessed or intended for use;
b) being used or have been used; or c) peculiar to and marketed for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects that are: a) possessed or intended for use; b) being used or
have been used; or c) peculiar to and marketed for use in injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, or
any controlled substance into the human body including, where applicable, the
following items:
         a.   Water pipes;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         e.   Carburetor pipes;
         f.   Electric pipes;
         g.   Air driven pipes;
         h.   Chillums;
         i.   Bongs;
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers;
      6.   Any items whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section or the "drug paraphernalia control act",
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/1 et seq.
   LOOK ALIKE SUBSTANCES: A substance, other than a controlled substance,
which:
      1.   By overall dosage unit appearance including shape, color, size,
markings or lack thereof, taste, consistency or any other identifying physical
characteristic of the substance would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the substance is a controlled substance; or
      2.   Is expressly or impliedly represented to be a controlled substance
or distributed under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the substance is a controlled substance. For the purpose of
determining whether the representations made or the circumstances of the
distribution would lead a reasonable person to believe the substance to be a
controlled substance under this definition, the court or other authority may
consider the following factors in addition to any other factor that may be
relevant:
         a.   Statements made by the owner or person in control of the
substance concerning its nature, use or effect.
         b.   Statements made to the buyer or recipient that the substance may
be resold for profit.
         c.   Whether the substance is packaged in the manner normally used for
the illegal distribution of controlled substances.
         d.   Whether the distribution or attempted distribution included an
exchange of or demand for money or other property as consideration and whether
the amount of the consideration was substantially greater than the reasonable
retail market value of the substance.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep for sale, offer
for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration a look alike
substance, or drug paraphernalia.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance for
any store, place or premises to keep for sale, offer for sale, or deliver for
any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
      3.   The possession and use of cannabis in the Village shall be
prohibited as described herein and shall further be prohibited to the fullest
extent permitted by Illinois law. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in any of the following conduct:
         a.   Undertaking any task under the influence of cannabis when doing
so would constitute negligence, professional malpractice, or professional
misconduct;
         b.   Possessing cannabis:
            (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
            (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary
school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
            (3)   In any correctional facility;
            (4)   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in
a reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
            (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         c.   Using cannabis:
            (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
            (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary
school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
            (3)   In any correctional facility;
            (4)   In any motor vehicle;
            (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
            (6)   In any public place; or
            (7)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21
years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         d.   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under
the Smoke Free Illinois Act;
         e.   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or snowmobile while using or under the
influence of cannabis in violation of Section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, Section 5-16 of the Boat Registration and Safety Act, or
Section 5-7 of the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act;
         f.   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed
to use cannabis under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         g.   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act;
         h.   The use of cannabis by a law enforcement officer, corrections
officer, probation officer, or firefighter while on duty; or
         i.   The use of cannabis by a person who has a school bus permit or a
Commercial Driver’s License while on duty.
   As used in this Section, “public place” means any place where a person could
reasonably be expected to be observed by others. “Public place” includes all
parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State, the
Village, or any other unit of local government. “Public place” includes all
areas in a park, recreation area, wildlife area, or playground owned in whole
or in part, leased, or managed by the State, the Village, or any other unit of
local government. “Public place” does not include a private residence unless
the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or
other similar social service care on the premises.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Cannabis: Any person convicted of possessing, keeping for sale,
offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration less than
two and five-tenths grams (2.5 g) of cannabis shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Any person convicted of possessing, keeping for sale,
offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration at least
two and five-tenths grams (2.5 g) but less than ten grams (10 g) of cannabis
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any person convicted of
possessing, keeping for sale, offering for sale, selling or delivering for
commercial consideration at least ten grams (10 g) but less than thirty grams
(30 g) of cannabis shall be punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any
person convicted of possessing, keeping for sale, offering for sale, selling or
delivering for commercial consideration thirty grams (30 g) or more of cannabis
shall be punishable by a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   Look Alike Substances: Any person convicted of possessing, keeping
for sale, offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration
look alike substances shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Any person convicted a second or subsequent time for possessing, keeping for
sale, offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration
look alike substances shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Drug Paraphernalia: Any person convicted of possessing, keeping for
sale, offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration
drug paraphernalia shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any
person convicted a second or subsequent time for possessing, keeping for sale,
offering for sale, selling or delivering for commercial consideration drug
paraphernalia shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   D.   Exemptions: This section does not apply to a person who is legally
authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the "hypodermic
syringes and needles act" 1 . (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 821, 12-12-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.
ARTICLE E. OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
SECTION:
5-3E-1: Unlawful Use Of Weapons
5-3E-2: Discharging Weapons
5-3E-3: Carrying Loaded Weapons
5-3E-4: Unlawful Display Of Weapons
5-3E-5: Confiscation And Disposition Of Weapons
5-3E-1: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Possess or carry any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sandclub,
sandbag, metal knuckles or any knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade
knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a
button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife; or
      2.   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument
of like character; or
      3.   Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle a tear gas gun
projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance; or
      4.   Carry concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person,
except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any
pistol, revolver or other firearm; or
      5.   Set a spring gun; or
      6.   Possess any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or
intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or
      7.   Possess or carry any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or
bullets may be discharged by a single function of the firing device, any
shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length, or any bomb,
bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive
substance, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails; or
      8.   Carry or possess any firearm or other deadly weapon in any place
which is licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, or at any public gathering held
pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or any public gathering
at which an admission is charged, excluding any place where a showing,
demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is
conducted within the limits of the village.
      9.   Carry or possess in a vehicle or on or about his person within the
corporate limits of the village, except when on his own land or in his own
abode or fixed place of business, any loaded pistol, revolver or other firearm.
   B.   The presence in an automobile other than a public omnibus of any
weapon, instrument or substance referred to in subsection A7 of this section is
prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by,
all persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument or
substance is found, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   If such weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the
person of one of the occupants therein; or
      2.   If such weapon, instrument or substance is found in an automobile
operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper
pursuit of his trade, then such presumption shall not apply to the driver.
   C.   Subsections A1, A3, A4, A6, A7, A8 and A9 of this section shall not be
construed to apply to any duly authorized and appointed police officer of the
village, or of the state of Illinois or of the United States, or to any member
of the armed forces or reserve forces of the United States or the Illinois
national guard while in the performance of their duties. (2012 Code)
5-3E-2: DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any firearm,
air gun, slingshot, bow, crossbow or other device designed to fire, project or
throw any stone, bullet or other hard substance within the village; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to any police officer discharging
his firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to any citizen from discharging
any firearm when lawfully defending his person or property.
   B.   The firing or discharging of weapons within the village shall be
permitted if approved by resolution of the village board of trustees for any
and all exhibitions involving the use of weapons having historical interest or
presenting an otherwise valid public interest. (2012 Code)
5-3E-3: CARRYING LOADED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons permitted by law, to have
or carry any shotgun or rifle or air gun in or on any vehicle, unless such
shotgun or rifle or air gun is dismantled to render it incapable of being fired
or is unloaded when enclosed in a case. The mere removal of the bolt from a
bolt action rifle shall not be construed as dismantled so as to render it
incapable of firing. (2012 Code)
5-3E-4: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of any weapon or device set
forth in this article to display or flourish any such weapon in a threatening
or boisterous manner such as might alarm a reasonable person. (2012 Code)
5-3E-5: CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS:
   A.   Upon conviction of a violation of this article, any weapons seized
shall be confiscated by the trial court.
   B.   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for evidentiary
purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession, if known. All
other confiscated weapons, when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes,
shall, in the discretion of the trial court, be destroyed or preserved as the
property of the village. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE F. OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
SECTION:
5-3F-1: Curfew
5-3F-2: Alcoholic Beverages
5-3F-2-1: Social Hosting
5-3F-3: Possession Of Tobacco Products
5-3F-4: Sales To, Possession Of Weapons
5-3F-5: Truancy And Excessive Absenteeism
5-3F-6: Materials Harmful To Minors
5-3F-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any minor person
under the age of seventeen (17) years to be present at or upon any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times unless
accompanied or supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible
companion at least eighteen (18) years of age, approved by a parent or legal
guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the
state authorize a person of less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   B.   Permitting An Offense: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
permit any person in his custody or control to violate subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Penalty: A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (2012 Code)
5-3F-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   Sale, Gift Or Furnishing To:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
another person under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit a gathering
at a residence which he or she occupies of one or more additional persons when
any one or more of the persons is under twenty one (21) years of age and the
following factors also apply: a) the person occupying the residence knows that
any such person under the age of twenty one (21) years is in possession of or
is consuming any alcoholic beverages; b) the possession or consumption of
alcohol by the person under twenty one (21) is not otherwise permitted by any
section of the laws of Illinois or any ordinance of the village. For the
purposes of this subsection A2, where the residence has an owner and tenant(s)
or lessee(s), there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is occupied
only by the tenant(s) or lessee(s).
      3.   A violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Purchase, Accept, Possess Or Consume:
      1.   Purchase, Accept Or Possess:
         a.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale,
gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this section to purchase
or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his
possession.
         b.   Penalty: A violation of subsection B1a of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         c.   Prima Facie Evidence: The presence in a vehicle other than a
public omnibus of any alcoholic liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is
in the possession of, and is being carried by, all persons occupying such
vehicle at the time at which such alcoholic liquor is found, except under the
following circumstances:
            (1)   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants
therein; or
            (2)   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over twenty
one (21) years.
      2.   Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one
(21) years of age to consume alcoholic liquor. A violation of this subsection
B2 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Exemptions: Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit
the possession, dispensing or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a minor
under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or parents or legal
guardian of such minor in the privacy of a home.
   C.   Use Of Illegal Identification:
      1.   Definition: For the purposes of this subsection, an "identification
card" is defined as any document issued by a public officer in the performance
of his official duties which on its face purports to identify the name and age
of the bearer.
      2.   Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person to display an
identification card that:
         a.   Is altered or defaced in any manner; or
         b.   Is false or forged; or
         c.   Is the identification card of another; or
         d.   Was obtained by means of false information to induce another to
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to the bearer.
      3.   Penalty: A violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). (2012 Code)
5-3F-2-1: SOCIAL HOSTING:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the following meanings unless expressly stated otherwise:
    ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl alcohol, or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, and beer and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and which contains
one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit
for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with
other substances.
   CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit a gathering or event.
   ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
   PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      1.   As a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
      2.   As a legal guardian; or
      3.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or
gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages present at the event
or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by
inspecting drivers' licenses or other government issued identification cards to
ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the event or gathering,
calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one (21) are in
possession of alcohol at the event or gathering or advising law enforcement in
advance of departing one's residence that the owner will be away, and no
underage person is authorized to be present and consume alcohol at the owner's
residence.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
   RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement,
fire, and other emergency response providers to an event or gathering
including, but not limited to:
      1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering, and the
administrative costs attributable to such response(s).
      2.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of an event or gathering.
      3.   The cost of repairing any village equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or
leaving the scene of an event or gathering.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord.
676, 3-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
permit, allow, host or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or
gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public
place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance over
which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity for control, where
illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages have been consumed by an underage person,
if such person either knows or reasonably should know that an underage person
has consumed any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages.
      2.   A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be
deemed to have known or should have known that an underage person has consumed
illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages if the person has not taken all reasonable
steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by
underage persons.
      3.   A person who permits, allows or hosts an event or gathering shall be
rebuttably presumed to have known or should have known that underage persons
have consumed illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages if such person is present at
the premises of the event or gathering at the time any underage person consumes
illicit drugs or an alcoholic beverage.
      4.   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between
an underage person and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by
Illinois state law.
      5.   It is the duty of any person who permits, allows or hosts an event
or gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, public
place, any other premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance, where
underage persons will be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages by any underage person at
the event or gathering.
      6.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation
of this section if he or she seeks assistance from the police department or
other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the
person's performance of the duties imposed by this section, or terminates the
event or gathering because the person has been unable to prevent underage
persons from consuming illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages despite having
taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request is made before any
other person makes a complaint about the event or gathering.
      7.   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present
at the event or gathering to be liable under this section.
      8.   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
responsible for any and all response costs incurred to investigate the event or
gathering.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be
fined for each such violation as follows:
         a.   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         b.   A second violation of this section by the same person within a
twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         c.   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   Each day on which or during which a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
   D.   Interpretation: This section is in addition to all other ordinances on
the subject and shall be construed therewith excepting as to that part in
direct conflict with any other ordinance, and in the event of such conflict,
the provisions hereof shall govern. (Ord. 676, 3-24-2011)
5-3F-3: POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
   A.   Possession Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco product within the corporate limits
of the village, which shall include cigarettes, cigars, and tobacco in any
other form, including pipe tobacco and chewing or smokeless tobacco.
   B.   Fine:
      1.   Established: The fine for each violation of this section is fifty
dollars ($50.00) if paid within one week of the date of the violation notice;
seventy five dollars ($75.00) if paid within one month of the date of the
violation notice; and one hundred dollars ($100.00) thereafter.
      2.   Payment Of Fine; Participation In Smoking Cessation Program; Refund:
Fines shall be payable to the "Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village
hall, 216 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL 61548. Any violator who pays his/
her fine to the village before the village has filed a court action, as
provided in subsection B3 of this section, and who, within six (6) months after
the date of violation, submits to the village clerk written proof of his/her
satisfactory completion of a smoking cessation program, shall be entitled to a
full refund of his/her fine, payable within one month after the submission of
written proof.
      3.   Failure To Pay Fine: If the village determines to pursue violators
in court who have not paid their fines within one month after the dates of
their violation notices, the violators shall be responsible for payment of all
court costs if found guilty. The village attorney shall pursue such violators
in court upon the direction of the village president. (Ord. 470, 4-26-2001)
5-3F-4: SALES TO, POSSESSION OF WEAPONS:
   A.   Sales To:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any firearm, "air rifle"
(as defined in section
5-3-2 of this chapter), bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sandclub, sandbag,
metal knuckles, dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, stiletto, or any knife
commonly referred to as a switchblade, which has a blade which opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, to a minor.
      2.   It shall be an affirmative defense for any person having sold such
weapon that:
         a.   The minor procured the same by use of false or forged
identification cards; and
         b.   That he did not know, and could not reasonably have known, of the
falsity or forgery; and
         c.   That he exercised reasonable diligence to determine the
verification of the information (representation).
   B.   Possession:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any bludgeon,
blackjack, slingshot, sandclub, sandbag, metal knuckles, dagger, dirk, billy,
dangerous knife, stiletto, or any knife commonly referred to as a switchblade
knife, which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to
a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to
possess any firearm or air rifle unless under the direct and immediate
supervision of that minor's parent, stepparent, adoptive parent, guardian or a
responsible adult. This subsection B2 shall not apply to minors possessing
firearms or air rifles on a recognized and established shooting range.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any parent of a minor, including
stepparents, adoptive parents or guardians, to knowingly allow said minor to
possess any weapon in violation of either subsection B1 or B2 of this section.
(2012 Code)
5-3F-5: TRUANCY AND EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM:
   A.   Prohibitions; Emergencies; Penalties:
      1.   Prohibitions:
         a.   Truancy: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years, enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within
the corporate limits of the village, to absent himself or herself from
attendance at school without valid cause. Any person who should so absent
himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy.
         b.   Excessive Absenteeism: It shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years, enrolled in a public, private or parochial
school within the corporate limits of the village, to absent himself or herself
from attendance at school for five (5) or more student attendance days during
any one school year, unless such absenteeism is for valid cause and has been
approved by his or her school district.
      2.   Emergencies:
         a.   Emergency Conditions: Emergency or unforeseen absence due to
illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself
or herself shall not constitute truancy or excessive absenteeism if a valid
cause has been obtained from the parent or person in loco parentis and such
valid cause is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within
twenty four (24) hours after such absence.
         b.   Valid Cause: A valid cause for absence is an illness that would
temporarily impair or interfere with a student's learning ability, observance
of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency or such
other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent, guardian or
custodian for the safety or health of the student. Valid cause shall not
include babysitting, employment activities (unless specifically sanctioned by
the student's school district) or any other reason that does not temporarily
impair or interfere with a student's learning ability.
      3.   Penalties: Any person found guilty of truancy or excessive
absenteeism under this subsection shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each offense. If the person found guilty of truancy is under the age of
thirteen (13), the parent or custodian of such person is subject to the
aforesaid penalty.
   B.   Parental Responsibility:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for a parent or a person in loco parentis to
knowingly permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to commit an
act of truancy or acts of excessive absenteeism as defined in subsection A of
this section.
      2.   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a minor under subsection A of this section to commit an act
of truancy as defined in said subsection when the parent or person in loco
parentis knows that said minor absents himself or herself from attendance at
school without valid cause and the parent or person in loco parentis fails to
act to ensure that the minor attends the school in which he or she is enrolled.
      3.   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to commit the
offense of excessive absenteeism as defined in subsection A of this section
when the parent or person in loco parentis provides a written or oral excuse
for the minor's nonattendance which is false or does not amount to valid cause.
      4.   A parent or person in loco parentis found guilty under this
subsection shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A parent or person in loco parentis
found guilty under this subsection more than three (3) times in any one school
year shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
subsequent offense. (2012 Code)
5-3F-6: MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
   EXHIBIT: Displaying material in such a way that a minor, as part of the
invited general public, will be exposed to view such material.
   KNOWINGLY: Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents thereof.
   MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording tape, or
videotape.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Determination Of Harmful Materials:
      1.   Material is harmful to a minor if, to the average person, applying
contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or
excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is material redeeming social
importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
      2.   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was offered, distributed, sent or exhibited, unless it
appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its
dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is designed for specially
susceptible groups, in which case, the predominant appeal of the materials
shall be judged with reference to its intended or probable recipient group.
   C.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   A person who, with knowledge that a person is a minor, or who fails
to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly
distributes, sends or causes to be sent, exhibits, or offers to distribute or
exhibit any material harmful to a minor, or knowingly allows a minor to view
such material is guilty of a misdemeanor.
      2.   Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who falsely states,
either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of eighteen (18)
years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of age and identity
which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining,
viewing, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful
material shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   D.   Affirmative Defenses:
      1.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any
library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under eighteen (18) years of age,
provided such circulation is in aid of legitimate scientific or educational
purposes, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a
violation of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of
legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his child any harmful material.
      3.   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted in reliance
upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a person shall be a
defense to any criminal prosecution under this section: A document issued by
the federal government or any state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed
forces.
      4.   A person shall not be deemed to have "exhibited" material harmful to
a minor if the material is kept behind devices commonly known as "blinder
racks" so that the lower two- thirds (2/3) of the material is not exposed to
view, if the material is covered with an opaque covering so that the lower two-
thirds (2/3) of the material is not exposed to view, or if the material is
displayed within a separate room or area so that the material is not exposed to
the view of any minor. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE G. OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALITY
SECTION:
5-3G-1: Gambling
5-3G-2: Prostitution And Related Offenses
5-3G-3: Public Indecency
5-3G-4: Obscenity
5-3G-5: Obscene Markings
5-3G-6: Window Peeping
5-3G-1: GAMBLING:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
    GAMBLING: Gambling occurs when any person:
      1.   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other things of value;
or
      2.   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election; or
      3.   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, or
bargains for the sale or lease of any gambling device; or
      4.   Knowingly owns or possesses any books, instruments or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered; or
      5.   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election; or
      6.   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or offers
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; or
      7.   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket or other similar device; or
      8.   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints or
publishes any lottery ticket or share or any policy ticket or similar device or
any advertisement of any lottery or policy game; or
      9.   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs equipment for the transmission or receipt of such
information; except, that nothing in this definition shall prohibit the
transmission or receipt of such information for the use of news reporting of
sporting events or contests.
   GAMBLING DEVICE: Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or
devices for the reception of money or other things of value on chance or skill
or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. However, a gambling
device does not include:
      1.   A coin operated mechanical device played for amusement which awards
the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which device is so
constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation thereof depend
in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the player thereof no
money, property or right to receive money or property, and which is commonly
known as a pinball machine; or
      2.   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
   GAMBLING PLACE: Any real estate, vehicle, boat or any other property
whatsoever used for the purpose of gambling.
   LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift or sale or some other name.
   POLICY GAME: Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by an instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property or evidence of debt.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Except for those games of chance authorized by the state or this
code, it shall be unlawful for any person to gamble within the village.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any premises
owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used as a gambling place within the
village.
   C.   Enforcement:
      1.   Review Of Liquor Licenses And Permits: Whenever any premises is
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be a gambling place, all
village licenses or permits issued authorizing the serving of alcoholic liquor
on such premises shall become void; and no license or permit so voided shall be
reissued for such premises for a period of sixty (60) days thereafter; nor
shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place be reissued any such
license or permit for one year from the date of his conviction and, after a
second conviction of keeping a gambling place, any such person shall not be
reissued any such license or permit.
      2.   Confiscation Of Gambling Devices And Gambling Funds: Every gambling
device which is incapable of lawful use constitutes contraband and shall be
subject to seizure and confiscation by village police officers. Any money or
other thing of value intrinsically related to acts of gambling shall be seized
and forfeited as contraband to the village. Disposition of such gambling
devices seized or confiscated shall be made according to law.
   D.   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the first offense, and not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for a subsequent offense, in addition to any other penalty herein provided.
(2012 Code)
5-3G-2: PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Prostitution:
      1.   Any person who performs or offers or agrees to perform any of the
following acts for money or other thing of value commits an act of
prostitution:
         a.   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
         b.   Any act of deviate sexual conduct.
      2.   Any person convicted of prostitution shall be fined not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   B.   Keeping Place Of Prostitution:
      1.   Any person who keeps, maintains or exercises control over the use of
any premises which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of
prostitution, and who performs any of the following acts, shall be deemed to
keep a place of prostitution:
         a.   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such premises for the
purpose of prostitution; or
         b.   Grants or permits the use of such premises under circumstances
from which he should reasonably be aware that such premises is used or about to
be used for purposes of prostitution; or
         c.   Permits the continued use of premises after becoming aware of
facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that such premises
is being used for purposes of prostitution.
      2.   Any person convicted of keeping a place of prostitution shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   C.   Patronizing A Prostitute:
      1.   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not
his spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
         a.   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct
with a prostitute; or
         b.   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution in the company of a
prostitute with the intent to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate
sexual conduct.
      2.   Any person convicted of patronizing a prostitute shall be fined not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   D.   Soliciting For A Prostitute:
      1.   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting
for a prostitute:
         a.   Solicits another person for the purpose of prostitution; or
         b.   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the
purpose of prostitution; or
         c.   Directs another person to a place knowing such direction is for
the purpose of prostitution.
      2.   Any person convicted of soliciting for a prostitute shall be fined
not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   E.   Pandering:
      1.   Any person who performs any of the following acts for money commits
pandering:
         a.   Compels a female to become a prostitute; or
         b.   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a female may
commit prostitution.
      2.   Any person convicted of pandering by compulsion shall be fined not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   F.   Pimping: Any person who receives money or other property from a
prostitute, not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or
in part from an act of prostitution, commits pimping. Any person convicted of
pimping shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (2012 Code)
5-3G-3: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Definition: "Public place", for purposes of this section, means any
place where such conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
   B.   Prohibitions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd or
lascivious act in any public place in the village, or to utter any lewd or
offensive words or to use any threatening or abusive language publicly and
within the hearing of another person.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place in a
state of nudity, or to make any indecent exposure of his person or to be guilty
of any other lewd or indecent act or behavior. (2012 Code)
5-3G-4: OBSCENITY:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    MATERIAL: Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, record, recording tape, or
videotape.
   OBSCENE: Any material or performance is obscene if:
      1.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
      2.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate
sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals; and
      3.   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   PERFORMANCE: Any motion picture, film, videotape, played record, phonograph
or tape, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance, or other exhibition
performed or presented to or before an audience of one or more, with or without
consideration.
   B.   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide, any obscene material or other representation or embodiment of the
obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section or of the penal laws or
regulations of the state; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   C.   Interpretation Of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference to
ordinary adults; except, that it shall be judged with reference to children or
other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the
material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for
or directed to such an audience.
   D.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who commits obscenity is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   E.   Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material. (2012 Code)
5-3G-5: OBSCENE MARKINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, mark, draw, cut or make any
profane or indecent word, sentence, design or figure in any place open to
public view. (2012 Code)
5-3G-6: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into or be found
loitering about and within view of any window within a building occupied as a
residence of another, with the intent of watching or observing the activities
of persons therein. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE H. MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-3H-1: Solicitation Or Conspiracy To Commit An Offense
5-3H-2: Civil Rights Violations
5-3H-3: Bribery
5-3H-4: Intimidation
5-3H-1: SOLICITATION OR CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE:
   A.   Solicitation To Commit Offense: A person commits solicitation when,
with intent that an offense be committed, he commands, encourages or requests
another person to commit that offense.
   B.   Conspiracy To Commit Offense: A person commits conspiracy when, with
intent that an offense be committed, he agrees with another person to the
commission of that offense. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit
an offense unless an act in furtherance of such agreement is alleged and proved
to have been committed by him or by a coconspirator.
   C.   Affirmative Defense: It shall be a defense to a charge of solicitation
or conspiracy that if the criminal objectives were achieved, the accused would
not be guilty of the offense. (2012 Code)
5-3H-2: CIVIL RIGHTS VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits a violation of civil rights
when:
      1.   He prevents, interferes with or denies to another, or conspires to
do the same, the full and equal access to and enjoyment of the facilities and
services of any office, place, business, accommodation, amusement or conveyance
because of race, religion, color, national ancestry, sex, marital status, age,
sexual orientation, or handicap; or
      2.   As an official, he refuses to employ, discriminates in employment,
or participates in a scheme which discriminates in employment for any work,
job, office or project because of race, religion, color, national ancestry,
sex, marital status, age, sexual orientation, or handicap; or
      3.   As an official, he denies or refuses to any person the full and
equal access, use or enjoyment of the services, facilities, accommodations,
advantages or privileges of his office, or of any property accommodations or
facilities under his care, because of race, religion, color, national ancestry,
sex, marital status, age, sexual orientation, or handicap.
   B.   Sanctions:
      1.   Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of civil rights may be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   Nuisance Declared: Any violation of civil rights occurring in any
public office, accommodation or amusement is declared to be a public nuisance
and may be abated in any manner provided by this code for the abatement of
public nuisances.
      3.   Discharge Of Public Officials: Whenever any public official shall be
found guilty of a violation of civil rights, the person aggrieved, or the
village attorney on his behalf, may file a petition in the circuit court to
discharge such official from office. The court shall order that such official
be immediately relieved of his office or duties, and shall order such official
to resign or be removed or discharged. Any person violating or refusing to
enforce any such court order or decree shall be deemed in contempt of court.
      4.   Sanctions Not Mutually Exclusive: The penalties and remedies
provided by this subsection shall not be deemed mutually exclusive.
   C.   Necessity As Affirmative Defense: Conduct which would otherwise be an
offense under subsection A of this section is justifiable by reason of
necessity if the accused was without blame in occasioning or developing the
situation, and he reasonably believed such conduct was necessary to avoid a
public or private injury greater than the injury which might reasonably result
from his own conduct. (2012 Code)
5-3H-3: BRIBERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   A.   To offer, promise or give to any official, police officer or employee
of the village any money, reward, service, privilege or thing of value which he
may not otherwise lawfully accept, with intent to influence the performance or
nonperformance of any official act, function, duty or employment.
   B.   To agree to accept, receive or retain any money, reward, service,
privilege or thing of value which he may not otherwise lawfully accept, knowing
or with reason to know that such benefit was offered, promised or given with
intent to influence him in the performance or nonperformance of any official
act, function, duty or employment. (2012 Code)
5-3H-4: INTIMIDATION:
A person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause another person to
perform or to omit the performance of any act, he communicates to another
without otherwise lawful authority a threat to perform any of the following
acts:
   A.   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or
property; or
   B.   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
   C.   Commit any criminal offense; or
   D.   Accuse any person of an offense; or
   E.   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
   F.   Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
   G.   Bring about or continue any strike, boycott or other collective or mob
action. (2012 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Sign Map
6-1-2: Speed Limits
6-1-3: Stop Intersections
6-1-4: Yield Right Of Way Intersections
6-1-5: Parking Regulations
6-1-6: Enforcement; Violations
6-1-7: Penalties
6-1-1: SIGN MAP:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, speed limits, stop and yield right
of way intersections, and parking prohibitions pertaining to public streets and
intersections within the village, and signage relating to those matters, shall
be as shown on the sign map dated May 19, 2022, prepared by Crawford, Murphy
And Tilly, Inc., attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein, or as
shown on a revised sign map attached as an exhibit to an amendment of this
section. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012; amd. Ord. 849, 5-19-2022)
6-1-2: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   General Regulations: The speed limits for vehicles traveling on public
streets in the village are hereby established as shown on the sign map. It
shall be unlawful to drive vehicles at a speed in excess of the established
speed limits. Upon conviction, the driver of the vehicle shall be subject to
the penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. Village employees are authorized and directed to place
speed limit signs at or about the locations shown on the sign map to give
notice of the applicable speed limits. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012)
   B.   Construction Or Maintenance Speed Zone:
      1.   The superintendent of public works is authorized to establish
construction or maintenance speed zones in accordance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-605.1. The superintendent may determine that the
preexisting established speed limit through a highway construction or
maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe with respect to the
conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance area. Should
such a determination be made, the superintendent shall determine the maximum
safe speed limit that vehicles may travel in the construction or maintenance
area.
      2.   Where the superintendent has determined the maximum safe speed limit
that vehicles may travel in the construction or maintenance area, he shall
establish a construction or maintenance speed zone. The superintendent shall
cause signs to be erected giving proper due warning that a construction or
maintenance speed zone is being approached. Such signs shall indicate the
maximum speed limit in effect and also state the amount of the minimum fine for
a violation which, pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-605.1, is a
two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine for a first time violator. (Ord. 664,
8-26-2010)
6-1-3: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Stop intersections within the village are hereby established as shown on the
sign map. It shall be unlawful for a driver not to stop a vehicle at a stop
sign. Upon conviction, the driver of the vehicle shall be subject to the
penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. Village employees are authorized and directed to place
stop signs at or about the locations shown on the sign map to give notice of
the requirement of drivers to stop at these intersections. (Ord. 707, 8-23-
2012)
6-1-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
Yield right of way intersections within the village are hereby established as
shown on the sign map. It shall be unlawful for a driver not to yield the right
of way at a yield sign. Upon conviction, the driver of the vehicle shall be
subject to the penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. Village employees are authorized and directed to place
yield signs at or about the locations shown on the sign map to give notice of
the requirement of drivers to yield the right of way at these intersections.
(Ord. 707, 8-23-2012)
6-1-5: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Parking Generally: Parking prohibitions within the village
are hereby established as shown on the sign map or as provided in subsections
B, C and D of this section. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to stand or be
parked in violation of prohibitions stated on a no parking sign. Each day a
vehicle shall stand or be parked in violation of prohibitions stated on a no
parking sign shall constitute a separate violation. Whenever a vehicle shall
stand or be parked in violation of this section, the person or entity in whose
name the vehicle is registered, and the driver of the vehicle, if not the
registered owner, shall be equally subject to the penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. Village employees are authorized and directed to place
no parking signs at or about the locations shown on the sign map to give notice
of parking prohibitions. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Mobile Homes, Truck-Tractors, Trailers, Semitrailers And Buses:
      1.   Definitions: For purposes of this subsection, the following terms
are defined:
         MOTOR HOME OR MOBILE HOME: A vehicle, such as a camper or other
motorized vehicle, used for traveling and recreational activities.
         SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
         TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
         TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
      2.   Prohibitions:
         a.   Unless otherwise provided by this subsection, no person shall
stand or park any truck-tractor, motor or mobile home, semitrailer, trailer, or
bus on any street, alley, highway or other public way within the village,
regardless of whether there is erected a general no parking sign at that
location, for a longer period than necessary for reasonably expeditious loading
or unloading.
         b.   It is unlawful for any person to park a trailer, travel trailer
or mobile or motor home on any street, alley, highway or other public way
within the village, regardless of whether there is erected a general no parking
sign at that location, between sunset and sunrise on the following day, unless
such trailer or travel trailer is hitched to an operable motor vehicle or is
itself a motorized vehicle.
         c.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer or travel
trailer which is hitched to an operable motor vehicle on any street, alley,
highway or other public way for any period longer than twenty four (24)
consecutive hours.
         d.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile or motor
home on any street, alley, highway or other public way for any period longer
than twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
      3.   Responsibility For Violations: Whenever a truck-tractor or
semitrailer shall stand or be parked in violation of this subsection, the
person or entity in whose name the truck- tractor is registered, and the driver
of the truck-tractor, if not the registered owner, shall be equally subject to
the penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter, unless a semitrailer alone shall stand or be parked in
violation of this subsection, in which case, the person or entity in whose name
the semitrailer is registered shall be subject to the penalty in section
6-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012)
   C.   Parking After Snowfall:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to park or leave parked any vehicle on any
public street in the village at any time within twelve (12) hours after a
snowfall of two inches (2") or more has occurred.
      2.   Any police officer or village officer or employee may authorize the
towing away by a towing service of any vehicle parked in violation of this
subsection. All towing costs shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
vehicle.
      3.   Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of
the provisions of this subsection, the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be subject to the penalty for such violation; except, that
whenever any vehicle, while being used without the consent of the owner, shall
be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this subsection, such owner
shall not be subject to the penalty for such violation. (Ord. 172, 1-22-1980)
      4.   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each conviction. (Ord. 172, 1-22-1980; amd.
2012 Code)
   D.   Parking For Persons With Disabilities:
      1.   Any person convicted of violating section 11-1301.2(a) of the
Illinois vehicle code within the jurisdiction of the village, whether on public
or private property, for the unauthorized use of parking places reserved for
persons with disabilities shall be fined three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00),
in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of
any motor vehicle.
      2.   The president, or his or her designee, shall cause signs to be
erected or changed, as applicable, indicating the designated parking places
reserved for persons with disabilities and also stating the fine imposed for
the unauthorized use of such parking places, pursuant to section 11-1301.3(c)
of the Illinois vehicle code and this subsection, which is three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00). (Ord. 673, 1-13-2011)
6-1-6: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS:
The regulations and restrictions established by this chapter may be enforced by
law enforcement personnel cooperating with the village, the village clerk or a
designee of the village president who is tasked with enforcement of this
chapter. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012)
6-1-7: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person convicted of violating subsection
6-1-2A, section
6-1-3 or
6-1-4 of this chapter shall be fined and shall be assessed applicable court
costs in accordance with the fines and court costs established from time to
time by state statute or regulation for the same violations upon state
controlled highways.
   B.   The fine for each violation of subsection
6-1-5A of this chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00) if paid within one week of
the date of the violation notice; twenty five dollars ($25.00) if paid within
one month of the date of the violation notice; and fifty dollars ($50.00)
thereafter. Fines shall be payable to the "Village Of Germantown Hills" at the
village hall, 216 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL 61548.
   C.   The fine for each violation of subsection
6-1-5B of this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid within one week
of the date of the violation notice; one hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid
within one month of the date of the violation notice; and one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) thereafter. Fines shall be payable to the "Village Of
Germantown Hills" at the village hall, 216 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL
61548.
   D.   The village may pursue a violator in court who has not paid the total
fine for any violation of subsection
6-1-5A or B of this chapter within one week after the date of the violation
notice. In the event the village pursues a violator through such a court
action, the violator may no longer settle his outstanding fines for the amounts
provided in subsections B and C of this section. Instead, the violator shall be
responsible for payment of a fine in an amount not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense, together with all applicable court costs, upon conviction. The village
attorney shall pursue such violators in court upon the direction of the village
president. (Ord. 707, 8-23-2012)
CHAPTER 2
VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS; TRUCK TRAFFIC
SECTION:
6-2-1: Vehicle Weight Limits
6-2-2: Truck Routes
6-2-1: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   All Village Streets:
      1.   Established: A weight limitation is imposed upon all village streets
within the village prohibiting trucks with a gross weight of 3.5 tons per axle
or more from traveling on said village streets.
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   The following vehicles shall be exempt from the weight
limitations imposed by this subsection: emergency vehicles; school buses;
village vehicles; garbage trucks; utility trucks (e.g., electricity, gas,
water, telephone, cable TV); vehicles delivering heating oil, LP gas or water
to residences within the village; and vehicles delivering chemicals, supplies,
repair parts, and other such items to Caterpillar Trail public water district.
         b.   All trucks that are not listed in Subsection 2.a. and larger than
those specified in Subsection A.1 of this Section may travel on village streets
only for the purpose of making local freight deliveries. Said trucks shall
proceed to and from the delivery point via the shortest direct route.
      3.   Signs Posted: This weight limitation shall take effect when signs
designating the weight limitation prescribed herein are erected at or near each
location where said highway enters the village, and no earlier than seven (7)
days after notice of the existence of this weight limitation, said weight
limitation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village.
      4.   Violation; Penalty: When any vehicle is operated in violation of
this subsection, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a
violation, and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle may be prosecuted
for the violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this
subsection shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for any weight exceeding the
posted limit up to the axle or gross weight limit allowed a vehicle as provided
in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, subsection (a) or (b), and seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) per every five hundred (500) pounds or fraction thereof
for any weight exceeding that which is provided in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111, subsection (a) or (b).
      5.   Interpretation: This subsection shall not prohibit the adoption of
or serve to repeal any previously adopted stricter weight limitations applying
to particular weather, season, or soil conditions.
   B.   February 15 Through May 15:
      1.   Weight Limit Established: Except as provided in subsection B2 of
this section, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle not hereinafter
exempted upon any street under the jurisdiction of the village board of
trustees from February 15 through May 15 of each year if the gross weight of
said vehicle on the road surface shall exceed seven thousand (7,000) pounds per
axle.
      2.   Application To Other Dates: If the street committee of the village,
or any member thereof, determines that, by reason of climate conditions in a
particular year, it is necessary to impose the weight limitation stated in
subsection B1 of this section on dates other than from February 15 through May
15, it shall make that determination in a document to be filed with the village
clerk, stating the alternate dates. Under no circumstances, however, may the
total number of days for which the weight limitation is imposed exceed ninety
(90) in any one calendar year.
      3.   Signs Posted: From February 15 through May 15 of each year, or upon
such other dates as the street committee of the village, or any member thereof,
may determine, as provided in subsection B2 of this section, village employees
shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained signs designating the
applicable weight limitation at each end of each village street affected, and
this subsection shall not be effective as to any particular street until such
signs are erected and maintained.
      4.   Exemptions: The following vehicles shall be exempt from the weight
limitations imposed by this subsection: emergency vehicles; school buses;
village vehicles; garbage trucks; utility trucks (e.g., electricity, gas,
water, telephone, cable TV); vehicles delivering heating oil, LP gas or water
to residences within the village; and vehicles delivering chemicals, supplies,
repair parts, and other such items to Caterpillar Trail public water district.
      5.   Violation; Penalty: When any vehicle is operated in violation of
this subsection, the owner or driver of the vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a
violation, and either the owner or the driver of the vehicle may be prosecuted
for the violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this
subsection shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) for any weight exceeding the
posted limit up to the axle or gross weight limit allowed a vehicle as provided
in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, subsection (a) or (b), and seventy
five dollars ($75.00) per every five hundred (500) pounds or fraction thereof
for any weight exceeding that which is provided in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111, subsection (a) or (b). (Ord. 287, 3-21-1991; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 445, 1-27-2000; Ord. 546, 2-24-2005; Ord. 569, 3-23-2006; Ord. 847, 4-21-
2022)
6-2-2: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Truck Routes Designated: When signs are erected giving notice thereof,
it shall be unlawful to operate any truck at any time upon any of the streets
or parts of streets in the village, excepting only those trucks described in
Subsection B. of this section and on the following streets, which are hereby
designated truck routes:
      1.   All State Routes
      2.   Fandel Road
      3.   Ten Mile Creek Road
      4.   Woodland Knolls Road
      5.   Holland Road
      6.   Lourdes Road
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   The restrictions set forth herein shall not apply to trucks normally
classified as one ton maximum and under, and having not more than two (2)
axles.
      2.   Operators of emergency vehicles; school buses; village vehicles;
garbage trucks; utility trucks (e.g., electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable
TV); vehicles delivering heating oil, LP gas or water to residences within the
village; and vehicles delivering chemicals, supplies, repair parts, and other
such items to Caterpillar Trail public water district are exempt from the
provisions of this section.
      3.   All trucks larger than those specified in Subsection B.1 of this
Section may travel off of truck routes within the Village only for the purpose
of making local freight deliveries. Said trucks shall proceed to the delivery
point via the shortest direct route and shall return by the same path to the
closest truck route.
   C.   Penalties: Every person, firm or corporation violating the provisions
of this section shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
and for a second conviction within a year, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than twenty (20) days, or both; and
for a third or subsequent conviction within one year after the first
conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 99, 10-18-
1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 847, 4-21-2022)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AT GERMANTOWN CROSSING SHOPPING CENTER
SECTION:
6-3-1: Fire Lanes Designated
6-3-2: Pedestrian Crossings Designated
6-3-3: Violations; Penalties
6-3-1: FIRE LANES DESIGNATED:
The village hereby designates as a fire lane the area directly in front of the
buildings and businesses that make up Germantown Crossing Shopping Center.
Appropriate village employees shall post the fire lane with signs reasonably
visible to motorists that prohibit the parking, stopping or standing of motor
vehicles in the fire lane. (Ord. 411, 7-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
6-3-2: PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS DESIGNATED:
The village hereby designates as pedestrian crossings such approaches from the
parking lot to the buildings and businesses that make up Germantown Crossing
Shopping Center as the village may direct its appropriate employees to mark
with broad white painted stripes on the pavement. Appropriate village employees
shall erect stop signs on each side of each pedestrian crossing so designated.
(Ord. 411, 7-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
6-3-3: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Parking In Fire Lane:
      1.   Prohibited: It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to
park in any fire lane designated pursuant to this chapter. The owner(s) of any
such unlawfully parked motor vehicle shall be equally liable with the operator
if the operator is not an owner. The fine for each violation is ten dollars
($10.00) if paid within one week of the date of the violation notice; twenty
five dollars ($25.00) if paid within one month of the date of the violation
notice; and fifty dollars ($50.00) thereafter. (Ord. 411, 7-23-1998)
      2.   Exemptions: Operators and owners of the following vehicles are
exempt from the provisions of subsection A1 of this section (but not subsection
B of this section), but only when the operators have stopped or parked their
vehicles for business rather than personal reasons:
         a.   Armored trucks.
         b.   Ice delivery trucks.
         c.   Public or private mail or parcel delivery trucks. (Ord. 415, 11-
19-1998)
   B.   Failure To Stop At Pedestrian Crossings: It is unlawful for the
operator of any motor vehicle to fail to stop at a stop sign erected at any
pedestrian crossing designated pursuant to this chapter. The fine for each
violation is twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within one week of the date of the
violation notice; fifty dollars ($50.00) if paid within one month of the date
of the violation notice; and one hundred dollars ($100.00) thereafter.
   C.   Payment Of Fines: Fines shall be payable to the "Village Of Germantown
Hills" at the village hall, 16 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL 61548.
   D.   Failure To Pay Fines: If the village determines to pursue violators in
court who have not paid their fines within one month after the dates of their
violation notices, the violators shall be responsible for payment of all court
costs if found guilty. The village attorney shall pursue such violators in
court upon the direction of the village president. (Ord. 411, 7-23-1998)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
ARTICLE A. DRIVEWAY CULVERTS AND UNDERDRAINS
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Permit Requirements
7-1A-2: Driveway Culvert Construction Requirements
7-1A-3: Roadside Underdrain Construction Requirements
7-1A-4: Violation; Penalty
7-1A-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall begin installation of driveway
culverts or roadside underdrains without first having secured a permit from the
superintendent of public works.
   B.   Notice To Install: Any person intending to begin such installation
shall so notify the superintendent of public works in writing and shall submit
plans or drawings showing the nature and location of the proposed installation.
   C.   Inspections:
      1.   Prior To Permit Issuance: Before issuance of the permit, the
superintendent of public works shall inspect the site of the proposed
installation and shall inform the applicant in writing of any changes to the
plans or drawings necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
      2.   Completion Of Installation; Certificate Of Compliance: After
completion of the installation, the applicant shall notify the superintendent
of public works who shall inspect the completed installation to ensure that it
has been built in compliance with this article and with any requirements
specified upon the issuance of the permit. If the completed installation is
satisfactory, the superintendent of public works shall issue a certificate of
compliance so stating. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
7-1A-2: DRIVEWAY CULVERT CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All driveways, except those leading onto streets improved with curb and gutter,
shall have culverts installed in accordance with the following standards unless
otherwise approved by the superintendent of public works:
   A.   Pipe material shall conform to the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" for
pipe culverts type 1-A. The culvert shall be sized to adequately handle the
drainage area to be served. Said culvert size shall be determined by the
superintendent of public works and/or his representative. In no case, however,
shall a pipe culvert of less than twelve inches (12") in diameter be installed.
The culvert shall be placed in line with the existing or proposed roadway ditch
horizontally, and shall be placed with its invert at a vertical depth of not
less than two feet (2') below the crown of the road. Minimum depth to cover
over the top of the pipe culvert to the surface of the driveway shall be six
inches (6"). If the existing ditch is not of sufficient depth to provide these
minimum standards, the builder shall regrade the existing ditch as directed by
the superintendent of public works to provide the necessary drainageway.
   B.   All areas disturbed in the course of the installation shall be repaired
to their original conditions, and all waterways shall be hand raked and seeded
as directed by the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980; amd.
2012 Code)
   C.   Culvert pipe shall be of sufficient length to extend from the toe of
the slope to the toe of the slope of the driveway cross section. In no case
shall these slopes be steeper than three feet (3') horizontal per each vertical
foot as measured from the flow line of the invert of the culvert to the edge of
the driveway.
   D.   The driveway surface shall be graded so that it meets the edge of the
existing street surface and drains toward the culvert at a minimum slope of
0.50 percent. The low point of the driveway shall not be closer to the street
than the existing ditch, but in no case shall it be closer than four feet (4').
   E.   All work and materials used on the village rights of way shall be in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction"
as well as exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 175, 3-
27-1980)
   F.   No fences, posts, retaining walls, shrubs or curbs shall be constructed
along the driveway between the right of way line or the property line and the
street pavement, except as approved by the superintendent of public works. In
no event, however, does the village assume any responsibility for damage or
removal of such items, should such be necessary to provide adequate drainage
maintenance.
   G.   Reflectors may be placed at the top of the slope in line with the
culvert. Reflectors shall not exceed four inches (4") in any dimension and
shall not project more than twenty four inches (24") above the low point of the
driveway surface. Reflectors must bend or break away when struck.
   H.   All driveways shall cross the existing or proposed sidewalk at sidewalk
grade causing neither a depression nor a hump in the sidewalk without the
express permission of the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980;
amd. 2012 Code)
7-1A-3: ROADSIDE UNDERDRAIN CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Underdrains will only be allowed in circumstances dictated by and at the
discretion of the superintendent of public works and/or the street committee.
When previously authorized by the superintendent of public works, an underdrain
system may be installed in lieu of the roadside ditch and shall be constructed
in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise approved by the
superintendent of public works:
   A.   Pipe material shall conform to the Illinois department of
transportation "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" for
pipe culverts type 1-A. The size of the underdrain shall be determined by the
superintendent of public works and/or his representative. In no case, however,
shall an underdrain of less than twelve inches (12") in diameter be installed.
The minimum pipe slope shall be two percent (2%), and all underdrain systems
shall be laid to line and grade. In addition, manholes and/or catch basins
shall be provided at the side yard property lines of each homeowner should the
underdrain system be continuous.
   B.   Each lot shall have, at minimum, an inlet structure on the downstream
end of the underdrain. Additional inlet structures shall be required, at the
direction of the superintendent of public works, when necessary to prevent the
obstruction of the drainageways or to prevent ponding. Each inlet structure
shall be constructed with an inside dimension of two feet by two feet (2' x 2')
square. It shall be constructed on block or brick and mortar with a minimum
wall thickness of four inches (4") where walls are eighteen inches (18") high
or less. If greater than eighteen inches (18") high, the wall thickness shall
be eight inches (8"). It shall be set on a portland cement concrete base slab
with a minimum thickness of six inches (6"). The inlet shall be covered with a
frame and grate suitable for use in streets or trafficways (similar to Neenah
Foundary no. R3405 or approved equal). The surface of the grate shall be laid
flush with the flow line of the surface drainage swale so as to deposit all
surface waters from the adjacent road and lot area into the underdrain system.
(Ord. 175, 3-27-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Culvert pipe on the upstream end of the underdrain shall be connected
to an existing inlet structure. If no inlet structure exists on the upstream
end, the ground at the upstream end shall be sloped from the new surface
drainage swale to the existing surface drainage swale with a slope not steeper
than three feet (3') horizontal per each vertical foot. The ground on the
downstream side of the downstream inlet structure, if no adjoining underdrain
exists, shall be similarly sloped. If a downstream inlet structure between two
(2) driveways, as shown on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein,
and sufficient space exists between the inlet structure and the downstream
driveway to accommodate the required slope, then the underdrain leading from
the inlet structure shall be connected to the existing downstream driveway
culvert, and the entire area between the driveways shall be filled and graded
so that the surface of the inlet structure grate is flush with the new surface
drainage swale. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980)
   D.   All areas disturbed in the course of construction shall be repaired to
their original condition, and all waterways shall be hand raked and seeded as
directed by the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980; amd. 2012
Code)
   E.   All work and materials used on the village rights of way shall be in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction"
as well as exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 175, 3-
27-1980)
7-1A-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this article shall be served by the superintendent of public works
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, make the necessary corrections
and permanently cease all violations stated.
   B.   Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided in subsection A of this section shall be fined in an amount not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day in which a violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 175, 3-27-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. MAILBOXES
SECTION:
7-1B-1: Interference With Traffic And Street Use Prohibited
7-1B-2: Location And Construction Requirements
7-1B-3: Information On Mailboxes
7-1B-4: Responsibility For Damages
7-1B-5: Noncompliant Mailboxes And Support Structures
7-1B-6: Penalties
7-1B-1: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC AND STREET USE PROHIBITED:
No mailbox or support structure will be allowed to exist on village rights of
way if it interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function,
maintenance or operation of the village street system. (Ord. 745, 3-26-2015)
7-1B-2: LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
The location and construction of mailboxes and support structures shall conform
to the standards established by the village in this article. A mailbox
installation that conforms to the following criteria will be acceptable unless,
in the judgment of the United States postal service or the corporate
authorities of the village, the installation interferes with the safety of the
traveling public or the function, maintenance or operation of the village
street system:
   A.   Location: Mailboxes shall be located in accordance with the following
requirements:
      1.   Mailboxes shall be located on the right hand side of the roadway in
the direction of the mail delivery route except on one-way streets where they
may be placed on the left hand side.
      2.   The bottom of the mailbox shall be set at an elevation of thirty six
inches (36") to forty two inches (42") from the roadway surface or as otherwise
established by the United States postal service.
      3.   The roadside face of the mailbox shall be set back not more than six
inches (6") from the edge of the pavement, if there is no all weather shoulder;
or not more than six inches (6") from the edge of an all weather shoulder; or
not more than six inches (6") from the front of a flat faced curb; or not more
than six inches (6") from the back of a roll curb.
      4.   Where a mailbox is located at a driveway entrance, it shall be
placed on the far side of the driveway in the direction of the mail delivery
route, except where the mailbox is located on a curve or cul-de-sac, in which
case, it shall be located before and as close as possible to the driveway in
the direction of the mail delivery route.
      5.   Where a mailbox is located at an intersecting street, it shall be
located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') beyond the center of the
intersecting street in the direction of the mail delivery route.
   B.   Construction: The village encourages mailbox construction to conform to
the guidelines of the United States postal service. (Ord. 745, 3-26-2015)
7-1B-3: INFORMATION ON MAILBOXES:
   A.   Every curbside mailbox must bear the following information: A house
number, if street names and house numbers have been assigned by the village and
if the postmaster authorizes their use as a postal address. If the mailbox is
on a different street from the homeowner's residence, both the house number and
the street name must be inscribed on the mailbox.
   B.   The mailbox may bear the owner's name.
   C.   All required information must be inscribed in contrasting color in neat
letters and numerals at least one inch (1") high on the side of the mailbox
visible to the carrier's regular approach or on the door if mailboxes are
grouped. (Ord. 745, 3-26-2015)
7-1B-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES:
   A.   Any mailbox placed in the right of way is at the sole risk of the owner
of the mailbox, and the village assumes no liability with respect to same. The
owner shall also indemnify and hold harmless the village from any liability,
claims, or damages that might be asserted by a third party as a result of the
placement of a mailbox in the public right of way.
   B.   The village shall not be responsible and assumes no responsibility for
repairing or replacing any damaged mailbox or support structure when:
      1.   The mailbox or support structure is constructed or located in a
manner that is in violation of the standards established by the United States
postal service or as required by this article.
      2.   The mailbox or support structure is damaged as a result of objects,
snow, sleet, ice, water or other precipitation thrown by a snowplow.
      3.   The mailbox or support structure is found to have been in an unsound
condition prior to the damage, regardless of the circumstances causing the
damage.
      4.   The mailbox or support structure is damaged by any person who is not
acting under the direction or at the request of the village.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the village shall
be financially responsible for damage to a mailbox or support structure when
the mailbox or support structure is physically struck by a village owned and
operated maintenance truck or snowplow, or when the mailbox or support
structure is physically struck by a snowplow owned and operated by a
subcontractor performing precipitation removal operations at the request of the
village, as follows:
      1.   The owner of the mailbox or support structure shall report the
damage to the village clerk within forty eight (48) hours of the incident.
      2.   The owner shall be responsible for repairing or replacing the
damaged mailbox or support structure.
      3.   Upon receipt of the owner's proof of payment for the repair or
replacement, the village shall reimburse the owner, but in no event shall the
village be responsible to reimburse the owner an amount in excess of one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per incident for the repair or
replacement.
   D.   In the event the village, or any utility company which has easement
rights within the village right of way, needs to use said area to repair,
maintain, or install any utility system or appurtenance, or needs to maintain
or repair the right of way, or for any other reason: 1) the village shall not
be liable for any damage caused to any mailbox or support structure located
within the right of way, regardless of the cause of said damage, except as
provided for in this section; and 2) if the mailbox and/or support structure
interferes with said rights of the village or utility company, the owner shall
remove the mailbox and/or support structure at the owner's sole expense. (Ord.
745, 3-26-2015)
7-1B-5: NONCOMPLIANT MAILBOXES AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
Any mailbox or support structure erected after the effective date hereof that
is found to be in violation of this article shall be removed and replaced by
the owner upon written notice from the village. At the discretion of the
village, based on assessment of the hazard to the public, the owner will be
granted not less than twenty four (24) hours nor more than thirty (30) days to
remove or replace an unacceptable mailbox or support structure. After the
specified removal and replacement period has expired, the unacceptable mailbox
or support structure will be removed by the village at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 745, 3-26-2015)
7-1B-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   This article shall be subject to the provisions and procedures
established in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code which provides an
opportunity for administrative payment of tickets for certain ordinance
violations (the "administrative ticket ordinance"). Any person violating this
article:
      1.   Shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) if a ticket issued pursuant to
the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to the "Village Of
Germantown Hills" at the village hall (216 Holland Road, Germantown Hills, IL
61548) no more than thirty (30) days after issuance of the ticket; or
      2.   Shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) if a ticket issued
pursuant to the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to the
"Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village hall more than thirty (30) days
after issuance of the ticket, but before the village files an action for
violation of this article in the county circuit court; or
      3.   Shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus all applicable
court costs, if the village files an action for violation of this article in
the county circuit court more than thirty (30) days after issuance of the
ticket.
   B.   Each day a violation of this article continues shall be considered a
separate violation and may be separately charged. (Ord. 745, 3-26-2015)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Superintendent Of Public Works
7-2-3: Contractor Requirements
7-2-4: Use Of Public Sewers Required
7-2-5: Connection Charges
7-2-6: Building Sewers And Connections
7-2-7: Pressure Sewers And Grinder Pumps
7-2-8: Use Of The Sanitary Sewer System
7-2-8-1: Discharges Into System
7-2-8-2: Interceptors
7-2-8-3: Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalization
7-2-8-4: Control Manhole
7-2-8-5: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
7-2-8-6: Special Agreements
7-2-9: Excess Stormwater And Sump Pump Discharges
7-2-10: Damage To, Tampering With System
7-2-11: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-2-12: Violations; Penalties
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection
agency.
   Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.), as amended
(Pub.L. 95-217).
   Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided by "Title II - Grants For
Construction Of Treatment Works" of the federal act and implementing
regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
   President: The president of the village of Germantown Hills or his
designated appointee who shall be confirmed by the village board.
   Village: The village of Germantown Hills.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator or, where appropriate, by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') beyond the foundation wall where
it is connected to the building sewer.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to jurisdiction of the village.
The term also includes sewers within or outside the village boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary
sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with
village funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes, or a
combination of both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters, and
groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970.
   State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided by the Illinois anti-pollution bond
act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge; sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of bonds outstanding, and shall be computed
by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected to the
wastewater facilities.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   Sewer Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in article A of this
chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per one month period levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in article A of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the
basic user charge, the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
   Commercial User: Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Industrial User: Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances
into products.
   Institutional/Governmental User: Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
   Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
   User Class: The type of user, either "residential", "institutional/
governmental", "commercial" or "industrial", as defined in this section.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
   Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituents. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analyses.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division
of laboratories "Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.22 pound of BOD and 0.25
pound of suspended solids. (Numbers are for systems with a garbage grinder.)
   Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   Sewage: The term is used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA division of
laboratories "Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
   Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewer
and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
   Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. Ord. 231, 9-20-1984; 2012 Code)
7-2-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Vacancy In Office: During the absence or disability of the
superintendent of public works, the superintendent, with the consent of the
president and/or the village board, must designate some properly qualified
person to perform the duties of the office.
   B.   Powers And Duties: In addition to other duties as may be assigned from
time to time by the village board of trustees, the superintendent of public
works shall have the responsibility of operating and maintaining the village
wastewater treatment facilities. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of
public works to:
      1.   Conduct tests thereon.
      2.   Keep records of all actions, examinations, inspections, and tests.
      3.   Advise the public, when requested, in matters concerning regulations
of the wastewater treatment facilities.
      4.   Make monthly reports of his acts and doings to the village board.
      5.   Report all violations of this chapter to the village president for
enforcement.
      6.   Be responsible for all property and equipment pertaining to the
wastewater treatment facilities, and supervise all other employees therein.
      7.   Perform all other duties pertaining to the village as directed by
the village president. (Ord. 137, 11-18-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-3: CONTRACTOR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application For Registration; Bond: Any person who desires to engage in
or who shall hereafter at any time engage in the business of the construction,
alteration or repair of any sewer, sanitary connection or storm drain within
the village shall, before commencing such work, make application to the village
clerk for registration as a sewer contractor, and shall deliver to the clerk
his certificate of bond, with sureties to be approved by the trustees, in the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the village, conditioned
that such person shall indemnify and save harmless the village and its officers
and employees from all liability for damages to persons or property by reasons
of or resulting directly or indirectly from the construction, alteration,
maintenance or repair by such person of any sanitary sewer connection or storm
drain or any work or act of omission or commission incidental thereto or in
connection therewith; conditioned further upon the conformance by such person
with all provisions of this chapter with respect to such work; and conditioned
further upon the restoration by such applicant of any street, alley, sidewalk
or pavement disturbed by him so as to leave the same in as good condition as
before the work was commenced. Provided, however, that any owner or occupant of
a single-family residence or duplex dwelling shall not be considered a sewer
contractor for the purpose of this section.
   B.   Issuance Of Certificate Of Registration; Fee: Upon approval of the bond
by the village board, the clerk shall forthwith issue to such applicant a
certificate of registration to operate as a sewer contractor within the
village. No registration shall be complete until the applicant shall pay to the
clerk an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 135, 9-16-
1976; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Term Of Registration: Registration shall be valid until December 31 of
the year in which it was issued.
   D.   Conflicting Provisions: If this section is in conflict with any other
ordinance, present or future, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 135, 9-
16-1976)
7-2-4: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   B.   Discharge To Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any
natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with this chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owners of all the houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley,
or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the village is hereby required, at
his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred feet
(300') of the property line. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
   E.   Connection For Annexed Property: Unless otherwise agreed to by the
village and the property owner, property annexed to the village shall connect
to the village's public sewer within five (5) years after the date on which
both: 1) the property has been annexed and 2) an adequate public sewer is
within three hundred feet (300') of the property line of the annexed property.
(Ord. 770, 9-26-2016)
7-2-5: CONNECTION CHARGES:
   A.   Established: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-150-1,
there is hereby established a connection charge for connection to the sewerage
system of the village in the amounts specified in this subsection. The
connection charge is imposed on and is assessed against all owners and users of
real property, jointly and severally, who constitute new or additional users of
the sewerage system. To the extent and in the manner provided by law, the
connection charge shall be a lien on the affected real property.
      1.   Residential Connections: The amount of the connection charge
applicable to residential connections shall be two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). A "residential connection" is defined as a connection to a
"residential user", which term is defined in section
7-2-1 of this chapter under "user types".
      2.   Nonresidential Connections:
         a.   The amount of the connection charge applicable to nonresidential
connections shall be in the same proportion to the two thousand five hundred
dollar ($2,500.00) residential connection charge as the actual or projected use
of the sewage plant capacity by the particular nonresidential user bears to the
use of the sewage plant capacity by an average residential user, as determined
by water usage records; provided, however, that the nonresidential connection
charge shall in no event be less than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). In the case of a nonresidential user with an established history
of water usage, the superintendent of public works shall calculate the
connection charge in accordance with the formula above. In the case of a
nonresidential user without an established history of water usage, the
superintendent of public works shall estimate and project the water usage for
calculation of the connection charge in accordance with the formula above. In
that event, after water usage figures have been established for a period of a
year, the connection charge shall again be calculated and an additional charge
collected from the nonresidential user, or an amount refunded to the
nonresidential user, depending on application of the formula above. (Ord. 244,
8-21-1986; amd. Ord. 669, 10-14-2010; 2012 Code)
         b.   A "nonresidential connection" is defined as a connection to a
"commercial user", an institutional or governmental user, or an "industrial
user", all of which are defined in section
7-2-1 of this chapter under "user types".
   B.   Use Of Revenues: In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
150-1, connection charges collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used by
the village for its general corporate purposes in relation to the sewerage
system, with primary application thereof being made by the necessary expansion
of the works of the system to meet the requirements of the new users thereof.
(Ord. 244, 8-21-1986; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Charge Is Additional: The connection charge established and imposed by
this section is in addition to all other fees and charges established by this
chapter, including the permit and inspection fee described in subsection
7-2-6A3 of this chapter, and including the wastewater service charges described
in section
7-2A-3 of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Prerequisite To Building Sewer Permit Issuance: The connection
charge established by this section must be paid before issuance of the building
sewer permit described in subsection
7-2-6A of this chapter. (Ord. 244, 8-21-1986)
7-2-6: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with, or opening into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
superintendent of public works. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: a) for residential wastewater service; and b) for
commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service. In
either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the superintendent of public works.
      3.   Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per residential living unit, and twenty dollars
($20.00) per population equivalent, as determined by the superintendent of
public works, for a commercial, institutional/governmental, or industrial
building shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. Any
commercial or industrial applicant, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity. (Ord. 245, 8-21-1986)
COMMONLY USED QUANTITIES OF SEWAGE FLOWS FROM MISCELLANEOUS TYPE FACILITIES
Type Of Establishment Gallons Per Person Per Day (Unless Otherwise Noted)
Type Of Establishment                       Gallons Per Person Per Day (Unless
                                            Otherwise Noted)
Airports (per passenger)                    5
Bathhouses and swimming pools               10
Camps:
Campground with central comfort stations    35
   With flush toilets, no showers        25
Construction camps (semipermanent)          50
Day camps (no meals served)                 15
Luxury camps                                100
Resort camps (night and day) with limited   50
plumbing
Cottages and small dwellings with seasonal  75
occupancy
Country clubs:
Per resident member                         100
Per nonresident member present              25
Dwellings:
Boarding houses                             50
   Additional for nonresident boarders   10
Rooming houses                              40
Factories (gallons per person, per shift,   35
exclusive of industrial wastes)
Hospitals (per bed space)                   250
Hotels with laundry, per room (2 persons    150
per room)
Institutions other than hospitals including 125
nursing homes (per bed space)
Laundries, self-service (gallons per wash)  30
Motels with laundry (per bed space)         50
Picnic parks:
Toilet wastes only (per park user)          5
With bathhouses, showers and flush toilets  10
(per park user)
Restaurants:
Toilet and kitchen wastes (per patron)      10
Kitchen wastes (per meal served)            3
Additional for bars and cocktail lounges    2
Schools:
Boarding                                    100
Day:
   Without gyms, cafeterias or showers   15
   With gyms, cafeterias and showers     25
   With cafeterias, but without gyms or  20
showers
Service stations (per vehicle served)       5
Swimming pools and bathhouses               10
Theaters:
Drive-in (per car space)                    10
Movie (per auditorium seat)                 5
Travel trailer parks:
With individual water and sewer hookups     100
(per space)
Without individual water and sewer hookups  50
(per space)
Workers:
Offices, schools and business               15
establishments (per shift)
 
(Source: Amended at 21 Ill. Reg. 12444, effective August 28, 1997)
(2012 Code)
      4.   Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will only be issued
and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. (Ord. 221, 12-1-
1983)
   C.   Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination by the
superintendent of public works, to meet all requirements of this chapter. The
old building sewer shall be televised for review by the superintendent of
public works prior to proceeding with connection.
   D.   Installation And Connection Requirements:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois" (latest revisions) shall apply. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983;
amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity to flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with subsection E2 of this section, and discharged to
the building sewer. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
      3.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" (latest
revisions). All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
superintendent of public works before installation. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd.
2012 Code)
      4.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
   E.   Prohibited Discharges:
      1.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
      2.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards. (Ord. 221, 12-1-
1983)
   F.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the Superintendent of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord. 221, 12-1-
1983; amd. 2012 Code)
   G.   Liability For Costs And Expenses; Indemnification: All costs and
expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Village from any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer including, but not limited to, sewer
backups. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
7-2-7: PRESSURE SEWERS AND GRINDER PUMPS:
   A.   Permitted; Compliance Required: When authorized or directed in writing
by the Village President and Board of Trustees, certain users shall discharge
wastes into the Village sewerage system by means of a pressure sewer and
grinder pump. Such users shall be bound by all provisions of this chapter
except as may be otherwise required by this section. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
   B.   Permit Required; Fees: Persons who will be installing pressure sewers
and grinder pumps must make application with the Superintendent of Public Works
for a pressure sewer permit on a form to be furnished by the Village. In
addition to the information and fees required by subsections
7-2-6A2 and A3 of this chapter, the applicant shall also pay, at the time the
application is filed, a sum of money, as determined from time to time by the
Superintendent of Public Works, sufficient to reimburse the Village for its
actual cost in purchasing a grinder pump, and shall also pay an additional
twenty percent (20%) of the cost of the grinder pump to help defray the future
cost of its replacement by the Village. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Specifications; Installation By Village; Responsibility For Costs:
Persons who will be installing pressure sewers and grinder pumps must use
grinder pumps and related material approved and supplied by the Village and
must have the pressure sewer and grinder pump installed by the Village, through
its employees or through such contractors as it may select from time to time.
All labor and material costs for such installation shall be the responsibility
of the person securing the permit. Once the pressure sewer and grinder pump are
installed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the pump
and all piping from the pump to the pressure sewer main shall be owned and
maintained by the Village. All piping from the house or other structure to the
pump shall be owned and maintained by the property owner. All power necessary
to operate the pump, however, shall be supplied and paid for by the owner or
occupant of the house or user of the pump. (Ord. 231, 9-20-1984; amd. 2012
Code)
   D.   Easement Required: In addition to other permit requirements, the owner
of any property that will be served by a pressure sewer and grinder pump must
furnish the Village a perpetual easement ten feet (10') wide with its
centerline located along the line of the lateral sewer pipe running across the
property from the main to the grinder pump, for the purposes of the
installation, inspection, testing, replacement and maintenance of the pump and
the lateral. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
   E.   Installation Requirements: Persons holding permits for the installation
of a pressure sewer and grinder pump should make specific arrangements with the
Village for the installation at mutually convenient times. Location of the
grinder pump on the property will be designated by the applicant, subject to
approval by the Superintendent of Public Works. Installation by the Village
shall be in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The property owner
should specifically note the following items, however:
      1.   One Pump: One (1) pump, and only one (1), is required per house,
unless written approval is obtained from the Board of Trustees on account of
special circumstances.
      2.   Power Connection: The property owner must supply a power connection
for the grinder pump control panel on the outside of the house, as required by
manufacturer's specifications.
      3.   Control Panel: The grinder pump control panel, with warning light
and audible alarm, must be visible from the street. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd.
2012 Code)
      4.   PVC Pipe: The property owner must supply a four inch (4") PVC pipe
connected at the foundation wall of the house and extending at least five feet
(5') from the foundation wall, for connection of the building drain to the
grinder pump. (Ord. 231, 9-20-1984; amd. 2012 Code)
      5.   Tamper Or Repair: Once the grinder pump is installed, no
unauthorized person shall tamper with or attempt to repair or maintain the
pump, and the cover of the pump apparatus, at ground level, shall not be
covered or obstructed in any fashion. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
      6.   Grinder Pump Misuse:
         a.   If the Village technician determines that a grinder pump failure
was caused by misuse, meaning improper items (as described in subsection E6b of
this section) were disposed into the system, a service charge will be issued to
the homeowner, and added to the homeowner's sewer bill, as follows:
            (1)   First offense in a thirty six (36) month period: One hundred
dollars ($100.00).
            (2)   Second offense in a thirty six (36) month period: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
            (3)   Third offense in a thirty six (36) month period: Four hundred
dollars ($400.00).
            (4)   Fourth and subsequent offenses in a thirty six (36) month
period: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
         b.   Examples of improper items that should not be disposed of through
the grinder system and will result in assessment of the service charge
described in subsection E6a of this section:
            (1)   Personal hygiene wipes.
            (2)   Feminine hygiene products.
            (3)   Solid waste, including food, garbage, and rags.
            (4)   Grease.
            (5)   Chemicals.
            (6)   Drugs.
            (7)   Hair. (Ord. 791, 10-26-2017)
      7.   Location: The grinder pump must be located at least five feet (5')
from the foundation wall of the house at a location for access for maintenance.
(Ord. 231, 9-20-1984; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-8: USE OF THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
7-2-8-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Stormwater And Surface Waters; Storm Sewers:
      1.   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord.
221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge, or cause to be
discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantity or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Superintendent of Public Works, that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent of Public Works will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are: (Ord. 221,
12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C). (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the superintendent of public works.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the superintendent of public works for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the superintendent of public works as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving
waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent of public
works in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligram
per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the superintendent of public
works in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligram per liter at any time
except as permitted by the superintendent of public works in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
         k.   Any ammonia nitrogen (as N) in excess of eighty milligrams per
liter (80 mg/l) at any time except as permitted by the superintendent of public
works in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. (Ord. 221,
12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
         l.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs", as defined in section
7-2-1 of this chapter under "wastewater and its characteristics".
         m.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June
26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the
superintendent of public works, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent of public
works may: (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of section
7-2-8-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
      3.   If the superintendent of public works permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review by the superintendent of public works
and approval by the board of trustees, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-8-2: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the superintendent of public works, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent of
public works, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-8-3: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
7-2-8-4: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required
by the board of trustees, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent of public
works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 221, 12-1-
1983; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-8-5: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   B.   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met.
   C.   The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the
village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and
reporting required by the village. At such times as deemed necessary, the
village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an
outside laboratory service.
   D.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of laboratories "Manual Of
Laboratory Methods", and shall be determined at the control manhole provided,
or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
7-2-8-6: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section
7-2-8 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment,
subject to payment therefor, in accordance with article A of this chapter, by
the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal
and state guidelines for user charge system. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
7-2-9: EXCESS STORMWATER AND SUMP PUMP DISCHARGES:
   A.   Short Title: This section shall be known as the EXCESS STORMWATER AND
SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE ORDINANCE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
    DRY BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to be normally dry and
maintained with a grass vegetative cover that will contain water only when
excess stormwater runoff occurs. Earthen type dry bottom stormwater detention
basins shall have a concrete paved channel or pipe capable of conveying low
flow through the basin and, where necessary, a system of underdrains to prevent
soggy areas. The embankments around any earthen type detention basin or swale
shall have a slope of no greater than four to one (4:1), horizontal to
vertical, to allow for safe and easy mowing.
   EXCESS STORMWATER: That portion of stormwater runoff from a specific
watershed at a specified rainfall frequency which exceeds the transportation
capacity of natural drainageways or the runoff from the area in its natural
undeveloped state. Excess stormwater includes subsurface as well as surface
runoff. Excess stormwater typically includes roof runoff and runoff from
nonporous surfaces.
   NATURAL DRAINAGEWAYS: Channels formed in the existing surface topography
prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   NATURAL UNDEVELOPED STATE: The condition of the existing surface topography
and vegetative cover of a parcel of land prior to any development having
occurred, with the exception of typical agricultural practices.
   STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITY: An area designed and designated to store
excess stormwater. A stormwater detention facility may include a dry bottom
detention basin or a wet bottom detention basin.
   25-YEAR STORM: A 25-year storm would have an intensity of rainfall which
would, on the average, be equaled or exceeded only once in twenty five (25)
years. This does not imply that it will occur only once in twenty five (25)
years or, having occurred, will not happen again for twenty five (25) years.
   WET BOTTOM DETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to be maintained as a pond
with a free water surface, and which has capacity to contain excess stormwater
runoff. A wet bottom detention basin must have a minimum normal water depth of
four feet (4') and shoreline protection to prevent erosion from wave action.
The embankments around the detention basin shall have a slope of no greater
than four to one (4:1), horizontal to vertical, to allow for safe and easy
mowing.
   C.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Discharge Upon Streets And Sidewalks: No person, firm or corporation
shall discharge, or allow to be discharged, any excess stormwater or water from
a sump pump upon a paved public street or sidewalk.
      2.   Discharge Upon Neighboring Properties: No person, firm or
corporation shall discharge, or allow to be discharged, any excess stormwater
or water from a sump pump upon property owned by another person or entity.
      3.   Accumulation Or Pooling: No person, firm or corporation shall
discharge, or allow to be discharged, any excess stormwater or water from a
sump pump in such a manner as to allow water to accumulate or pool on the
surface of the land, or to accumulate or pool in any ditch or depression.
Nothing in this subsection C3 shall be construed as preventing the use of
detention ponds or other reasonable means to control water runoff or erosion.
Nothing in this subsection C3 shall be construed as prohibiting natural
wetlands.
   D.   Duty To Take Corrective Action: No person, firm or corporation, having
discharged or having allowed to have been discharged, any excess stormwater or
water from a sump pump, roof runoff or subsurface drainage upon a public
street, right of way or sidewalk, shall fail to take all reasonable corrective
action to prevent or mitigate harm or damage to the public street, right of way
or sidewalk, or the users of said public street, right of way or sidewalk. At a
minimum, required mitigation shall include, but is not limited to, promptly
salting the area of water discharge to prevent the accumulation of ice, or to
melt any such accumulation of ice which may have already occurred, should the
discharge occur or should water accumulate or pool during any period of
freezing temperatures. The failure to take corrective action, as required by
this subsection, is a separate and distinct offense from any discharge in
violation of subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section.
   E.   Defenses:
      1.   It shall be no defense that the person, firm or corporation does not
own the property from which a discharge of excess stormwater or water from a
sump pump originates (either in whole or in part), if the person, firm or
corporation has control over said property.
      2.   It shall be a defense to an alleged violation of subsection C1, C2
or C3 of this section if a developed property from which a discharge of excess
stormwater originates contains one or more stormwater detention facilities
designed to provide sufficient storage volume to detain excess stormwater
produced by a 25-year rainfall event from the developed drainage area for any
and all durations. Nothing in this subsection E2 shall be deemed as allowing
the purposeful discharge of sump pump water upon a paved street, sidewalk or
property owned by another. (Ord. 654, 3-25-2010)
   F.   Violations, Penalties And Enforcement:
      1.   Notice Of Violation: If any person, firm or corporation violates
this section, the village may send notice to correct the violation. The notice
may issue from the superintendent of public works, any subordinate of the
superintendent of public works, the village attorney, or any other person
designated by the village president. The notice may be delivered by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon any person over
eighteen (18) years of age residing with the person violating this section;
provided further, that notice may be given by any means (including, but not
limited to, posting, telephone, electronic mail or facsimile transmission) to
correct a violation of subsection D of this section. (Ord. 654, 3-25-2010; amd.
2012 Code)
      2.   Fine: If, after ten (10) days' notice to correct a violation of
subsection C1, C2, or C3 of this section, or after twenty four (24) hours'
notice to correct a violation of subsection D of this section, the person, firm
or corporation so notified fails to correct the violation, said person shall be
subject to prosecution for violating this section, and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      3.   Injunction: In addition, the village may make application to the
circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this section or make
such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
section.
      4.   Recovery Of Costs: The village shall be entitled to recover from any
person, firm or corporation violating this section all costs connected with any
enforcement activity, including court costs, reasonable attorney fees and the
fees of any private collection agents retained by the village attorney.
      5.   Remedies Cumulative: The above remedies are cumulative, not
exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedies provided by law or
ordinance.
   G.   Interpretation: This section is in addition to all other ordinances on
the subject and shall be construed therewith excepting as to that part in
direct conflict with any other ordinance, and in the event of such conflict,
the provisions of this section shall govern. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as repealing the prohibitions and penalties for the discharge of
certain water into the village sanitary sewer system in this chapter. (Ord.
654, 3-25-2010)
7-2-10: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to penalty and potential prosecution. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012
Code)
7-2-11: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Entry Powers; Limitation On Requested Information:
      1.   The president, members of the board of trustees and other duly
authorized employees of the village, the Illinois environmental protection
agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The president, members of the
board of trustees or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
      2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in subsection A1 of this section, the president, members of the board of
trustees or duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
village employees, and the village shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by the village employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company
and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be
caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as
required in sections
7-2-8-4 and
7-2-8-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Safety Precautions: The president, members of the board of trustees and
other duly authorized employees of the village, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this chapter, except section
7-2-10 of this chapter, shall be served by the village with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord.
221, 12-1-1983)
   C.   Fine: Any person found to be violating section
7-2-10 of this chapter, or who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided in subsection A of this section, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 221, 12-1-1983; amd. 2012
Code)
   D.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 221, 12-1-1983)
ARTICLE A. WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
7-2A-1: Basis For Charges; Surcharge
7-2A-2: Measurement Of Flow
7-2A-3: Charges Established
7-2A-4: Computation Of Charges
7-2A-4-1: Connection Maintenance And Repair Charge
7-2A-5: Audit Of Charges
7-2A-6: Bills, Penalties And Other Charges
7-2A-7: Delinquent Payments; Discontinuance Of Service; Reconnection
7-2A-8: Lien Provisions
7-2A-9: Revenues
7-2A-10: Accounting
7-2A-11: Access To Records
7-2A-12: Notice Of Rates
7-2A-13: Unoccupied Premises
7-2A-14: Penalty
7-2A-1: BASIS FOR CHARGES; SURCHARGE:
The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance, plus replacement, a debt service charge, and a
surcharge, if applicable.
   A.   Basic User Charge:
      1.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams
per liter (250 mg/l).
      2.   The basic user charge shall consist of operation and maintenance
costs, plus replacement, as follows, and shall be computed as shown in
subsection 7-2A-4A of this article: (Ord. 282, 6-28-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
         a.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to pay for the
fixed costs to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities for the year,
including a replacement fund for the year. Fixed costs are those that would be
payable even if there were no flow, or very low flow, of sewage through the
system.
         b.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to pay for the
variable costs to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities for the year,
using such flow information as is available to estimate the projected flow of
sewage through the system. Variable costs are those that are payable as a
result of sewage flow through the system.
         c.   Establish a minimum charge estimated to raise sufficient revenue
to pay for the projected fixed costs for the year by dividing the projected
fixed costs by the number of users. Through further divisions, the minimum
charge for each billing period can be computed.
         d.   Establish a user rate based on sewage flow through the system
estimated to raise sufficient revenue to pay for the projected variable costs
for the year, using such flow information as is available. The user rate shall
be applied to each one hundred (100) gallons of water consumption in excess of
a very low flow level established for each user in calculating the minimum
charge. (Ord. 282, 6-28-1990)
   B.   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall be computed by
dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding bonds by the number of
users. Through further divisions, the debt service charge for each billing
period can be computed as a fixed charge.
   C.   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose wastes exceed
the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge
will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters
for all wastes which exceed the two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) and
two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/L) concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively. Subsection 7-2A-4B of this article specifies the procedure to
compute a surcharge. (Ord. 282, 6-28-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2A-2: MEASUREMENT OF FLOW:
   A.   The "billing year", for purposes of the flow calculations identified in
this section, shall begin each July 1 and shall end the following June 30.
   B.   Unless otherwise noted, the volume of flow used for computing basic
user charges and surcharges shall be the metered water usage as read by
Caterpillar Trail Water District to the lowest even increment of one hundred
(100) gallons.
   C.   The monthly metered water usage calculations for each billing year for
most users shall be the average of the preceding three (3) month winter period
for which the user's home or business water meter is read by Caterpillar Trail
Water District, beginning in the months of November, December or January. (For
example, the monthly metered water usage calculations for billing year 1987-88
shall be the average of the water meter readings for the 3 month periods
beginning in the months of November 1986, December 1986, or January 1987.)
   D.   The monthly metered water usage calculations for each billing year for
users whose water meters are read monthly by Caterpillar Trail Water District
shall be the average of the preceding winter months of December, January and
February. (For example, the monthly metered water usage calculations for
billing year 1987-88 shall be the average of the water meter readings for the
months of December 1986, January 1987, and February 1987.)
   E.   The monthly water usage calculations for each billing year for
residential users who: 1) do not receive water from Caterpillar Trail Water
District; 2) have not yet established a record of water usage during the
relevant three (3) month water meter reading period; 3) are determined by
Caterpillar Trail Water District to have damaged or inaccurate water meters; or
4) for any other reason have no water meter reading during the relevant three
(3) month water meter reading period, shall be the average monthly metered
water usage for all residential users whose water meters were read by
Caterpillar Trail Water District during the relevant three (3) month water
meter reading period. Residential water meter readings for properties which
were vacant for at least one month during the relevant three (3) month water
meter reading period shall be excluded in calculating the average usage
described in this subsection.
   F.   The monthly water usage calculations for each billing year for
commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial users who fall within the
exceptions identified in subsection E of this section shall be determined by
special arrangement between the user and the Board of Trustees in an effort to
estimate the likely monthly water usage, taking into account all information
relating to comparable uses within or without the Village, and all other
relevant information gathered by the Board of Trustees or submitted by the
user. In the event the user and the Board of Trustees fail to agree on a
special arrangement, the determination of the Board of Trustees based on
information gathered or submitted shall be binding.
   G.   The Village has determined that computation of the basic user charges
and surcharges based on an average of the relevant three (3) month winter water
meter reading periods identified in this section will avoid charging users for
unsewered water used to fill swimming pools, water lawns, etc. If a user
contends, however, that he has substantial unsewered water usage during the
relevant three (3) month winter water meter reading periods identified in this
section, he can apply to the Board of Trustees for an appropriate adjustment.
Such a user must be prepared to present to the Board qualitative and verifiable
evidence that he is using water for purposes that do not result in any impact
on the wastewater facilities of the Village. Evidence of unsewered water usage
of less than five hundred (500) gallons per month will not be considered to be
substantial and will not be considered appropriate for an adjustment. (Ord.
245, 8-21-1986)
7-2A-3: CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Basic User Charges: There shall be and there are hereby established
minimum charges and basic user rates for the use of and for service supplied by
the wastewater facilities of the village for the billing years 2023-2024
through 2026-27.
      1.   The following minimum charges per month shall be applied to all
users, including those whose water consumption does not exceed one hundred
(100) gallons per month:
 
                                  2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27
Flat charge per customer per month $20.95  $21.00  $21.05  $21.10
 
      2.   The following basic user rates per one hundred (100) gallons shall
be applied to all users for water consumption in excess of one hundred (100)
gallons per month:
 
                          2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27
Usage rate per 100 gallons $0.85   $0.90   $.95    $1.00
 
   B.   Debt Service Charges: The following debt service charges shall be
applied per month to each user of the wastewater facilities of the village for
the billing years 2017-18 through 2021-22:
 
                                        2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27
Debt service charge per customer per month $20.95  $21.00  $21.05  $21.10
 
   C.   Surcharge: Effective September 1, 1986, the rates of surcharges for BOD
and SS shall be as follows: An additional fifty percent (50%) of the total of
the minimum charge and the basic user rate for two hundred milligrams per liter
(200 mg/L) BOD and two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/L) SS, or
part thereof, that shall exceed the limits set forth in section 7-2A-1 of this
article. (Ord. 245, 8-21-1986; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 781, 6-20-2017; Ord. 848,
5-19-2022; Ord. 864, 6-15-2023)
7-2A-4: COMPUTATION OF CHARGES:
   A.   Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be
computed by the following formula:
      CW = CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS
Where:
   =WAmount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.
   =DDebt service charge (subsection
        7-2A-3B of this article).
   =MMinimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection
        7-2A-3A of this article).
   =uWastewater volume for the billing period (section
        7-2A-2 of this article).
   = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection
        7-2A-3A of this article).
   =UBasic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection
        7-2A-3A of this article).
   =SAmount of surcharge (subsection
        7-2A-3C of this article and subsection B of this section).
 
(Ord. 245, 8-21-1986)
   B.   Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the Superintendent of Public Works and
shall be binding as a basis for surcharges. (Ord. 245, 8-21-1986; amd. 2012
Code)
7-2A-4-1: CONNECTION MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR CHARGE:
If, as determined by the Village's Superintendent of Public Works (or the
Village President in his stead), any connection to the Village's sanitary sewer
system: a) after installation, fails to comply with the standards set forth in
any applicable ordinance or State or Federal law; b) by reason of disrepair or
lack of maintenance, no longer complies with the standards set forth in any
applicable ordinance or State or Federal law; c) fails to operate in a manner
as described in the permit for its installation, or otherwise deviates from its
permitted use; or d) by virtue of present or imminent failure, threatens to
fail and/or threatens damage to the Village's sanitary sewer system, then the
Village's Superintendent of Public Works (or the Village President in his
stead) shall serve the owner of property responsible for the sewer connection
with written notice that the sewer connection is required to be maintained or
repaired. No special form of the notice is required, and the notice may be
served in any manner reasonably likely to provide actual notice to the owner,
but said notice shall be reasonably specific in describing the work which must
be performed by the property owner, and the notice shall provide the property
owner at least thirty (30) days to complete such work at his or her own
expense. Should the property owner fail to complete all work within the time
specified in the notice, the village shall be permitted to enter upon land and
perform all necessary work, repairs or maintenance. The village's expenses for
the work, repairs or maintenance shall be billed to the property owner,
appearing on the property owner's bill as the "connection maintenance and
repair charge", and the village may collect said bill and charge, using all
procedures and remedies permitted under this article. For purposes of this
section, a "connection" includes, but is not limited to, any lateral line
connecting toilet facilities to the village's sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 709,
10-11-2012)
7-2A-5: AUDIT OF CHARGES:
The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by
certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit report. The
wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs, including
replacement costs. (Ord. 282, 6-28-1990)
7-2A-6: BILLS, PENALTIES AND OTHER CHARGES:
   A.   Monthly Bills: Rates and charges for service established in this
article shall be payable each month.
   B.   Liability For Service: The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof,
and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for
the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by
the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant
and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
village.
   C.   Rendition Of Bills; Due Date; Late Payment Penalty: Bills for sewer
service shall be sent out to arrive during the first week of each monthly
billing period. All sewer bills are due and payable by the last day of each
monthly billing period. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all
bills not paid by the last day of each monthly billing period, e.g., bills sent
during the first week of July will be subject to a penalty of ten percent (10%)
if not paid by July 31.
   D.   Notice Of Lien Charge; Insufficient Funds Charge:
      1.   The village hereby imposes an additional charge for recording a
notice of sewer lien in the amount actually charged by the office of the county
recorder of deeds, and an additional charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each insufficient funds check, to pay for additional administrative expense.
      2.   If an owner/occupant delivers two (2) insufficient funds checks
payable to the village during any twelve (12) month period, then that owner/
occupant must make all further payments to the village either in cash or
through the use of the electronic pay system operated at the direction of the
village. The village will not accept checks from any such owner/occupant until
such owner/occupant has made timely noncheck payments to the village for a
period of at least one year. (Ord. 703, 6-14-2012)
7-2A-7: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; RECONNECTION:
   A.   Delinquent Payments: If the charges for such services are not paid by
the last day of the month a bill is sent, the account shall be considered
delinquent, and the village, in addition to any other remedies provided herein,
may sue to recover the delinquent charges, penalty, additional charges stated
in section
7-2A-6 of this article, fine, costs and attorney fees.
   B.   Notice Of Delinquency: In the event a sewer bill becomes sixty (60)
days delinquent, the village clerk shall mail to the occupant and/or owner of
the subject premises a notice of delinquency detailing all delinquent amounts
owed for sewer services. (Ord. 703, 6-14-2012)
   C.   Notice Of Disconnection: If, after ten (10) days of the mailing of the
notice of delinquency, any delinquent amounts remain unpaid, the village clerk
shall, via certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the occupant
and/or owner of the subject premises, send a notice of disconnection. The
notice of disconnection shall inform the occupant and/or owner that unless the
village receives full payment of all current and delinquent amounts within
fifteen (15) days of the mailing, or unless satisfactory payment arrangements
are made, water service shall be disconnected without further notice. If the
specified payment arrangements are not followed, the water service will be
disconnected without further notice. The notice shall state the service
address, the amount of current and delinquent charges, penalties, additional
charges stated in section
7-2A-6 of this article, and other charges for disconnection and reconnection of
water service. The notice shall further advise the occupant and/or owner that
if the occupant and/or owner believes the delinquency amount to be erroneous,
the occupant and/or owner may, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing, request
an administrative hearing before the village sewer committee chairperson or the
village president prior to disconnection, and that absent such request or after
the conclusion of the administrative hearing, if the delinquency amount is not
found to be erroneous, such water service shall be disconnected without further
notice. (Ord. 703, 6-14-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Adjustment Of Bills: The village sewer committee chairperson or village
president is hereby authorized and directed to adjust bills he/she finds to be
"erroneous" based on village records.
   E.   Disconnection Of Service: Following the period set forth in the notice
of disconnection, the village clerk, by written notice to Caterpillar Trail
public water district, shall request the discontinuation of water service to
the subject premises based on charges for sewer service that have become
delinquent, and shall further request Caterpillar Trail public water district
not to resume water service until receiving a like notice that said delinquency
has been cured. The village shall pay Caterpillar Trail public water district
the reasonable cost of disconnection of service.
   F.   Reconnection Of Service: A premises disconnected pursuant to this
section may be reconnected upon payment by cash, certified check or money order
of all outstanding charges, penalties and additional charges stated in section
7-2A-6 of this article relating to sewer service in addition to the
disconnection and reconnection charges as established by Caterpillar Trail
public water district. Upon receipt of payment as required by this subsection,
the village clerk, by written notice to Caterpillar Trail public water
district, shall request the reconnection of water service to the subject
premises, and shall transmit the village's payment for the reasonable cost of
reconnection.
   G.   Indemnification: To the extent required by law, the village shall
indemnify Caterpillar Trail public water district for any judgment and related
attorney fees resulting from the disconnection of water service pursuant to
this section.
   H.   Other Remedies: Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting
or denying the village its statutory right of lien against the owner of the
property for any charges incurred or other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 703,
6-24-2012)
7-2A-8: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Statement Of Lien Claim:
      1.   Whenever an account becomes delinquent, the village clerk, as an
alternative to the procedures established in section
7-2A-7 of this article, may send notice to the owner(s) of the premises, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that there are unpaid sewer bills and
other charges that may result in a lien against the premises, in the form
required by statute. Thereafter, at least ten (10) days after receipt of the
notice by the owner(s), the village clerk shall file or cause to be filed with
the county recorder of deeds a verified notice of lien claim. This notice shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the date the account
became delinquent, the amount of any unpaid bill, the amount of any penalty,
the amount of any additional charges, and a notice that the village claims a
lien for the total amount due, as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.
      2.   The village clerk shall mail a copy of the notice of lien claim to
the owner(s) of the premises by certified mail, return receipt requested.
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of sale shall be
applied to all charges, penalty, costs, and attorney fees. Such foreclosure
shall be by bill in equity in the name of the village. The village attorney is
hereby authorized to initiate such proceedings in the name of the village in
any court having jurisdiction over such matters upon being directed to do so by
the village president. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-9: REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewer account of the sewer fund. All such
revenues and monies shall be held by the village treasurer separate and apart
from his/her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
village, and all of said funds, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
delivered to the village treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of
the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may, from time to time, be
directed by the village president and board of trustees.
   B.   The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him/her and shall deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the "sewer fund of the village". The
treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-10: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   System Of Accounts: The village treasurer shall establish a proper
system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he/she shall cause to be made
an audit of the books by an independent auditing concern to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   Annual Audit Report: In addition to the customary operating statements,
the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses
of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
the sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet
these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant(s)
for the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-11: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois environmental protection agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village
system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of special and
general conditions to any state grant. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-12: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of this article, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed
in the office of the county recorder of deeds and shall be deemed notice to all
owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of the village on
their properties. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-13: UNOCCUPIED PREMISES:
   A.   The owner of any unoccupied premises that has not been disconnected
from the water supply shall pay a wastewater service charge in the amount of
the monthly debt service charge and the monthly minimum portion of the basic
user charge, added together. The owner of the premises shall notify the village
that the premises is unoccupied, and the unoccupied premises charge shall not
be applied until the village receives such notice. The owner of the premises
shall notify the village when the premises becomes occupied again. If the
village determines that the premises has become occupied again before receiving
such notice from the owner, the village may back charge the user to the date of
actual occupancy. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   The owner of unoccupied premises may elect to disconnect the premises
from the water supply to the premises. The owner of the premises shall notify
the village of the disconnection and, in addition to whatever charge may be
imposed by Caterpillar Trail public water district, shall pay a fifty dollar
($50.00) disconnection charge to the village to remove the premises from the
sewer billing system. After payment of the disconnection charge, the premises
shall not be subject to the village wastewater service charge until
reconnection. The owner of the premises shall notify the village when the
premises is reconnected to the water supply to the premises and, in addition to
whatever charge may be imposed by the water district, shall pay a fifty dollar
($50.00) reconnection charge to the village to reinstate the premises into the
sewer billing system. If the village determines that the premises has become
reconnected before receiving such notice from the owner, the village may back
charge the user to the date of actual reconnection. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012)
7-2A-14: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 703, 6-24-2012; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
SETBACKS FROM PUBLIC WATER WELLS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Statute Authority; Purpose; Scope
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Setback Zones Established
7-3-4: Prohibitions
7-3-5: Waivers, Exceptions And Certifications Of Minimal Hazard
7-3-6: Exclusion
7-3-7: Penalty
7-3-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE; SCOPE:
Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-125-
4, and in the interest of securing the public health, safety, and welfare; to
preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order to assure a
safe and adequate water supply for present and future generations; and to
preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those aquifers having a
potential for future use as a public water supply, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all properties located within the minimum setback zone
established under section 14.2 of the environmental protection act 1  ("act")
and this chapter, and the maximum setback zone established under section 14.3
of the act 2  and this chapter. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5/14.2.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5/14.3.
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as stated in this section and unless a different meaning of a word or
term is clear from the context, the definitions of words or terms used in this
chapter shall be the same as those used in the act and the Illinois groundwater
protection act 1 .
ACT: The environmental protection act 2 .
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOARD: The Illinois pollution control board.
MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well established
under section 14.3 of the act and this chapter, and described in the appendices
referenced in section
7-3-3 of this chapter.
MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE: The area around a community water supply well established
under section 14.2 of the act and this chapter, and described in the appendices
referenced in section
7-3-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010)
 
Notes
1 3. 415 ILCS 55/1 et seq.
2 4. 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
7-3-3: SETBACK ZONES ESTABLISHED:
Attached to the following ordinances and made a part of this chapter are the
following appendices describing and defining the minimum setback zones and
maximum setback zones for the following wells of the Caterpillar Trail public
water district:
   A.   Ordinance 431, Appendix A, Well Number 5: Well number 5 bears
designation as Illinois environmental protection agency well identification
number 00913 located in Woodford County.
   B.   Ordinance 662, Appendix A, Well Number 6: Well number 6 bears
designation as Illinois environmental protection agency well identification
number 01487 located in Woodford County. (Ord. 431, 6-24-1999; amd. Ord. 662,
8-12-2010)
7-3-4: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in section
7-3-5 or
7-3-6 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential source, new
potential secondary source, or new potential route within the minimum setback
zone.
   B.   Except as provided otherwise in section
7-3-5 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential primary source
within the maximum setback zone. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010)
7-3-5: WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD:
   A.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(b) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential
route is granted a waiver by the agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a
waiver to the same extent from subsection
7-3-4A of this chapter.
   B.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) of the act, the owner of a new
potential primary source (other than land filling or land treating), new
potential secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by
the board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent
from subsection
7-3-4A of this chapter.
   C.   If, pursuant to section 14.2(c) and section 14.3(e) of the act, the
owner of a new potential primary source (other than land filling or land
treating) is granted an exception by the board, such owner shall be deemed to
have an exception to the same extent from subsection
7-3-4B of this chapter.
   D.   If, pursuant to section 14.5 of the act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source, or new potential route is
issued a certificate of minimal hazard by the agency, such owner shall not be
subject to subsection
7-3-4A of this chapter to the same extent that such owner is not subject to
section 14.2(d) of the act. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010)
7-3-6: EXCLUSION:
Subsection 7-3-4A of this chapter shall not apply to new common sources of
sanitary pollution as specified pursuant to section 17 of the act and the
regulations adopted thereunder by the agency; however, no such common sources
may be located within the applicable minimum distance from a community water
supply well specified by such regulations. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010)
7-3-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, in addition to any
other legal remedies available to the village, be subject to a fine of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day any such violation exists or
occurs. (Ord. 662, 8-12-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Purpose And Scope
7-4-2: Definitions
7-4-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-4-4: Dispute Resolution
7-4-5: Indemnification
7-4-6: Insurance
7-4-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 805, 6-21-2018)
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical
Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
805, 6-21-2018)
7-4-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   A.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   B.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the
Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         a.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         c.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         g.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         a.   Priority Of Applications: The first completed application shall
have priority over applications received by different applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
         b.   Applications Regarding Existing Utility Poles: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be
deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         c.   Applications Regarding New Utility Poles: An application to
collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new
utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed
approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         d.   Denial Of Application: The Village shall deny an application
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
            If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application.
            The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village
and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed
approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the Village's review period.
            The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         e.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village Hall, 216 Holland Rd, Germantown Hills, IL 61548.
   C.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
         A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
         Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy
the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Collocation Location: The wireless provider shall not collocate
small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
         However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Compliance With Public Safety Regulations: The wireless provider
shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations
that concern public safety.
      6.   Compliance With Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply
with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative
utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements
that are set forth in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the
Village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to
other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this subsection C, a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities
on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
         New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in section
9-3A-4 of this Code.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   D.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   E.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
         For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a)
to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
   F.   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
         A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by
notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this paragraph.
   G.   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
         If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day
after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of
intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   H.   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
         The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
         A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider. (Ord. 805, 6-21-2018)
7-4-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Woodford County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 805, 6-21-2018)
7-4-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 805, 6-21-2018)
7-4-6: INSURANCE:
   A.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self- insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 805, 6-21-2018)
CHAPTER 5
DAMAGE TO VILLAGE PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Repair Of Village Property
7-5-2: Responsible Parties
7-5-3: Suspension Of Building Permit
7-5-4: Building Permit Application
7-5-1: REPAIR OF VILLAGE PROPERTY:
Any person who shall damage Village property, including, without limitation,
Village streets and/or right-of-way, shall be responsible for the prompt repair
of such damage. (Ord. 812, 2-21-2019)
7-5-2: RESPONSIBLE PARTIES:
Any property owner, builder or permit holder shall be responsible for any
damage to Village property, including, without limitation, Village streets and/
or right-of-way, which occurs in the course of the erection, construction,
development, modification, alteration or repair of a building or structure,
whether caused by such owner, builder or permit holder, or one of their
respective agents, contractors, subcontractors or other entity associated with
the project. (Ord. 812, 2-21-2019)
7-5-3: SUSPENSION OF BUILDING PERMIT:
If the property owner, builder or permit holder fails to promptly repair such
damage, the Village may suspend the applicable building permit until the
repairs are made to the satisfaction of the Village Superintendent of Public
Works. (Ord. 812, 2-21-2019)
7-5-4: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION:
Each application for a building permit must contain an agreement, signed by the
property owner and contractor, acknowledging and agreeing to be bound by the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 812, 2-21-2019)
TITLE 8
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING NUMBERS AND STREET NAMES
SECTION:
8-1-1: Numbering System Established
8-1-2: Base Lines
8-1-3: Grid Numbering System
8-1-4: Posting Numbers
8-1-5: New Subdivisions
8-1-6: Street Names
8-1-7: Administrative Official
8-1-8: Penalty
8-1-1: NUMBERING SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering all homes and
buildings ("improvements") now or hereafter constructed fronting on all streets
or other public ways within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 222, 12-
15-1983)
8-1-2: BASE LINES:
   A.   The base line for numbering north and south streets shall be Illinois
Route 116.
   B.   The base line for numbering east and west streets shall be Fandel Road
and its southerly extension along the east line of sections 29 and 32 of
township 27 north, range 3 west of the third principal meridian. (Ord. 222, 12-
15-1983)
8-1-3: GRID NUMBERING SYSTEM:
   A.   Areas to be numbered shall be blocked out by a uniform grid with an
interval of 0.1 mile. The original of the grid is on file at the village hall.
A reduced copy is attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part of
this chapter.
   B.   One number shall be assigned to each sixty feet (60') of frontage,
whether improved or unimproved. Each block shall begin with one or two (2) and
multiples of one hundred (100) (e.g., 101, 102; 201, 202). Odd numbers shall be
assigned to the north and west sides of a street, and even numbers to the south
and east sides of a street. Diagonal streets shall be designated according to
their predominant direction. Where a street intersection approximates a grid
corner, the change from the one hundreds sequence to the next higher hundreds
sequence shall be made at the street intersection. (Ord. 222, 12-15-1983)
8-1-4: POSTING NUMBERS:
   A.   Owners of properties within the jurisdiction of the village which are
improved after the effective date hereof shall post their assigned numbers on
their properties not later than thirty (30) days after completion of the
improvement.
   B.   Posting of numbers on properties under this section or any other
section of this chapter shall be done in a manner so as to be visible from the
street or other public way fronting the properties. (Ord. 222, 12-15-1983; amd.
2012 Code)
8-1-5: NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of anyone laying out a new subdivision within the
jurisdiction of the village to prepare and submit a numbering plan for each lot
therein in accordance with this chapter. The numbering plan shall be reviewed
and approved in the same manner and at the same time as the final subdivision
plat is reviewed and approved.
   B.   Owners of properties within new subdivisions described in this section
shall post their assigned numbers on their properties not later than thirty
(30) days after completion of any improvement to their properties. (Ord. 222,
12-15-1983)
8-1-6: STREET NAMES:
Streets and other public ways shall generally retain their historical and
familiar designations. New streets and other public ways shall be named so that
they are distinct, as written and pronounced, from the name of any other street
and other public way within the village, the fire district, and the postal
areas serving the village. The village board, on its own motion or on a
petition of a majority of the residents living on a given street or other
public way, may change the name of any street or other public way within the
corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 222, 12-15-1983)
8-1-7: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
The village plat officer shall assign numbers to existing and newly improved
properties, and shall be generally responsible for the administration of this
chapter. (Ord. 222, 12-15-1983)
8-1-8: PENALTY:
Each owner of an improved property within the jurisdiction of the village who
fails to post the number assigned under this chapter, or who violates any other
provision of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 222, 12-15-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 2
EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORMWATER CONTROL
SECTION:
8-2-1: Short Title
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Application Of Provisions
8-2-4: Standards For Design And Maintenance
8-2-5: Maintenance Requirements
8-2-6: Retrofitting Presently Developed Sites
8-2-7: General Erosion And Sediment Control Permit Requirements
8-2-8: Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater Control Permit Requirements
8-2-9: Maintenance Of Existing Stormwater Control Measures
8-2-10: Enforcement
8-2-11: Penalties
8-2-12: Stop Work Order
8-2-13: Appeals
8-2-14: Attachments
8-2-14-1: Attachment A, Standards For Stormwater Design Analyses
8-2-14-2: Attachment B, Erosion And Sediment Control Criteria And
Specifications
8-2-14-3: Attachment C, Technical Guidance For Meeting Volume Control
Requirements
8-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the EROSION, SEDIMENT AND
STORMWATER CONTROL ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS. (Ord. 607, 4-
24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
2-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT:   the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        two (2) years.
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
5-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT:   the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        five (5) years.
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
10-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT:  the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        ten (10) years.
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
25-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT:  the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        twenty-five (25) years.
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
50-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT:  the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        fifty (50) years.
                                        The storm event rainfall depth during
100-YEAR CRITICAL DURATION STORM EVENT: the controlling storm duration which is
                                        exceeded, on the average, once every
                                        one hundred (100) years.
                                        Surrounding land that may either impact
                                        a site or be impacted by potential soil
                                        erosion, sediment and/or stormwater
ADJACENT LANDS:                         runoff as a result of land disturbing
                                        activities conducted on a site and, at
                                        a minimum, is an area within fifty feet
                                        (50') of the site.
APPEAL OFFICER:                         The erosion, sediment and stormwater
                                        control appeal officer.
                                        Any area where water may accumulate or
                                        flow, whether continual or as the
AREAS OF CONCENTRATED FLOW OR BODIES OF result of a storm event, including, but
WATER:                                  not limited to, lakes, rivers, streams,
                                        creeks, ponds, ditches, swales,
                                        gullies, ravines, street gutters and
                                        other similar features.
                                        Any proposed temporary or permanent
CONTROL MEASURE:                        measure to be installed to control
                                        erosion, sediment and/or stormwater
                                        runoff from a project area.
DEPARTMENT:                             The village of Germantown Hills
                                        department of public works.
                                        The division of a parcel into two (2)
                                        or more parcels; the construction,
                                        reconstruction, conversion, structural
DEVELOPMENT:                            alteration, relocation, or enlargement
                                        of any structure; any mining,
                                        excavation, landfill, or land
                                        disturbance.
                                        Any area of land on which the
                                        predevelopment ground surface will be
                                        affected or altered by the development
DISTURBED AREA:                         activities. This includes, but is not
                                        limited to, excavating, grading,
                                        clearing, stockpiling, tracking and
                                        other similar activities.
                                        The person(s) appointed by the board of
EROSION CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR:          trustees of the village of Germantown
                                        Hills to administer this chapter.
                                        Maps prepared by the federal emergency
                                        management agency (FEMA) that depict
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM):       the special flood hazard areas (SFHA)
                                        within a community. These maps include
                                        insurance rate zones and floodplains
                                        and may or may not depict floodways.
                                        A religious or public use, such as a
                                        church, library, public or private
INSTITUTIONAL USE:                      school, hospital, or government owned
                                        or operated building, structure or land
                                        used for public purpose.
                                        Any change in land which may result in
                                        soil erosion from water or wind and the
                                        movement of sediments into state,
                                        county or village waters or lands, or a
                                        change in the amount and/or intensity
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY:               of stormwater runoff, including, but
                                        not limited to, the covering with an
                                        impervious surface, stockpiling,
                                        clearing, grading, excavating,
                                        rehabilitating, transporting,
                                        depositing or filling of land.
                                        Activities associated with the
                                        preparation and tilling of land for the
                                        purpose of growing crops or raising
NORMAL AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES:          livestock, which may include, but are
                                        not limited to, the construction of
                                        conservation measures, plowing,
                                        disking, and cultivating.
                                        Any control measure installed between
                                        the down slope side of the disturbed
PERIMETER CONTROL:                      area and the property line and/or
                                        between the down slope side of the
                                        disturbed area and any area of
                                        concentrated flow.
                                        A condition that impacts erosion,
                                        sediment, or stormwater runoff
                                        characteristics of a site prior to
                                        start of construction activity. The
                                        preproject condition shall be based on
PREPROJECT CONDITION:                   the predominant land use for the past
                                        five (5) years. For example, if a site
                                        has been cropland for four (4) of the
                                        past five (5) years and in grass just
                                        prior to development, the land use
                                        would be cropland for the preproject
                                        condition.
                                        Any development involving modification
PROJECT:                                to land which involves a land
                                        disturbing activity.
                                        A system which is designed, constructed
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM:  and maintained to provide stormwater
                                        control for multiple landowners.
                                        Any right of way that has been improved
                                        for the purposes of providing a surface
ROAD:                                   for vehicular traffic, including any
                                        federal, state, county, township, and
                                        village controlled facilities.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING:                 A building designed for or occupied by
                                        one family.
SITE:                                   The lot or parcel on which the project
                                        is to be developed.
                                        A general erosion and sediment control
                                        plan for projects where the slope is
                                        less than ten percent (10%) and there
                                        are no areas of concentrated flow or
                                        bodies of water on or immediately
STANDARD PLAN:                          adjacent to the site. Slope shall be
                                        determined by the maximum slope
                                        indicated on the site according to the
                                        USDA soil survey or topographic survey
                                        as prepared by an Illinois registered
                                        surveyor.
                                        A. The Illinois environmental
                                        protection agency's "Illinois Urban
                                        Manual, A Technical Manual Designed For
                                        Urban Ecosystem Protection And
                                        Enhancement", published in 2002;
                                        B. "Illinois Procedures And Standards
                                        For Urban Soil Erosion And
                                        Sedimentation Control", published in
                                        1988 by the urban committee of the
                                        Association Of Illinois Soil And Water
                                        Conservation Districts;
                                        C. The village of Germantown Hills,
                                        "Standards For Stormwater Design
                                        Analyses", found at section
STANDARDS:                              8-2-14-1, attachment A of this chapter;
                                        and
                                        D. The erosion and sediment control
                                        criteria and specifications found at
                                        section
                                        8-2-14-2, attachment B of this chapter.
                                        Publications in subsections A and B of
                                        this definition shall mean those
                                        publications now existing or as
                                        hereafter amended and are incorporated
                                        herein by reference. Sections
                                        8-2-14-1, attachment A and
                                        8-2-14-2, attachment B of this chapter,
                                        shall be maintained in the office of
                                        the village clerk and shall be made
                                        available to the public.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING:                    A building designed for or occupied by
                                        two (2) families.
                                        The means by which utility service is
UTILITY SERVICE LINE:                   provided to service users, such as
                                        electric, telephone and television
                                        cable; or gas, water and sewer pipes.
                                        Each day other than Saturday, Sunday,
                                        or any holiday when the Germantown
WORKING DAY:                            Hills Village Hall is closed. (Ord.
                                        607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-
                                        2021)
 
8-2-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to:
   A.   All projects within the corporate limits of the village. No land
surface shall be disturbed unless an erosion and sediment control permit (see
section
8-2-7 of this chapter) or an erosion, sediment and stormwater control permit
(see section
8-2-8 of this chapter) has first been issued for that project, except as
follows:
      1.   Land disturbing activities which do not involve the construction of
any new single- or two-family dwellings and for which the disturbed area is
less than five hundred (500) square feet; or
      2.   Normal agricultural practices; or
      3.   Routine maintenance of roads and utility service lines.
      The erosion control administrator reserves the right to require any
nonagricultural construction development activity, regardless of disturbed area
or type of activity, to comply with this chapter if it is determined to be the
cause of or a contributor to an existing or potential erosion, sediment or
stormwater impact.
   B.   Any land within the corporate limits of the village on which there is
located a permanent stormwater control measure which was installed pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-4: STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE:
Standards for design and maintenance of control measures for soil erosion,
sediment and stormwater are as follows:
   A.   Erosion And Sediment Control Measures: All control measures required by
this chapter shall conform to the design criteria, standards, and
specifications provided in the applicable standards referenced in section
8-2-14-2, attachment B of this chapter, now in effect or as hereafter amended
or measures deemed acceptable by the erosion control administrator or designee.
All control measures installed shall be sufficient to prevent sediment from
leaving the permit site during a 5-year frequency storm event. Measures shall
be taken to prevent sediment from leaving the site. When sediment does leave
the site, the owner, developer or contractor shall remove the sediment within
four (4) hours, or by no later than the end of the workday. For example,
installing a rock construction drive or cleaning tires could be used to
minimize tracking of sediment onto public roads.
   B.   Permanent Stormwater Control Measures:
      1.   All development shall provide water quality treatment for runoff
from increased impervious areas to minimize impacts of post-development
stormwater runoff on water quality. The development shall provide non-
structural BMPs and volume control for runoff to meet the requirements as
indicated below:
         a.   Non-Structural BMPs: All developments shall include a minimum of
two (2) non-structural BMPs. Examples of BMPs that may be considered for
developments are:
            (1)   Natural vegetation buffers;
            (2)   Preservation of existing streams, channels and drainage ways;
            (3)   Preservation of existing wetlands, prairies, and floodplains;
            (4)   Minimization of disturbance of steep slopes (greater than 3:
1);
            (5)   Minimization of impervious surfaces; and
            (6)   Maximize preservation of existing forested area. Removal of
undergrowth and preservation of large trees (greater than six (6) inches) is
encouraged.
         b.   Volume Control: Volume control practices shall be designed to
control the first inch of runoff from the impervious area of development on the
site. Retention-based practices with quantifiable storage capacity shall be
sized to retain and infiltrate the required volume. Practices include, but are
not limited to: infiltration trenches, infiltration basins, porous pavement,
bio retention systems, dry wells, open channel practices fitted with check
dams, retention storage below the outlet of a detention facility and
constructed wetlands that have quantifiable storage. Existing soil conditions
within the village limit the infiltration capacity. All infiltration methods
shall include an underdrain system. See Attachment C Technical Guidance For
Volume Control.
      2.   All stormwater controls shall be designed so that the peak discharge
rate from the permitted area resulting from the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-
year and 100-year critical duration storm events for the post-project condition
do not exceed the corresponding storm event peak discharges for the pre-project
condition or a cropland equivalent for straight row crops with crop residue
greater than twenty percent (20%) and good hydrologic condition, whichever is
less. The velocity of the post-project peak discharge rate from the above noted
design storms shall not exceed the corresponding storm event peak discharges
for the pre-project condition.
   C.   Regional Stormwater Control Systems: To allow for the beneficial
development and maintenance of regional stormwater management systems, where
they are available and appropriate, an applicant may submit a design dependent
on such a system. The applicant shall submit documentation of the approval for
the use of the regional stormwater management facility from the governmental
agency having jurisdiction thereover. The applicant shall submit evidence
showing that there will be no adverse flooding impact to any receiving stream
between the point of discharge and the regional stormwater facility. If the
applicant is approved to use the regional stormwater management system, the
applicant may request from the erosion control administrator exemption from the
requirements in this section for permanent on site stormwater controls. Such
exemption shall not apply to any temporary stormwater control measures required
by this chapter. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-5: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Erosion, Sediment And Temporary Stormwater Control Measures:
      1.   On site sediment control measures shall be constructed and
functional prior to initiating any land disturbing activity, clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.
      2.   Sediment control measures and temporary stormwater control measures
are to be maintained so they are operating effectively until permanent ground
surface protection and permanent stormwater control measures are established in
a manner specified in the applicable permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
      3.   Fully functioning temporary sediment control measures (including,
but not limited to, perimeter sediment controls) shall remain in place until
the ground is stabilized with permanent ground cover. The intent of this
chapter is to keep the sites protected at all times until the ground is
permanently stabilized. In cases where it is not practical to leave the
temporary sediment control measures in place prior to establishing permanent
ground cover (for example, when control measures need to be removed in order to
grade the area or install pavement or sod), an exception will be made only if
one of the following conditions will be met. In no way does adhering to one of
the following conditions relieve the owner of responsibility to clean up or
repair any damages caused from sediment or stormwater runoff leaving the site.
         a.   Permanent ground cover shall be established with pavement,
aggregate or sod within three (3) days of the removal of sediment barriers.
         b.   Permanent vegetation shall be established by seeding with
anchored mulch within three (3) days of removal of sediment barriers during the
spring or fall seeding periods. However, on project areas with slopes not
exceeding five percent (5%), permanent vegetation shall be established by
seeding within three (3) days of the removal of sediment barriers during the
spring or fall seeding periods. Summer seeding is acceptable on project areas
which shall be watered. This does not apply to concentrated flow areas.
   B.   Additional Control Measures: The erosion control administrator may
require additional control measures pursuant to the standards if determined as
necessary after site inspection.
   C.   Permanent Stormwater Control Measures: An operation and maintenance
(O&M) plan shall be developed by the site owner. The O&M plan shall clearly
establish the operation and maintenance necessary to ensure the proper
functioning of all permanent stormwater control facilities. The O&M plan shall
be submitted with the stormwater control permit application and include (at a
minimum) the following items:
      1.   Annual inspection of the stormwater facilities. To assure proper
implementation of BMPs, maintenance and care stormwater BMPs should be
inspected by a qualified person, which may include the landowner, or the
owner’s designee.
      2.   Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment in order to keep the material from building up in grass waterways,
pipes, detention or retention basins, infiltration structures, or BMPs, and
thus reducing their capacity to convey or store water.
      3.   Re-establishment of vegetation of scoured areas or areas where
vegetation has not been successfully established.
      4.   Plan for removal and replacement of any underdrain system every ten
(10) years (or sooner).
   D.   If deficiencies within the storm water control measures are identified,
the village shall notify the owner. The owner shall have thirty (30) days to
correct the deficiencies. Municipality shall then conduct a subsequent
inspection to ensure completion of the repairs. If, after an inspection by the
municipality, the condition of a stormwater control facility presents an
immediate danger to the public health or safety because of an unsafe condition
for improper maintenance, the municipality shall take such action as may be
necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. Any cost incurred
by the municipality shall be assessed against the owner(s). (Ord. 607, 4-24-
2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-6: RETROFITTING PRESENTLY DEVELOPED SITES:
In instances where the project involves a presently developed site, the
applicant may request an exemption from fully complying with the stormwater
control requirements. The erosion control administrator shall determine the
type and extent of compliance required based on existing and proposed site
conditions and the impact of stormwater runoff on the surrounding area. This
exemption will only be granted in cases where the proposed condition of the
site will not be significantly different from the existing condition as
determined by the erosion control administrator. The purpose of this section is
to allow for alterations to presently developed sites without a major redesign
of the existing (or nonexisting) stormwater system, while assuring that all
projects will be moving closer to compliance with the stormwater control
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-7: GENERAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Before commencing any project involving construction
of any new single- or two-family dwelling or commencing any project with an
area of between one thousand (1,000) square feet and one-half (1/2) acre, the
owner of the land shall be required to file an application for a general
erosion and sediment control permit as either a standard plan or site specific
plan except as otherwise provided by section
8-2-3 and subsection
8-2-8A of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit; Fee: The applicant shall file the application
with the village on forms provided by the village. The fee for a standard plan
application shall be in the amount of one hundred eighty five dollars ($185.00)
for each permit, and the fee for a site specific plan application shall be two
hundred forty dollars ($240.00) for each permit. However, no fee shall be
required for any project, the purpose of which is agricultural, or initiated by
a unit of local government. There shall be no refund of any fees paid, and no
application shall be accepted for filing unless the fee has been paid in full.
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit Or Plan Review: Review of a general
erosion and sediment control permit application shall be limited to verifying
that the required information and permit fee have been provided, and that the
application meets the standards, and that it conforms to any erosion and
sediment control permit or erosion, sediment and stormwater control permit that
may have been issued for an area encompassing the site. The erosion control
administrator shall not take any action on a request until a complete
application is received. Upon receipt of a complete application, the erosion
control administrator shall either issue or deny the permit, or initiate the
review process for a site specific plan. If the permit is denied, it shall be
returned to the applicant with a written explanation of its denial.
   D.   Term Of Permit: The general erosion and sediment control permit shall
be issued for a period that is the same as the zoning permit for the project.
If the project does not require a zoning permit, the general erosion control
permit shall be issued for a period not exceeding two (2) years. In the event
permanent ground cover has not been established at the time of expiration of
the permit, the permit holder shall be required to submit a new application for
a general erosion and sediment control permit.
   E.   Conditions Of Permit: The general erosion and sediment control permit
shall contain, at a minimum, the following general conditions:
      1.   That written approval be obtained from the erosion control
administrator prior to making any modification to the erosion and sediment
control plan as set forth in the application; and
      2.   That all control measures identified in the application shall be
installed; and
      3.   That all control measures shall be maintained during construction;
and
      4.   Such other conditions as the erosion control administrator deems
appropriate to ensure compliance with the specific requirements and intent of
this chapter.
   F.   Inspection: Prior to initiating any land disturbing activity, the
permit holder shall install the control measures set forth in the approved
erosion and sediment control plan and request an inspection of the installed
control measures by the erosion control administrator. The erosion control
administrator shall perform the inspection within two (2) business days of
receipt of the inspection request. The erosion control administrator shall
determine whether the control measures conform to the permit application and
requirements of this chapter and approve or deny the commencement of the land
disturbing activity.
   G.   Time For Final Stabilization: Without exception, all disturbed areas
must have final stabilization within six (6) months of project completion or
within six (6) months of occupancy, whichever comes first. (Ord. 607, 4-24-
2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-8: EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORMWATER CONTROL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Before commencing any commercial, institutional,
multi- family or industrial project with an area of more than four thousand
nine hundred ninety-nine (4,999) square feet, or a project requiring
subdivision approval by the village with an area of more than four thousand
nine hundred ninety-nine (4,999) square feet, the owner of the land shall be
required to file an application for an erosion, sediment and stormwater control
permit.
   B.   Application For Permit: The applicant shall file the application with
the village on forms provided by the village. The applicant shall supply the
number of copies of application documents as provided in the application. Each
application shall be accompanied by the following information:
      1.   Existing Site Conditions Map: A map of existing site conditions on a
scale of at least one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the site
and immediately adjacent areas and the locations of the following site
information:
         a.   Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify site
location; and
         b.   Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other
watercourses on and immediately adjacent to the site; and
         c.   Floodways and/or zone A of the floodplain as determined on the
flood insurance rate map (FIRM), and indicating the map panel number; and
         d.   All off site drainage onto or through the site; and
         e.   Location and dimensions of stormwater management systems on or
adjacent to the site; and
         f.   Locations and dimensions of structures, roads, highways,
easements and paved areas; and
         g.   Site topography; show contours at vertical intervals as follows:
            (1)   Slope of six percent (6%) or less, two foot (2') intervals.
            (2)   Slope of over six percent (6%) but less than fifteen percent
(15%), five foot (5') intervals.
            (3)   Slope of over fifteen percent (15%), ten foot (10') or twenty
foot (20') intervals.
      2.   Final Site Conditions Plan: A plan of final site conditions drawn to
the same scale as the existing site conditions map submitted pursuant to
subsection B1 of this section, and which includes information to accurately
depict the postconstruction appearance of the site, e.g., paved areas,
buildings, landscaping, and other changes to the site, along with other
predominate site features, e.g., open areas and bodies of water. (See section
8-2-14-2, attachment B of this chapter.)
      3.   Site Construction Plan: A site construction plan including:
         a.   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities; and
         b.   Antierosion measures for all temporary soil and aggregate
stockpiles; and
         c.   Location, dimension and construction details of all construction
site management control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter and including proposed revegetation of disturbed areas; and
         d.   Statement regarding provisions for maintenance and maintenance
requirements of the construction site management control measures during
construction.
      4.   Stormwater Management Plans And Controls: Design calculations and
information related to the permanent stormwater management system for any
project with a net increase of impervious area greater than four thousand nine
hundred ninety-nine (4,999) square feet. The following information shall also
be provided by the applicant:
         a.   A map showing the drainage area divides, including off site
drainage areas that drain into the site; and
         b.   Location and identification of soil types for the entire
watershed; and
         c.   Location and identification of vegetative cover for the entire
watershed; and
         d.   Runoff curve number calculations for both preproject and
postproject conditions for all subwatersheds; and
         e.   Time of concentration calculations for both preproject and
postproject conditions for all subwatersheds, and include a map showing
hydraulic flow lengths used; and
         f.   Peak flow rate calculations for 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-
year, and 100-year critical duration storm events for both preproject and
postproject conditions; and
         g.   Design calculations for detention basin outlets for both 2-year,
10-year, 25-year, 50-year, and 100-year critical duration storm events, include
stage-storage table and discharge rating curve data or outflow calculations
(refer to optional form in section
8-2-14-1, attachment A of this chapter); and
         h.   Location, dimensions, and construction details of proposed
detention basins and outlets; and
         i.   Detention volume calculations; and
         j.   Summary of peak flow rates for preproject, postproject, and
proposed conditions, with detention showing that the requirements of this
chapter are met (refer to section
8-2-14-1, attachment A of this chapter).
         k.   If the disturbed area is two (2) acres or more, provide a design
certification by a registered Illinois professional engineer stating that
federal, state and village requirements for stormwater and erosion control are
met.
      5.   Schedule Of Development: Schedule or sequence of development or
installation of the elements of the site management control measures proposed
in this subsection.
      6.   Estimates: A detailed estimate of quantities and estimated costs,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, of all control measures
required under this section.
      7.   Continued Management And Maintenance Plan: A plan of the continued
management and maintenance of such permanent control measures.
      8.   Application Fee: An application fee shall be submitted at the time
of application. The fee shall be in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per acre, with a minimum fee of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) and a
maximum fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). However, no fee shall be
required for any project, the purpose of which is agricultural. A fractional
acre shall be rounded to the nearest whole acre. There shall be no refund of
any fees paid, and no application shall be accepted for filing unless the fee
has been paid in full.
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Request For Additional Information: After
submittal of a complete application, the erosion control administrator shall
respond in writing to the sediment and erosion control practices portion by
either issuing a permit, issuing a request for additional information, or
issuing a statement denying the permit with an explanation of cause. The
aforementioned response shall also be made for the stormwater management plans
and control portion, but shall not be required at the same time as the
aforementioned response.
   D.   Surety Required: The developer of any subdivision shall be required to
furnish to the village surety for one hundred percent (100%) of the costs of
the permanent erosion control measures as determined by the village.
   E.   Term Of Permit: The erosion, sediment and stormwater control permit
shall be issued for a period equal to that of the zoning permit. The permit for
projects not requiring a zoning permit shall be issued for a period not
exceeding two (2) years. In the event permanent ground cover has not been
established at the time of expiration of the permit, the permit holder shall be
required to submit a new application for an erosion, sediment and stormwater
control permit.
   F.   Conditions Of Permit: The erosion, sediment and stormwater control
permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following general conditions:
      1.   That written approval be obtained from the erosion control
administrator prior to making any modification to the approved erosion,
sediment and stormwater control plan as set forth in the permit; and
      2.   That all control measures required in the permit shall be installed;
and
      3.   That all control measures shall be maintained during construction;
and
      4.   Such other conditions as the erosion control administrator deems
appropriate.
   G.   Inspections:
      1.   Initial Inspection: Prior to initiating any land disturbing
activity, the permit holder shall install the control measures set forth in the
approved erosion control plan and request an inspection of the installed
control measures by the erosion control administrator. The erosion control
administrator shall perform the inspection within two (2) business days of
receipt of the inspection request. The erosion control administrator shall
determine whether the control measures conform to the permit application and
requirements of this chapter and approve or deny the commencement of the land
disturbing activity.
      2.   Final Inspection:
         a.   For projects with a disturbed area less than two (2) acres: Upon
completion of the permanent stormwater and erosion control measures and after
permanent ground cover is fully established, the applicant shall notify the
erosion control administrator the control measures are ready for final
inspection. If the inspection shows that the control measures and maintenance
plan comply with the standard in section
8-2-14-1, attachment A of this chapter, the erosion control administrator shall
issue a notice of permanent stormwater and erosion control measures. In the
case of subdivisions, said notice of permanent stormwater and erosion control
measures shall be issued to the applicant.
         b.   For projects with a disturbed area of two (2) acres or more: Upon
completion of the permanent stormwater and erosion control measures and after
permanent ground cover is fully established, the applicant shall provide a
certification letter from a registered Illinois professional engineer attesting
that the measures have been built substantially in accordance with the approved
plan. This letter shall be accompanied by two (2) stamped copies of the
approved construction plans for the permanent stormwater and erosion control
measures, with as built information so noted. Upon receipt of said
certification letter and stamped as built drawings, the erosion control
administrator shall issue a notice of permanent stormwater and erosion control.
In the case of subdivisions, said notice of permanent stormwater and erosion
control measures shall be issued to the applicant.
         c.   The erosion control administrator shall not issue a notice of
permanent stormwater and erosion control measures unless permanent ground cover
has been fully established.
   H.   Final Stabilization: Without exception, all disturbed areas must have
final stabilization within six (6) months of project completion or within six
(6) months of occupancy, whichever comes first. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord.
841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-9: MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES:
Anyone owning property with a permanent stormwater control measure existing
thereon and installed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain the control
measure so that it functions in compliance with the standards established
herein. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-10: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the erosion control
administrator, who shall make or cause to be made periodic inspections of all
work authorized by permits issued in accordance with this chapter to ensure
that said construction is in compliance with the provisions of the same. The
erosion control administrator shall make or cause to be made investigations of
violations of this chapter and shall cause any violations to be corrected. The
erosion control administrator shall prepare a noncompliance report setting
forth the violations to be corrected.
   B.   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the
issuance of a stop work order by the erosion control administrator when it is
found, from personal inspection or from competent evidence, that the rules,
regulations or standards under which said permit was issued are being violated.
   C.   1. All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in a
construction document box for inspection, at the applicant's expense. In
addition, permit holders shall maintain a list of the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of all contractors, subcontractors and property owners in the
construction document box.
      2.   The construction document box shall be securely mounted on a two by
four (2 x 4) and inserted into the ground not exceeding six feet (6') in
height. The construction document box shall be placed on the property where it
can be viewed from the road.
      3.   The erosion control administrator shall place a copy of any
inspection reports, stop work orders and noncompliance reports in the
construction document box after inspection. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord.
841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-11: PENALTIES:
   A.   This chapter shall be subject to the provisions and procedures
established in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code which provides an
opportunity for administrative payment of tickets for certain ordinance
violations (the "administrative ticket ordinance"). Any person violating this
chapter:
      1.   Shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00), with each day the
violation remains uncorrected constituting a separate offense, if a ticket
issued pursuant to the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to
the "Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village hall (216 Holland Road,
Germantown Hills, IL 61548) no more than thirty (30) days after issuance of the
ticket; or
      2.   Shall be fined four hundred dollars ($400.00), with each day the
violation remains uncorrected constituting a separate offense, if a ticket
issued pursuant to the administrative ticket ordinance procedures is paid to
the "Village Of Germantown Hills" at the village hall more than thirty (30)
days after issuance of the ticket, but before the village files an action for
violation of this chapter in the county circuit court; or
      3.   Shall be fined four hundred dollars ($400.00), with each day the
violation remains uncorrected constituting a separate offense, plus all
applicable court costs, if the village files an action for violation of this
chapter in the county circuit court. Such fine is in addition to any other
remedy provided by law.
   B.   Administrative tickets shall be issued in accordance with the
administrative ticket ordinance. In addition, a copy of any administrative
ticket issued shall be placed in the construction document box. (Ord. 607, 4-
24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-12: STOP WORK ORDER:
The violation of any of the terms of this chapter may result in the erosion
control administrator posting a stop work order for the project. If such stop
work order is posted, a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged
to the owner of the property. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-13: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeal Officer:
      1.   The appeal officer shall consider and fairly decide upon appeals of
any decision, order, or requirement of the erosion control administrator made
pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   The village president shall appoint the appeal officer for a term of
one year. The appeal officer appointed shall be a professional engineer,
licensed architect, licensed landscape architect, landscape contractor,
earthmoving contractor, homebuilder, or citizen who has extensive experience in
the control of stormwater and soil erosion.
   B.   Administrative Appeals Procedure:
      1.   Any person directly aggrieved by any decision, order, requirement,
or determination of the erosion control administrator made pursuant to this
chapter shall have the right to appeal such action to the appeal officer. Such
appeal shall be made within thirty five (35) days from the date of the action
appealed from, shall be filed in writing, and shall include a short, concise
statement of why the action is being appealed. The fee for such an appeal shall
be forty five dollars ($45.00) payable to the "Village Of Germantown Hills".
      2.   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the appeal officer shall set a
date for a public hearing. Such public hearing shall commence not sooner than
fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place
of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county, the fee for which shall be paid by the appealing party. The appeal
officer shall fairly decide the appeal within seven (7) days after the
conclusion of the public hearing. The appeal officer may affirm, modify or
reverse any appealed action.
   C.   Appeals To Court: Appeals from the decision of the appeal officer shall
be made in conformity with the provisions of the Illinois administrative review
law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. Copies of any orders or
proceedings ordered by the appellant shall be furnished to him/her at his/her
own cost. (Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-14: ATTACHMENTS:
8-2-14-1: ATTACHMENT A, STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER DESIGN ANALYSES:
   ATTACHMENT A
   VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS
   STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER DESIGN ANALYSES
The following are the minimum standard methods and procedures to be used to
comply with the stormwater design requirements of this chapter. If an applicant
determines that different methods are necessary based on site specific
conditions, the applicant must request approval from the erosion control
administrator to use other methods prior to submittal.
The design methods listed below are readily available in a number of computer
programs, including the soil conservation service's TR 20 (SCS), and WinTR-20
HEC1 and HEC-HMS or other municipally approved program. Additionally, a
simplified methodology which is based on the use of these methods is available
in TR 55 (SCS, 1986). TR 55 can be applied using either manual computations or
a computerized version.
   Rainfall Depth And Duration/Intensity Data
      Use data for Woodford County (Illinois state water survey, Bulletin 75).
   Storm Event Rainfall Runoff
      Use the SCS runoff curve number method to determine rainfall runoff depth
for the critical duration storm. Soil type information is available from the
SCS Woodford County soil survey, 1992.
   Storm Distribution (Cumulative Rainfall Versus Time)
      Rainfall should be distributed use the appropriate Illinois state water
survey circulare 173 Huff rainfall distrubution (Huff, 1990). Except that SCS
Type II distribution is acceptable with TR-55.
      Use the SCS dimensionless hydrograph. See SCS (1974) for information
regarding this procedure.
      As a substitute for detailed hydrograph analysis, TR 55 (SCS, 1986) can
be used, either manually or computer program.
   Storage Routing (Detention Pond Analysis)
      Use the continuity equation, also known as the modified-Puls and storage
indication methods. As a substitute for detailed storage routing of a
hydrograph, TR 55 (SACS, 1986) can be used, either manually or computer
program. If TR 55 is used and a detention basin with a two-stage outlet control
structure including a rectangular weir and/or orifice outlet is included as
part of the control measures, use the attached detention basin outlet worksheet
to determine and present the structure design information. (Ord. 607, 4-24-
2008; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-14-2: ATTACHMENT B, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL CRITERIA AND
SPECIFICATIONS:
   VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS EROSION AND
   SEDIMENT CONTROL CRITERIA AND SPECIFICATIONS
There are three ways to accomplish urban soil erosion and sedimentation
control:
   •   Allow erosion to take place and then control sediment before it leaves a
site.
   •   Stop erosion in the watershed (project area), by soil stabilization or
run off control measures.
   •   A combination of the two (most desirable).
The following is a list of common measures that can be used to control erosion
and sediment. It is by no means an exhaustive list. Some standard drawings are
included in this attachment. Additional drawings, standards and specifications
can be found in the Illinois Urban Manual, IEPA and USDA, NRCS, 1995 and the
Illinois Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sediment Control, The Urban
Committee Of The Association Of Illinois Soil And Water Conservation Districts,
Revised July 1988.
SEDIMENT CONTROL
   A.   Perimeter Sediment Control Measures: To be installed between disturbed
areas (including stockpiles) and property lines or drainageways in order to
protect off site areas. Control measures should be installed on the down slope
sides of the disturbed areas where runoff will leave the site.
Slope Range Control Measure Comments
Slope Range  Control Measure                  Comments
             Vegetative (grass) filter
Less than 2% strips, no minimum width          
             requirement
             Vegetative (grass) filter        Size would be increased in
2% to <5%    strips, 10 ft. wide, minimum     proportion to the drainage area
             (detail B-1)                     and slope
                                              Drainage area less than 1/2 acre
"            Filter fence (detail B-2)        per 100 ft.; see standard for
                                              spacing criteria
                                              For use in small drainage areas;
"            Straw bales (detail B-3)         see standard for spacing
                                              criteria; maximum life is 3
                                              months
             Vegetative buffer area (other    Minimizing disturbed area is
"            than grass), about 50 ft. wide,  desirable; increase buffer size
             minimum                          in proportion to the drainage
                                              area and slope
"            Sediment basin                   Can handle sediment from a larger
                                              area
             Vegetative (grass) filter        Size would be increased in
5% to <10%   strips, 20 ft. wide, minimum     proportion to the drainage area
             (detail B-1)                     and slope
                                              Drainage area less than 1/2 acre
"            Filter fence (detail B-2)        per 100 ft.; see standard for
                                              spacing criteria
                                              For use in small drainage areas;
"            Straw bales (detail B-3)         see standard for spacing
                                              criteria; maximum life is 3
                                              months
             Vegetative buffer area (other    Minimizing disturbed area is
"            than grass), about 100 ft. wide, desirable; increase buffer size
             minimum                          in proportion to the drainage
                                              area and slope
"            Sediment basin                   Can handle sediment from a larger
                                              area
                                              Drainage area less than 1/2 acre
>10%         Filter fence (detail B-2)        per 100 ft.; see standard for
                                              spacing criteria
"            Sediment basin                   Can handle sediment from a larger
                                              area
 
   B.   Inlet Sediment Control: To be installed around storm sewer or other
inlets to prevent sediment from entering the system. There are many different
types depending on the type of inlet. Common measures include:
      Inlet protection excavated drain (detail B-4)
      Inlet protection block and gravel (detail B-5)
      Inlet protection stacked straw bales (detail B-6)
   C.   Mud And Dust Control: To prevent mud and dust from leaving the site.
Common measures include:
      Stabilized construction entrance (detail B-7)
      Dust control, see the standards and specifications
RUNOFF CONTROL
   A.   Concentrated Flow Areas: Temporary erosion control measures should be
installed to protect drainageways such as road ditches and waterways until the
area is permanently stabilized. Common measures include:
Rock checks for waterways (detail B-8)
Fabric checks for waterways (detail B-9)
Erosion blanket
   B.   Outlet Protection: All outlets should be stabilized to prevent
downstream areas from erosion. Common measures include:
Pipe outlet to channel (detail B-10)
Pipe outlet to flat area
   C.   Diversions: Surface runoff from adjacent areas should be diverted
around disturbed areas to stable outlets to reduce erosion due to surface
runoff.
SOIL STABILIZATION
(Recommended seeding dates for Central Illinois are shown in bold.)
   A.   Vegetative Soil Cover:
1) Temporary Seeding: Provides a temporary quick cover to control erosion when
permanent seeding is not desired or the time of year is inappropriate. (Early
spring - September 30)
2) Permanent Seeding: Provides permanent vegetative cover to control erosion,
filters sediment from water. May be part of final landscape plan. (Spring
seeding: early spring - May 15) (Fall seeding: August 1 - September 10)
3) Dormant Seeding: Same as permanent seeding except seeding is done during
dormant season. Higher rates of seed application are required. If no mulch is
applied, then perimeter controls should be maintained until the vegetation is
established. (November 15 - March 1)
4) Sodding: Quick, permanent cover to control erosion. Quick ways to establish
vegetative filter strip. Can be used on steep slopes or in drainageways where
seeding may be difficult. (Anytime, except when ground is frozen.)
5) Ground Cover: Provides ground cover, shrubs and trees in addition to
permanent vegetation. May be used as part of a final landscape plan along with
shrubs and trees.
   B.   Nonvegetative Soil Cover:
1) Mulching: Added insurance of a successful temporary or permanent seeding.
Controls unwanted vegetation and preserves moisture. Provides cover where
vegetation cannot be established.
2) Aggregate Cover: Provides soil cover on roads and parking lots and areas
where vegetation cannot be established. Prevents mud from being picked up and
transported off site.
3) Paving: Provides permanent cover on parking lots, roads or other areas where
vegetation cannot be established.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1225.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1227.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1229.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1231.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1233.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1235.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1237.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1239.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1241.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1243.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1245.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1247.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1249.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1251.gif]
(Ord. 607, 4-24-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
8-2-14-3: ATTACHMENT C, TECHNICAL GUIDANCE FOR MEETING VOLUME CONTROL
REQUIREMENTS:
   ATTACHMENT C
   VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS
   TECHNICAL GUIDANCE FOR MEETING VOLUME CONTROL
   REQUIREMENTS
Volume Control Practices Overview
   Volume control practices utilize designated infiltration areas or structures
to capture a portion of stormwater runoff (i.e., the volume control storage)
and retain it onsite such that the runoff is able to: 1) percolate through (or
into) the underlying soils; 2) evaporate; 3) dissipate through
evapotranspiration by plants; or 4) drain back slowly into the minor system via
underdrains. The process of percolating runoff through the soil is an effective
mechanism for both site runoff volume reduction and pollutant removal.
Pollutants such as fine sediment, nutrients, bacteria, and organic materials
can be filtered, absorbed by soil particles, or utilized by plants, thus
providing a water quality benefit.
Site Feasibility Assessment
   A site feasibility assessment that examines site limitations is necessary to
determine the appropriate approach for volume control practice design. Volume
control practices should be located on soils that are significantly permeable
to ensure that the captured volume of runoff can infiltrate and dewater the
structure at a minimum rate of 0.5 inches per hour. Other considerations, such
as the groundwater table and discharge of volume control practice overflows,
should be examined and used in the design. Installing retention based volume
control practices within a floodway is prohibited due to the risk of washout
from deep and swift flood waters in these flood prone areas.
Soil Suitability
   Retention-based practices require soils with appropriate infiltration
capacity. The infiltration rate is strongly influenced by the proportion of
sand, silt, and clay (texture). Predominately clay soils have infiltration
rates that are too low (in inches per hour) to accommodate the volume of volume
control practices and predominately sandy soils can infiltrate runoff too
rapidly and adversely impact groundwater. In addition to infiltration capacity,
the soils must be free of contaminants, which can also adversely impact
groundwater. Therefore, sites with contaminated soils are not suitable for
volume control practices.
   Onsite soils must be tested in order to determine if they are appropriate
for volume control practices. Testing must include a determination of the soil
type(s) and the infiltration capacity, including the capacity of the soils at
the base of the structure.
   Soil borings or pits should be taken in the location of the proposed volume
control practice to verify soil particle size distribution (textural class) and
to determine the depth to groundwater and bedrock. The number of soil borings
should be selected as needed to determine soil conditions. The minimum depth of
the soil borings or pits must be five feet (5') below the bottom elevation of
the proposed volume control practice. This serves the purpose of determining
the location of the seasonally-high groundwater table. Infiltration tests
should be conducted at the proposed bottom elevation of the volume control
practice. The infiltration rate must be measured with a double-ring
infiltrometer and meet the requirements of ASTM D3385. For sites where the
double-ring infiltrometer test is impractical, the single-ring infiltrometer
test may be used, provided that the testing follows the procedure contained on
Page 28 of the City of Chicago Stormwater Ordinance Manual (March 2014).
   Soils must have sufficient infiltration capacity to accept the volume
control storage. The infiltration range of onsite soils for volume control
practices should be between 0.5 and 2.41 inches per hour. These restrictions
limit the use of volume control practices to soils with textures of sandy loam,
loam, silt loam, silt, most sandy clay loams, and only some clay loams and
silty clay loams.
   In the event that a natural depression is proposed to be used as a volume
control practice, the applicant must demonstrate the following information:
      1.   Infiltration capacity of the soils under existing conditions
(inches/hour);
      2   Existing drawdown time for the high water level (HWL) and a natural
overflow elevation; and
      3.   Operation of the natural depression under post-development
conditions mimics the hydrology of the system under pre-development conditions.
   Poor infiltration rates (< 0.5 inches/hour) are common in the Village of
Germantown Hills and do not prevent the use of retention-based practices. If
onsite soils do not provide a suitable infiltration rate, the design of the
volume control practice should incorporate the use of an underdrain system. As
described in the next section, only certain site constraints (contaminated
soils or high groundwater levels) are acceptable reasons for not providing
retention-based practices.
Contaminated Sites
   There are sites, such as those previously used as gas stations or sites with
known contaminants (based on a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment), where it
would be impractical to use retention-based practices. For these sites, the
volume control requirements can be met by providing flow-through practices or a
reduction in impervious area.
Groundwater Analysis
   An investigation into the location of the seasonally-high groundwater table
must be carried out in order to avoid groundwater contamination. In combined
sewer areas, the seasonally-high groundwater table must be at a minimum of
three and a half feet (3.5') below the bottom of the proposed volume control
practice to allow for treatment of collected runoff prior to it entering the
groundwater system (two feet (2') in separate sewer areas). If soil borings or
pits do not show the seasonally-high groundwater table to be within 3.5 (or 2)
feet of the bottom of the proposed volume control practice, then further
investigation is not required.
   For instances where the seasonally-high groundwater table is within three
and a half (3.5') (or two (2)) feet of the bottom of the proposed volume
control practice, then the proposed volume control practice must be relocated
or redesigned such that a minimum of three and a half (3.5) (or two (2)) feet
is maintained.
Volume Control Practices for Site Development
   The Village Ordinance requires that volume control practices must be sized
to retain and/or infiltrate the volume control storage. The volume control
storage is equal to one inch (1") of runoff from the impervious surfaces of the
development. The volume control practices can include:
      Infiltration Trenches*
      Infiltration Basins*
      Porous Pavement (storage in the voids below the pavement)
      Bio-Retention Systems*
      Dry Wells
      Open Channel Practices Fitted With Check Dams*
      Storage Below the Outlet of a Site Detention facility*
      Constructed Wetlands that have Forebays, Deepwater Zones, and Micropools
   As discussed above, pretreatment measures to protect the functionality of
volume control practices are required where necessary. The volume control
practices marked with an asterisk (*) will usually require pretreatment. A
summary of the pretreatment measures that may be used for various volume
control practices is shown below:
Volume Control Practice Pretreatment Measures
Volume Control Practice                Pretreatment Measures
                                       Level spreader must be installed where
                                       runoff enters the facility as shallow
                                       concentrated flow to distribute the
                                       runoff as sheet flow over the entire
                                       facility.
                                       Vegetated filter strip, grass-lined
                                       channel, or sump must be installed
                                       upstream of the facility to filter out
Bioretention Facility                  settleable particle and floatable
                                       materials.
                                       Where inflow velocities are greater than
                                       3 ft/s, a vegetated filter strip or rock
                                       outlet protection must be installed to
                                       prevent erosion and distribute flows
                                       across the facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drianage area must be stabilized.
                                       Level spreader must be installed where
                                       runoff enters the facility as shallow
                                       concentrated flow to distribute the
Bioswale                               runoff as sheet flow over the entire
                                       facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Where inflow velocities are greater than
                                       3 ft/s, rock outlet protection should be
                                       provided to prevent erosion and
Constructed Wetlands                   distribute the flows into the facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Sediment forebay shall be installed
                                       upstream of the facility.
                                       Filter screens must be installed on all
                                       roof drains directed toward the
                                       facility.
Drywell                                For facilities that include inflow
                                       pipes, sump and/or trash rack shall be
                                       installed at manhole immediately
                                       upstream of facility.
Green Roof                             No pretreatment measures required.
                                       Level spreader must be installed where
                                       runoff enters the facility as shallow
                                       concentrated flow to distribute the
                                       runoff as sheet flow over the entire
                                       facility.
                                       Vegetated filter strip, grass-lined
                                       channel, or sump must be installed
                                       upstream of the trench to filter out
Infiltration Trench                    settleable particle and floatable
                                       materials.
                                       Where inflow velocities are greater than
                                       3 ft/s, a vegetated filter strip or rock
                                       outlet protection should be provided to
                                       prevent erosion and distribute flows
                                       across the facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Vegetated filter strip, grass-lined
                                       channel, or sump must be installed
                                       upstream of the facility to filter out
Permeable Pavement                     settleable particle and flotable
                                       materials.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Where inflow velocities are greater than
                                       3 ft/s, rock outlet protection should be
                                       provided to prevent erosion and
Storage Below Detention Basin Outlet   distribute the flows into the facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Sediment forebay shall be installed
                                       upstream of the facility.
                                       Level spreader must be installed where
                                       runoff enters the facility as shallow
                                       concentrated flow to distribute the
Vegetated Filter Strip (Flow- Through) runoff as sheet flow over the entire
                                       facility.
                                       Vegetated portions of the contributing
                                       drainage area must be stabilized.
                                       Filter screens must be installed on all
                                       roof drains directed toward the
                                       facility.
Water Reuse System                     For facilities that include inflow
                                       pipes, sump and/or trash rack shall be
                                       installed at manhole immediately
                                       upstream of facility.
 
   Depending on the volume control practice, the storage volume may consist of
surface storage, storage in the voids of growing media, and/or storage in the
void space of aggregate. The aggregate layer may be incorporated into a number
of practices ranging from infiltration trenches to porous pavements. Many
volume control practices are in the form of reservoirs filled with coarse
aggregate with no outlet beneath a vegetated depressional area (such as with
bio-retention systems). When coarse aggregate is used, the capacity of the
reservoir is determined by the void space of the coarse aggregate used in the
system. If the infiltration rate of the underlying soil is less than 0.5
inches/hour, an underdrain must be used to drain the accumulated volume of
runoff.
   There can be a great deal of flexibility in the types of practices selected
as well as the location and configuration of these practices onsite. For
example, the dimensions (length, width, and depth) of these practices can be
manipulated such that they can take on irregular shapes, thereby allowing for
easier integration into the site design, such as along property lines, in
parking lot islands, or unusable portions of the site. Additionally,
underground storage can be provided using the stone voids under permeable
pavement, and other systems can be designed to function below impervious areas.
Volume Control Practice Sizing and Drainage Criteria
   Calculate Required Volume Control Storage
   Determine the portion of the volume control storage that will need to be
treated with volume control practices. The volume control storage is equal to
one inch (1") of runoff from the impervious surfaces of the development. This
volume is best represented in cubic feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1288.png]
   The dimensions of the volume control practices will be a combination of the
depth and surface area available to retain the volume control storage. In order
to minimize the footprint of the practice, the allowable depth is often the
limiting factor. The maximum allowable depth is determined by the depth
necessary to maintain a three and a half (3.5') foot separation from the
seasonally high groundwater level, bedrock, or other limiting layer (three and
a half (3.5') feet in combined sewer areas, two feet (2') in separate sewer
areas). The surface area of the volume control practice is determined using the
design volume and final depth values.
   All volume control practices must have quantifiable storage space to retain
the calculated volume control storage. Depending on the volume control
practice, the storage volume may consist of surface storage, storage in the
voids of growing media, and/or storage in the void space of aggregate.
   The capacity of an aggregate-filled reservoir to retain the volume control
storage should be based on the volume of void space (% porosity) of the coarse
aggregate used in the system, where the volume of voids is equal to the volume
control storage. If test data is not available, use thirty-six percent (36%)
porosity for the coarse aggregate. The size of an aggregate-filled reservoir
can be computed by converting the volume control storage to reservoir volume:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1290.png]
   Perforated underdrain is required for each volume control retention-based
practice due to the region's typical clayey soils where infiltration rates are
assumed to be low. In most cases, a required underdrain should be no larger
than 4-inches in diameter to encourage retention, have an observation well
installed at the terminal end, be spaced no more than thirty feet (30') on
center across a retention field area, and laid with the perforations on the
bottom of the pipe. Void volume credit available below the invert of the
perforated underdrain must be limited to no more than 12-inches and will be
credited at one hundred percent (100%) toward volume control requirements. Void
volumes below the underdrain invert must extend across the entire volume
control storage system, and not limited to only an underdrain trenched area.
Void volume above the invert of the underdrain up to the ground surface will be
deducted by a factor of fifty percent (50%) to account for losses out of the
underdrain. When calculating the storage volume in aggregate a void volume of
0.36 is used. A void ratio of 0.25 is used for growing media.
   Volume provided above the ground surface will be limited in depth to 12-
inches of wetland ponding and credited at one hundred percent (100%). For
calculating surface volume control storage, the average end area method between
the ground elevation and the elevation of the overflow grate/outlet pipe/check
dam is recommended. Wet ponding depths above one foot (1') of depth are not
considered volume control and are considered impervious areas.
   For more information, see the volume control practice details located in
MWRD Technical Guidance Manual (TGM), Appendix C. The complete Manual is
available at: http://www.mwrd.org/irj/go/km/docs/_documents/MWRD/internet/
protecting_the_environment/Stormwater_Manageme_nt/htm/WMO/
Technical_Guidance_Manual.htm
   If high infiltrating soils are suspected, provide a detailed soils report
documenting the additional in situ percolation tests to confirm actual
infiltration rates and to allow for design of a volume control facility without
underdrains and take credit for additional infiltrative release.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b6ed54ee5b335f83bfc39ab71d0ac19f0bb9431d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1292.png]
Volume Control Practice Figure - Surface Storage, Media Storage and Aggregate
Storage
   Volume Control Practice Site Location
   Determine how volume control practices will fit into the development site
design (on available pervious area of the development), and select the
appropriate volume control practice. Information collected during the site
feasibility assessment should identify the potential for multiple volume
control practices versus relying on a single volume control practice. Again,
volume control practices should be located on soils that are significantly
permeable to ensure the captured volume control storage can infiltrate and
dewater the structure at a minimum rate of 0.5 inches per hour. If these soils
don't exist on site, then an underdrain should be included in the design.
   The following should be considered when determining the location of volume
control practices:
      1.   Conveyance path of the runoff to the practice;
      2.   Overland flow path from the practice to the main drainage system;
      3.   Practices should be a minimum of ten feet (10') from a building
foundation (unless waterproofed), twenty feet (20') from a sanitary sewer, and
one hundred feet (100') from potable water wells and septic tanks;
      4.   Practices should not be installed on slopes greater than fifteen
(15);
      5.   Practices should not be installed above soils that are considered
fill; and
      6.   A minimum setback of twenty feet (20') from a road's gravel shoulder
is required to ensure that the practices do not cause frost heaving.
   Volume Control Storage Design
   The volume control practice should be filled with coarse aggregate that
meets IDOT Section CA-7 quality and gradation. Other types of coarse aggregate
will be permitted, provided that it is crushed angular stone that is clean and
washed free of fines. A void ratio of 0.36 is used when calculating the storage
volume in aggregate. For growing media, a void ratio of 0.25 applies. A layer
of choking stone or filter fabric must separate the growing media from the
coarse aggregate, and/or sand layers. No filter fabric shall be placed along
the bottom of the trench between the volume control media and the native
subsoil. Filter fabric must wrap along the trenching sides to prevent soils
migration from clogging the system. The filter fabric should meet the
requirements of the Illinois Urban Manual Material Specifications 592 for
geotextile fabric.
   The storage reservoir should have direct access for maintenance activities.
An observation well (e.g., a perforated PVC pipe that leads to the bottom of
the structure) is needed to enable inspectors to visually monitor the drawdown
rate of the water. For more information, see the observation well detail
located in the MWRD Technical Guidance Manual (TGM), Appendix C. One well per
40,000 ft2 of practice surface area is required. Where infiltration rates of
the soil are less than 0.5 inches per hour, volume control practices must
incorporate an underdrain pipe that will allow the structure to be dewatered
within seventy-two (72) hours or less, if the structure becomes clogged. An
underdrain can be a perforated pipe system in a gravel bed, installed at the
base of the structure (minimum of two inches (2") and maximum of twelve inches
(12") from the bottom) to collect and remove filtered runoff. The period of
inundation is defined as the time from the high water level in the practice to
one to two inches (2") above the bottom of the facility. This criterion was
established to provide:
      1.   Wet-dry cycling between rainfall events;
      2.   Unsuitable mosquito breeding habitat;
      3.   Suitable habitat for vegetation;
      4.   Aerobic conditions; and
      5.   Storage for back-to-back precipitation events.
   Additional details and specifications for the design of volume control
practices are provided in this article and in the MWRD Technical Guidance
Manual (TGM), Appendix C:
      Underdrain
      Coarse aggregate
      Filter fabric
      Monitoring well
      Turf fields
   Overflow Path From Volume Control Practice
   In addition to a conveyance design that routes flows to a volume control
practice, an equally important consideration is a conveyance design that routes
flows from the practice back to the main drainage system. The overflow path is
a necessary component designed to prevent structural damage to the volume
control practice from localized flooding in the event that the practice does
not dewater fast enough to prevent an overflow. Overflows can occur as a result
of clogging or during long-duration, high-intensity storm events that raise the
groundwater level to an elevation that impedes infiltration. Therefore,
overflow designs should route excess flows through a stabilized discharge point
that allows these flows to be directed back to the main drainage system in a
controlled manner that will not cause scour.
   Protection Of Volume Control Facilities During Construction
   Volume control practices are susceptible to failure during construction and
therefore it is important that staging, construction practices, and erosion and
sediment control practices all be considered during their installation. To
protect the long-term functionality of volume control practices, the following
measures should be addressed in the construction sequencing, general notes,
and/or soil erosion and sediment control plan for a development:
      Volume control practices should be installed toward the end of the
construction period.
      The contributing drainage area must be stabilized prior to the
installation of the volume control practice.
      Soil compaction shall be minimized as much as possible during site
grading. Appropriate measures (such as fencing) should be used to prevent heavy
construction equipment traffic from accessing the area.
      Volume control facilities must be protected with a double-row of silt
fence (or equivalent measure) during construction. The two (2) layers of silt
fence should be placed at least five feet (5') apart and must follow the
Illinois Urban Manual standards.
      In general, volume control facilities should not be used as temporary
sediment traps during construction. For sites where this is not practicable,
special construction notes and/or details are required to protect the
functionality of the facility.
Protection Of Volume Control Practice Infiltration Capacity: Pretreatment
   Pretreatment is critical for runoff entering volume control practices in
order to prevent clogging within the volume control practice. This reduces
maintenance and also provides an added level of protection against groundwater
contamination. Pretreatment of runoff entering a volume control practice is
strongly recommended to protect the functionality of the structure. Where
practicable, flow-through practices such as vegetated swales or filter strips
should be used to meet the pretreatment requirement. Additionally, upland
drainage should be properly stabilized both during and after construction to
reduce erosion, thus minimizing the sediment loads being delivered to the
structure. The use of trash racks or downspout screens will also satisfy the
pretreatment requirements in some cases, as these measures prevent debris from
clogging the volume control practice. (Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
CHAPTER 3
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Short Title
8-3-2: Purpose
8-3-3: Interpretation
8-3-4: Definitions
8-3-5: Permit Requirements
8-3-6: Exempt Signs
8-3-7: Permitted Signs In Zoning Districts
8-3-8: Prohibited Signs
8-3-9: Restrictions Generally
8-3-10: Additional Standards, Restrictions And Conditions
8-3-11: Aggregate Sign Display Area Limitations In Commercial And Industrial
Districts
8-3-12: Nonconforming Signs
8-3-13: Unlawful Signs
8-3-14: Variances
8-3-15: Penalties
8-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SIGN CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN
HILLS, ILLINOIS, and may be cited and referred to herein as "this chapter".
(Ord. 688, 7-21-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
8-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety
and welfare by regulating existing and proposed outdoor signs and advertising
of all types. This chapter is intended to:
   A.   Reduce sign or advertising distractions;
   B.   Reduce visual and physical obstructions;
   C.   Prevent traffic accidents or other potential hazards;
   D.   Maintain the current rural character of the village by regulating the
number, size and quality of signs available to commercial and industrial
entities; and
   E.   Establish and preserve an aesthetically pleasing environment, in part
through prevention of the visual clutter caused by signs, which is common in
more populated and developed communities. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Authority To Interpret: This chapter shall be construed by the zoning
officer, the zoning board of appeals, and the courts in a manner designed to
give effect to its stated purposes.
   B.   Conflicting Provisions: If any portion of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire safety, or
other ordinance of the village, the provision that establishes the higher
standard shall prevail. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the following words shall have the following meanings:
A-FRAME: A portable sign that is intended to be used by an existing business to
advertise business specials, menu choices, and similar matters relating
directly to a purpose of the business.
APARTMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign identifying an apartment building or
buildings with more than four (4) units.
ATTACHED SIGN: A sign attached to a building wall, the generally vertical plane
of a mansard type roof, the face of a canopy, portico or marquee, a fence, or
an electronic scoreboard.
BALLFIELD: The enclosed field and surrounding fence of an athletic facility
attached to or within school property.
BANNER SIGN: A sign that may possess colors, characters, letters,
illustrations, or ornamentations and is intended to be hung without frames made
of plastic or fabric of any kind.
BILLBOARD: A free standing sign, which is located off premises, used for
advertising.
BUS STOP OR BENCH TYPE SIGN: A sign attached to or painted upon a bus stop
bench or other type of bench.
BUSINESS CENTER: A single premises, or multiple premises in a single business
development, containing three (3) or more businesses sharing a common building
entrance or private parking lot.
BUSINESS CENTER COMPREHENSIVE SIGN PLAN: An integrated signage plan for a
business center.
CHANGE PANEL SIGN: A sign designed to permit an immediate change of copy which
may be other than the name of the business. A change panel sign shall be
limited to either an attached sign or a ground sign.
CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD SIGN: A sign attached to the exterior of a church or
located elsewhere on the church premises used to identify the church name and
to indicate the services and/or other activities of the church.
CHURCH IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign attached to the exterior of a church used to
identify the church name.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign used during construction of new buildings
or reconstruction of or additions to existing buildings, such as those
identifying the project and denoting the owner, architect, engineer, contractor
and/or financing institutions of the project.
CREDIT CARD OR CHARGE PLATE SIGN: A sign advertising the acceptance of, or
being a replica of, any credit card or charge plate, whether national, local or
otherwise. The sign shall be subject to the standards applicable to the type of
sign used for this advertising purpose.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which indicates a direction for movement of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign containing the names of more than one business or
occupation within a single sign.
DURABLE MATERIALS: Materials capable of not less than a five (5) year life
without visible deterioration.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD/LED: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an
electronic image and/or video, which may or may not include text. Such signs
include any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a
sign message or messages in text form, or uses electronic means to change the
sign message wherein the sequence of messages and the rate if electronically
programmed can be modified by electronic processes.
ELECTRONIC SCOREBOARD: A sign, or portion of a sign, that, at least in part,
uses changing lights to form numbers and/or text to designate a score.
FEATHER FLAG: A free standing feather like structure made of cloth, canvas,
plastic or other flexible material typically constructed of a single plastic or
metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached pennant that is vertically
elongated and attached to the shaft that moves or is designed or intended to
move or blow in the wind.
FENCE: A barrier, railing, or other upright structure, made of wood or wire,
enclosing an area of ground to mark a boundary or to control access.
FLASHING SIGN: An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is
not steady or on which colors change.
FLUTTERING SIGN: A sign that flutters and includes pennants, banners,
nongovernmental flags or other flexible material that moves with the wind or by
some artificial means.
FRONTAGE: The length of a lot on its side bordering a street. A lot bordering
more than one street is considered to have separate frontage for each street
bordered.
GARAGE OR YARD SALE SIGN: A sign used to advertise a sale of personal property
from a home, but not for the purpose of deriving steady income.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION PRICE SIGN: A sign containing thereon the price per
gallon of gasoline or diesel fuel sold at the station. The words "gas",
"ethyl", "self-service", "miniservice", "regular", "premium", "diesel" or
"unleaded" or similar matter, or a combination thereof, also may be placed on
the sign.
GRAND OPENING; ANNIVERSARY SIGN: A sign advertising the opening of a new
business or the yearly commemoration of the opening of the business, which may
include banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, flags, streamers, strings of light
bulbs, or other moving devices, and may also include inflatable signs, balloons
or other air or gas filled devices.
GROUND SIGN: A detached sign on the same lot as the use it advertises which has
its bottom portion erected upon or supported by the ground, a ground planter
box or other supports. Any sign which meets the definition of a "pole sign"
shall not be considered a ground sign.
HANGING SIGN: A sign hanging entirely beneath a canopy, portico or marquee.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN: A sign identifying the type of business offered in a
residence.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign that is illuminated by light sources mounted on or
in the sign or at some other location.
LOT: A parcel, tract, plot, site or area of land accessible by means of a
street or other permanently reserved principal means of access. It may be a
single parcel separately described in a deed or plat that is recorded in the
office of the county recorder of deeds, or it may include parts of or a
combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one.
MOVING SIGN: A sign all or any part of which moves by any means. Such sign
includes a fluttering sign.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign legally erected under the previously existing sign
ordinance of the village but that does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign that advertises products, services or businesses
which are not located or offered for sale on the same lot, building or premises
as the sign.
ON SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN: An informational sign located on a commercial or
industrial site which gives parking, fire protection, traffic flow (other than
directional signs), height clearance, pedestrian or other similar information
and which does not advertise the business or use located on the site, and any
signs required to be posted relating to self- service gasoline stations.
PERMANENT WINDOW SIGN: A sign of durable construction materials that is
permanently affixed to either side of the glass of an exterior door or window.
For the purpose of this chapter, a glass brick wall shall be deemed a window.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or entity of any kind.
POLE BANNER: A banner sign that is attached to the supporting standard for a
streetlight, a utility pole or other similar structure.
POLE SIGN: A detached sign located on the same lot as the use it advertises
which is supported by one or more stationary supports longer than three feet
(3') in height, where the bottom of the sign is at least one-half (1/2) as high
as the total sign height. Any sign which meets this definition shall not be
considered a ground sign.
POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign advocating or opposing any political
proposition or candidate for public office.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign which is not permanently mounted to a pole, building, or
foundation.
PREMISES: That portion of a lot or building occupied by a single occupant,
exclusive of common area, if any, shared with adjacent occupants.
PYLON SIGN: A sign used to advertise a shopping center development and its
related businesses.
REAL ESTATE DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign providing directions to property for
rental, lease or sale.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign pertaining only to the prospective rental, lease or
sale of the property on which it is located.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected on any part of a roof, or on top of a marquee, canopy
or portico.
SEASONAL DISPLAY: Decorations or displays celebrating or denoting religious
holidays or events, the seasons of the year, state and national holidays and
similar occasions.
SIGN: A device or a structure, or part of a structure, including structural
trim, which displays or upon which is displayed any colors, message, name or
symbol of any kind for the purpose of advertising, announcing, directing or
attracting attention from the outside of a building. A cross or other religious
symbol on a religious building shall not be considered a sign. Sign supports
are not considered a part of the sign.
SIGN AREA: The area of the sign face, including structural trim. If a sign or
letters are attached to a building or suspended in any manner whereby there is
no apparent trim or confining border, the sign area shall be computed by
drawing imaginary straight lines around generally rectangular margins and
measuring the area so encompassed by these lines. Square footage restrictions
in sign area shall be interpreted as applying to each sign face, e.g., a ten
(10) square foot restriction means ten (10) square feet per sign face.
SIGN FACE: Any surface of a sign upon, against or through which the advertising
message is displayed or illustrated on the sign; provided, that the ends, or
thickness, of a sign shall not be considered as a separate sign face unless an
advertising message is conveyed thereon.
SIGN HEIGHT: The height of a sign measured from the top of the sign structure
to the surrounding elevation at the base of the sign structure; provided,
however, that if a sign is mounted on a berm, the sign height shall be measured
from the base of the berm.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The sign and all parts associated with its construction.
SIGN SUPPORTS: All devices by which a sign is held up, including, for example,
poles, braces, guys and anchors.
SPECIAL SIGN: A sign used for holidays, public demonstrations or the promotion
of civic welfare or charitable organizations and not for the advertisement of
any product or business.
STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and
platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign identifying an entrance to a
residential subdivision, including the subdivision name and/or street names
within the subdivision.
SUBDIVISION REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary real estate sign advertising an
entire residential or commercial subdivision.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended for a limited or intermittent period of
display. A sign to be hung with frames made of plastic, fabric of any kind,
wood, or metal that may possess colors, characters, letters, illustrations, or
ornamentations.
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN: A temporary sign of paper, cardboard, canvas, cloth or
other nondurable materials affixed to the inside of an exterior window or glass
door.
UNLAWFUL SIGN: A sign which does not currently meet the requirements of this
chapter and any amendments hereto, and which did not meet the requirements of
the regulations in effect at the time it was erected.
UTILITY IMPROVEMENT SIGN: A temporary sign used to advertise a utility company
and its utility improvement project during: a) construction of a new
subdivision or b) the improvement or expansion of a utility in an existing
subdivision.
VENDING MACHINE SIGN: A sign affixed to or part of a vending machine such as
those machines that sell and dispense soft drinks, snacks and cigarettes.
VILLAGE PROVIDED SIGN: A sign authorized by the Village to be erected on
private commercial/industrial property for the purpose of identifying and
providing direction to businesses that are not located on Route 116.
WALL: That part of a building from its location on the ground to the lowest
part of the related roofline; provided, however, that the generally vertical
plane of a mansard type roof shall be considered as part of the wall of a
building. Wall area shall be calculated using a flat plane projection of the
building elevation from one end of the building to the other. Vertical height
of a wall shall be measured from the grade line to the lower roofline.
(Ord. 688, 7-21-2011; amd. Ord. 704, 6-28-2012; Ord. 743, 2-26-2015; Ord. 790,
10-26-2017; Ord. 808, 8-16-2018; Ord. 853, 11-17-2022; Ord. 878, 1-16-2025)
8-3-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: A sign permit is required for the
construction, installation, erection, relocation or alteration of any sign,
except those signs that are otherwise exempted under this chapter, and except
painting, repainting, cleaning, and other normal repair and maintenance of a
sign structure. In addition, the following signs shall be exempt from the
permit requirements of this section:
      Garage and yard sale signs.
      Political signs.
      Real estate signs.
      Temporary window signs.
      Vending machine signs.
      Village provided signs.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a sign permit shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer by the owner of the sign or his agent. The application
shall contain the following information, as noted on the Village sign permit
form:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the sign, and
agent, if any.
      2.   Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected.
      3.   Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures,
property lines and right-of-way lines.
      4.   Two (2) prints or scale drawings of the plans and specifications
indicating sign materials, design, dimensions (including square footage area),
structural supports, electrical components, and the method of construction and
attachment to the buildings or in the ground. Plans shall show the location of
the sign relative to the ground line and/or roofline as applicable. Plans shall
also show proposed landscaping, if applicable.
      5.   Name of the person erecting the sign.
      6.   Evidence of written consent of the owner of the building, structure
or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
      7.   Dollar amount of the installed cost of the sign.
      8.   Such other information as the Zoning Officer shall require to show
full compliance with this chapter.
      9.   Type of sign and sign structure being considered for permit in
accordance with this chapter.
      10.   Statement as to whether or not other signs currently exist on the
property.
      11.   A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with
the locations and square footage area of all existing signs on the same
premises, if any.
      12.   If the sign is to be illuminated, a statement from the sign company
or owner shall be attached to the application stating the measured light
intensity and that the illumination is in conformance with the requirements
specified by this chapter and the Village zoning ordinance.
   C.   Business Center Comprehensive Sign Plan:
      1.   No permit shall be issued for a sign to be located in a business
center until a comprehensive sign plan has been approved for the center and the
sign complies with the provisions thereof.
      2.   Application for approval of a comprehensive sign plan shall be made
in writing to the Planning Commission on a form and in a manner prescribed
thereby.
      3.   The application shall include a format for all signs to be used in
the center, including their maximum size, color, location, illumination
details, lettering type, mounting details, and (if any) landscaping details.
      4.   Approval of a comprehensive sign plan shall be at the discretion of
the Village Board after receiving the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
      5.   The criteria for approval of a comprehensive sign plan shall be the
following:
         a.   Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and
in its visual relationship to the other signs, buildings and surroundings.
         b.   The signs in the plan shall be designed as an integral
architectural element of the building and site to which they principally relate
and shall not appear as "add ons" or intrusions.
         c.   Signs shall be designed and constructed such that the materials,
colors, lettering, images and trade identification of the businesses are,
insofar as possible, integrated and similar in appearance within the center.
         d.   The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be
restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally
relates.
         e.   The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey each sign's major message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign's face.
         f.   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises
and shall not compete for attention.
   D.   Conditions Of Permit Issuance: Issuance of a sign permit shall be
subject to the following additional requirements:
      1.   The permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer within fourteen
(14) days from the date an application is submitted with the appropriate
application fee if the Zoning Officer finds that the sign complies with the
provisions of this chapter and all other laws and regulations of the Village.
Should the Zoning Officer determine that information provided with the
application was insufficient, or that more information is required to determine
whether the application for a sign permit should be granted, the Zoning Officer
shall notify the applicant within this initial fourteen (14) day period, and
the Zoning Officer shall specify what further information is required. The
Zoning Officer shall then issue a permit or deny the same within fourteen (14)
days from the date an applicant provides any required additional information.
      2.   The permit signifies nothing more than approval for the
construction, installation, erection, relocation or alteration of the sign.
Thereafter, the sign must continue to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
      3.   For each sign requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid at the time of
application for the permit. The fee charged for each sign, other than a B/TS or
a feather flag, shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00), plus an additional five
dollars ($5.00) for each one hundred (100) square feet of surface area of the
sign. The fee charged for each B/TS shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The fee
charged for each feather flag permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 808,
8-16-2018)
      4.   The applicant who has been issued a sign permit shall, upon
completion of the work, notify the Zoning Officer, who shall inspect the sign
with respect to its compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   If the work authorized by a sign permit has not been substantially
completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become void and a new permit is required.
      6.   Sign permits issued under the terms of this section are not
transferable.
   E.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Officer
relative to the provisions of this section may appeal such decision to the
Zoning Board of Appeals as is otherwise provided in the Village zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-6: EXEMPT SIGNS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "sign" shall not include the
following:
   A.   Signs of duly constituted governmental bodies, including traffic or
similar regulatory devices, legal notices, or warnings at railroad crossings.
   B.   Flags or emblems of civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious
organizations, provided flags are less than thirty two (32) square feet in
area.
   C.   Memorial plaques, cornerstones, historical tablets, and the like which
are a permanent part of a building and which denote the name of a building,
date of erection, historical significance, or other similar information.
   D.   Signs posted in conjunction with doorbells not exceeding fifteen (15)
square inches in area.
   E.   Signs required to be maintained or posted by law or governmental order,
rule or regulation, unless specifically prohibited, limited, or restricted.
   F.   Address signs, not more than one for each frontage of each principal
use on a lot and not exceeding one hundred forty four (144) square inches in
area, showing only the numerical address designations of the premises upon
which they are located.
   G.   Signs located on mailboxes identifying occupants and address, provided
the sign area does not exceed one hundred forty four (144) square inches in
area. Signs must comply with postal regulations.
   H.   Seasonal displays; provided, that the display shall not be in place for
a period longer than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
   I.   Welcome signs erected near community entrances if such sign is provided
by the Village and approved by the Village Board of Trustees prior to
construction. (Ord. 743, 2-26-2015)
8-3-7: PERMITTED SIGNS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Lots used for residential purposes in R-1 Districts: Subject to
limitations set forth in this chapter, only the following signs shall be
permitted on lots used for residential purposes in R-1 Districts:
   Attached Signs to ballfield fences, with special use permit for school
purposes.
   Construction signs.
   Electronic Scoreboards on each ballfield, with special use permit for school
purposes.
   Garage and yard sale signs.
   Home occupation signs.
   Pole Signs, with special use permit for school purposes.
   Political signs.
   Real estate directional signs.
   Real estate signs.
   B.    Agricultural and R-2 Districts, and lots not used for residential
purposes in R-1 Districts: Subject to limitations set forth in this chapter,
only the following signs shall be permitted in agricultural and R-2 districts,
and lots not used for residential purposes in R-1 districts:
   All signs permitted on lots used for residential purposes in R-1 Districts.
   Apartment identification signs.
   Billboard Signs, with a special use permit for school purposes.
   Church identification signs/church bulletin board signs.
   Feather flags.
   Pole banners.
   Real estate directional signs.
   Real estate signs.
   Special signs.
   Subdivision identification signs.
   Subdivision real estate signs.
   C.   Commercial And Industrial Districts: Subject to limitations set forth
in this chapter, only the following signs shall be permitted in commercial and
industrial districts:
   All signs permitted in agricultural and residential districts.
   A-frame signs.
   Attached signs.
   Banner/temporary signs.
   Change panel signs.
   Credit card or charge plate signs.
   Directional signs.
   Directory signs.
   Electronic message boards/LED signs.
   Feather flags.
   Gasoline service station price signs.
   Grand opening/anniversary signs.
   Ground signs.
   Hanging signs.
   Off premises signs.
   On site informational signs.
   Permanent window signs.
   Pole signs.
   Pylon signs.
   Temporary window signs.
   Village provided signs.
   Vending machine signs.
(Ord. 876, 11-21-2024; amd. Ord. 878, 1-16-2025)
8-3-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs and sign features are prohibited unless otherwise
permitted in this chapter:
   A.   Signs that flash or make noise. The only exceptions shall be dial
clocks or time and temperature light banks with flashing cycles exceeding four
(4) seconds.
   B.   Colored lights or illuminated signs employing colors that are used in
traffic control devices cannot be within thirty feet (30') of or the same
height as an official traffic control device. Signs using such colors or
illumination are also prohibited where, regardless of their distance from
traffic control devices, they may otherwise be confused for such a device.
   C.   Imitation or resemblance to an official traffic control sign or device,
or use of such words as "stop", "look", "danger", "go slow", "caution", or
"warning". (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
   D.   Moving signs (operated mechanically, electrically, electronically, or
by wind or other forces of nature) or signs with any moving devices, except
clocks and feather flags. Also, the use of posters, pennants, ribbons, flags,
streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other moving devices when not
part of any sign, are similarly prohibited. Pennants, ribbons, flags and
streamers are allowed for anniversary and grand opening signs. (Ord. 688, 7-21-
2011; amd. Ord. 808, 8-16-2018)
   E.   Paper, cloth, cardboard or other similar nondurable signs located on
the exterior of a building or structure.
   F.   Abandoned signs and signs advertising an activity, business or service
no longer conducted on the lot or premises upon which the sign is located.
   G.   Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene,
indecent or immoral character such as will offend public morals or decency.
   H.   Roof signs.
   I.   Signs, logos or trademarks painted directly upon a building or wall.
   J.   Signs which project above the highest point of the roof of the
principal building on the lot upon which the signs are located. (Ord. 688, 7-
21-2011)
   K.   Signs attached to a tree, streetlight, public bench or seating area, or
utility pole, except for pole banners pursuant to subsection
8-3-10EE of this chapter. (Ord. 743, 2-26-2015)
   L.   Signs displayed in or on a vehicle or merchandise of any type
advertising the vehicle or merchandise for sale if the vehicle or merchandise
is parked or located on the right-of- way of Route 116 or its parallel frontage
road.
   M.   Signs that do not otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-9: RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
All signs shall be subject to the following restrictions, in addition to any
other standards appearing in this chapter or the Village zoning ordinance:
   A.   Hazardous Signs:
      1.   If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, any sign becomes hazardous
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic by reason of, but not limited to,
deterioration, damage, obstruction of walkways or fire access or exit lanes,
restriction of sight distances for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or its
location so close to travel lanes or parking areas that it is struck by
maneuvering vehicles, then such sign shall be relocated, removed, or protected
by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the premises or lot
within ten (10) days of notification by certified letter from the zoning
officer that such hazard exists.
      2.   If, in the opinion of the zoning officer, the condition or location
of the sign presents imminent danger to the public, it shall be removed or
corrected by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the premises
or lot promptly upon receipt of written notice from the zoning officer. Any
aggrieved business owner may seek review of the zoning officer's ruling by the
village board.
   B.   Signs To Be Durable:
      1.   All new signs shall be constructed from materials that are durable
and weatherproof. These materials include high impact plastics with fade
resistance, wood treated in such a manner as to retain color and strength, wood
that is naturally resistant to weathering such as cedar and redwood, brick and
other masonry materials, aluminum and associated alloys resistant to visible
corrosion, painted steels with baked on finish, and other corrosion resistant
steels.
      2.   Vinyl signs shall have minimum weight of sixteen (16) ounces per
square yard, minimum tensile strength of 270/270 pounds, and minimum tear
strength of 75/85 pounds. Lettering for vinyl signs shall be either of vinyl
pressure sensitive material or transparent vinyl material. Structural support
for vinyl signs shall be one inch (1") square aluminum or galvanized steel
tubing; electrical conduit is not permitted for vinyl sign supports.
      3.   Signs should be constructed to avoid degeneration over time, to
withstand weather, and to require little or no maintenance. Signs shall be
constructed in such a way as to maintain proper alignment both level and plumb.
Signs shall not become misaligned due to frost conditions, and masonry signs
shall have adequate footings to prevent damage due to frost.
      4.   Broken panels, missing letters, flaking or peeling paint and other
visual damage to a sign shall be repaired within forty five (45) days of
occurrence or within thirty (30) days of notification by certified letter from
the zoning officer, whichever occurs first.
      5.   The sign's owner may seek review by the village board of the zoning
officer's determination of compliance with this subsection.
   C.   Illuminated Signs: Illuminated signs shall be subject to the following
standards:
      1.   No signs designated as permitted in an agricultural or residential
district, or actually existing in such a district, may be illuminated, except
subdivision identification signs.
      2.   All signs permitted only in commercial and industrial districts may
be illuminated.
      3.   All illuminated signs, including electronic message boards/LED
signs, located within one hundred feet (100') of a residential property shall
be extinguished no later than the later of: a) the time of business closing; or
b) between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.; provided,
that this shall not prohibit continuous illumination of permitted flags,
subdivision signs, vending machine signs and directional signs.
      4.   All illumination devices shall be designed to be weather resistant
and shatter resistant.
      5.   The use of unshielded lights, including incandescent light bulbs
strung on poles, wires, or any other type of support, to illuminate signs is
prohibited. Whenever external illumination is used for a sign, the source of
light shall be located, shielded, and directed in such a manner that the source
is not directly visible from any public street or private residence. In no case
shall the lighting intensity of any sign, whether resulting from internal or
external illumination, exceed seventy five (75) foot-candles when measured with
a standard light meter perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance
equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign face.
      6.   a. Allowable area for an illuminated attached, ground, gas station
price or pole sign shall be increased by ten percent (10%) if the sign is an
internally illuminated sign as described in subsection C6b of this section.
This increase shall not be counted towards the maximum sign area allowed in the
aggregate sign display calculation under this chapter.
         b.   Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully
through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for
such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit
light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering
and graphics.
   D.   Signs Shall Not Obstruct: All signs shall be located so as to not
obstruct vision at an intersection or a vehicular entry or exit from the lot on
which the sign is located. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained
so as to obstruct a fire escape, exit, window or door opening used as a means
of egress. Nor shall any sign be attached in form, shape or manner such that it
will interfere with any opening required for ventilation. However, this
subsection will not prevent a sign from being erected in front of or covering a
transom window when not in violation of the provisions of the building or fire
prevention regulations that may apply.
   E.   Setbacks: All signs shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
property lines unless specifically exempted in this chapter. Directional signs
shall not be subject to the ten foot (10') restriction, except at corners.
   F.   Landscaping: All ground, pole, or other signs or sign structures that
originate from or otherwise touch the ground shall be appropriately landscaped
so as to blend with the surrounding area.
   G.   Wind Load And Anchoring:
      1.   All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a
building, shall be constructed to withstand wind loads as follows:
         a.   For solid signs, thirty (30) pounds per square foot on one face
of the sign.
         b.   For skeleton signs, thirty six (36) pounds per square foot of the
total face area of the letters and other sign surfaces, or ten (10) pounds per
square foot of the gross area of the sign as determined by the overall
dimensions of the sign, whichever is greater.
      2.   The wind loadings quoted in subsection G1 of this section are normal
averages and must be adjusted for areas subject to unusually high velocity
winds, for signs of extraordinary height or wind tunneling effects created by
large buildings.
      3.   Further, no sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices that
will allow the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored to
prevent any lateral movement that would cause wear on supporting members or
connections.
   H.   Compliance With Applicable Regulations: All signs shall comply with all
applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, other
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building and electrical
requirements promulgated by the village. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-10: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS, RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In addition to the general requirements, restrictions or other provisions of
this chapter, the following standards, restrictions and conditions shall be
applicable to the signs listed herein:
   A.   A-Frame Sign:
      1.   An “A-frame sign” (sometimes referred to as a “sandwich board sign”)
shall be referred to herein as an “AFS”. “Operator” signifies the operator of a
particular business within a building located on a commercially zoned property.
      2.   An AFS shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   Only one AFS is permitted per business, although each business
located in a building containing two (2) or more businesses may have an AFS.
(If more than 1 business operates within a single business premises, i.e., a
premises accessed by single front entrance, only 1 AFS is permitted for the
business premises, although the operators of each business within the premises
may jointly apply for a permit for the AFS and may share space on the AFS.)
         b.   An AFS shall be no wider than three feet (3') and no taller than
five feet (5') from the top of the sign structure to the surface upon which it
is placed.
         c.   An AFS shall not be located off premises.
         d.   An AFS shall be located no greater than twenty feet (20') from a
front entrance to the business premises it advertises, and shall not be located
in a place that impedes vehicular movement or visibility or that unreasonably
impedes pedestrian movement.
         e.   An AFS shall be displayed only during the business hours of the
business it advertises.
         f.   An AFS shall either be secured down or sufficiently weighted so
as not to blow out of position, or shall be removed whenever weather conditions
might make it susceptible to blowing out of position.
         g.   An AFS shall not be externally illuminated; provided, that an AFS
shall not be considered to be externally illuminated if a fixture attached to a
building or under a canopy, for example, but which is not specifically directed
at the AFS, happens to cast light on the AFS.
         h.   An AFS shall not count against the allowable square feet of
signage otherwise permitted by this chapter.
         i.   An AFS may have advertising on each side of the AFS. The operator
may change the advertising on the AFS as often as he/she sees fit, so long as
the AFS is used as stated in the definition of an AFS in section
8-3-4 of this chapter.
      3.   The right to display an AFS is extended to operators. Operators are
responsible for securing AFS permits and for otherwise assuring compliance with
this chapter. An operator shall only be required to secure an AFS permit one
time for any particular AFS. Once issued, an AFS permit shall be of unlimited
duration, so long as the AFS is used in conformity with the AFS policy.
   B.   Apartment Identification Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area;
provided, that the sign structure shall not be included when determining sign
area.
      2.   Sign, including structure, shall not exceed a height of five feet
(5').
      3.   Only one sign shall be permitted per frontage.
   C.   Attached Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not extend more than fifteen inches (15") beyond the
vertical plane of the wall or other building feature to which it is attached.
      2.   Sign shall not project more than twenty four inches (24") above the
parapet wall or roofline of the wall where the sign is placed; provided, that
the projection above the parapet wall or roofline shall not exceed the
projection of the sign below the top of the parapet wall or roofline.
      3.   Sign shall not exceed a height of twenty five feet (25').
      4.   No more than three (3) attached signs per frontage shall be
permitted for a single business or for each business located within a single
building.
      5.   All mounting brackets and other hardware used to affix a sign to a
wall shall be concealed by the sign or integrated into the design of the sign.
      6.   Signs within Ballfield shall face inward towards field. No sign
shall be permitted on the reverse, facing outward from the field.
      7.   Signs within Ballfield are excluded from the general restriction of
subsection C4 of this section.
   D.   Banner Signs And Temporary Signs: Banner signs and temporary signs
shall be referred to herein collectively as "B/TS", and both types of sign are
subject to the following standards:
      1.   For purposes of this subsection regarding B/TS, "owner" signifies
the owner of a business property, which includes the land and any buildings.
"Operator" signifies the operator of a particular business within a building
located on a business property.
      2.   A B/TS may be freestanding. If so, the B/TS can be mounted no higher
than four feet (4') from the ground and can be no longer than fifteen feet
(15') or fifteen percent (15%) of the wall space to which it is adjacent. A
freestanding B/TS may not be located off premises. The specific location(s) for
freestanding B/TS shall be specified in the permit application and must be
approved by the reviewing zoning officer. The location(s) must be set back at
least ten feet (10') from any property line and must not create a traffic
hazard by reason of limited visibility or otherwise. A B/TS must be mounted
securely. A B/TS shall not be attached to a utility pole or utility structure.
      3.   A B/TS may be attached to a building. If so, it can be a maximum of
three feet (3') high by ten feet (10') long or fifteen percent (15%) of the
wall space to which it is adjacent, and cannot be mounted so as to extend
higher than the roofline of the building. The specific location(s) on the
building shall be specified in the permit application and must be approved by
the reviewing zoning officer. A B/TS attached to a building must be mounted
securely.
      4.   A B/TS may be externally illuminated.
      5.   A B/TS shall not count against the allowable square feet of signage
otherwise permitted in this chapter.
      6.   The right to display B/TS is extended to owners. Owners are
responsible for securing B/TS permits and for otherwise assuring compliance
with this chapter, not only for themselves and their businesses, if any, but
for all operators and their businesses. Owners may designate an agent to act on
their behalf with respect to B/TS matters, but the owners remain responsible.
If an owner wishes to designate an agent to deal with B/TS matters, the owner
must inform the Zoning Officer of that designation in writing, providing all
contact information for the agent.
      7.   If an owner's building contains two (2) or more operators, it is the
owner's responsibility to allocate among the operators opportunities for them
to display B/TS, consistent with the requirements of the B/TS policy, and to
apply for B/TS permits on behalf of the operators, and to assure the operators'
compliance with the B/TS policy, including abiding by all permit requirements.
The Village will not be in the business of mediating disputes among owners and
operators, or among various operators, concerning any perceived "unfairness" in
the allocation of opportunities to display B/TS. Finally, consistent with the
owner's ultimate responsibility, if an operator violates any B/TS policy, the
owner will be liable for any penalty imposed under this chapter.
      8.   A B/TS requires a permit.
      9.   An owner whose building contains a single business is limited to
four (4) B/TS permits per year per frontage (up to a maximum of 2 frontages).
      10.   An owner whose building contains two (2) or more businesses is
limited to six (6) B/TS permits per year per frontage (up to a maximum of 2
frontages).
      11.   For the purpose of determining that the specific limitation on the
number of B/TS that may be displayed on a particular frontage per year is met,
a freestanding B/TS is assigned to the frontage it faces or to the nearest
adjoining frontage, and an attached B/TS is assigned to the frontage that the
wall on which the B/TS is attached faces.
      12.   No more than one B/TS (either freestanding or attached) may be
displayed on a single frontage at any time. If there are two (2) frontages, one
B/TS (either freestanding or attached) may be displayed on each frontage at the
same time.
      13.   Operators may have grand opening or anniversary signs in accordance
with the terms of this chapter. Grand opening or anniversary sign permits do
not count against the number of B/TS that may be displayed per frontage per
year, even if those signs include banners.
      14.   Permits for B/TS will be for a period of twenty (20) days. A twenty
(20) day period may be divided among multiple operators so long as the division
among operators is specified in the permit application. A period of at least
one week must elapse between the end of one permit period and the beginning of
the next permit period.
      15.   B/TS must be in good condition and maintained at all times. Failure
to comply will be a violation of this chapter and may result in the banner
being removed.
      16.   No B/TS permit may be issued while a feather flag permit is in
effect, or during the one week period after the expiration of a feather flag
permit.
   E.   Change Panel Signs: A change panel sign is designed to permit immediate
change of copy, which may be other than the name of the business. Sign shall
not exceed twenty four (24) square feet. Only one change panel sign will be
allowed per property.
   F.   Church Identification Signs/Church Bulletin Board Signs:
      1.   Signs shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area;
provided, that sign structures shall not be included when determining sign
area.
      2.   Signs along Route 116 are allowed up to sixty (60) square feet in
area.
      3.   Signs may be attached to the building or may be ground signs.
      4.   Ground signs, including structure, shall not exceed a height of six
feet (6').
      5.   Only one church identification sign is allowed on the primary
building. In addition, one church bulletin board sign shall be permitted for
each frontage on a public street.
      6.   Church identification signs attached to the building shall not
extend above the roofline.
   G.   Construction Signs:
      1.   On lots used for residential purposes in R-1 districts, one (1) sign
not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed a height of four
feet (4').
      2.   In agricultural and R-2 districts, and lots not used for residential
purposes in R-1 districts, one (1) sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet
in area and a height not exceeding five feet (5') shall be permitted on the
work site of each frontage.
      3.   In commercial and industrial districts, one (1) sign not exceeding
thirty two (32) square feet in area and a height not exceeding five feet (5')
shall be permitted on the work site of each frontage.
      4.   Sign shall not be erected prior to sixty (60) days before the
beginning of construction for which a valid building permit has been issued.
Sign shall be removed upon completion of the work or occupancy of the premises
or building, whichever occurs first.
   H.   Directional Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall not
exceed a height of three and one-half feet (3.5').
      2.   No more than two (2) such signs shall be permitted per entry/exit
unless said entry/exit is divided by a raised median, in which case, each side
of the median shall be treated as a separate entry/exit.
      3.   At least fifty percent (50%) of any directional sign face shall
contain one of the following words, phrases or similar traffic directions:
         a.   "Entrance" or "entrance only".
         b.   "One-way".
         c.   "Exit" or "exit only".
         d.   "Do not enter".
         e.   "No exit" or "no entrance".
         f.   "Right turn only" or "no left turn".
         g.   Directional arrows.
      4.   In the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the sign face, there may be
provided the name of the business or development, or name of the use or
building, or a trademark, logo or similar matter.
   I.   Directory Signs: A directory sign shall conform to the standards
applicable to the type of sign used in providing such directory information.
   J.   Electronic Message Board/LED Signs:
      1.   Length of display or dwell time for electronic multiple message
signs shall be permitted, and the message on said signs may be changed no more
than once every four (4) seconds.
      2.   Automatic dimming must be maintained by light sensing devices or a
scheduled dimming timer that automatically dims the intensity of the light
emitted by the sign during ambient low light and nighttime hours not to exceed
five hundred (500) nits of intensity and during daytime hours not to exceed
five thousand (5,000) nits of intensity.
      3.   Multiple message signs must contain a default design that will
freeze the message in one position if a malfunction occurs.
      4.   Location of multiple message signs must not be within thirty feet
(30') of or the same height as an official traffic control sign that could
confuse the motoring public.
      5.   Maintenance of multiple message signs shall include replacement of
bulbs, LEDs, and pixels and shall be in working and properly illuminating
condition at all times.
      6.   Sign shall not exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area.
   K.   Garage And Yard Sale Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall not
exceed a height of four feet (4').
      2.   Sign shall not be erected prior to three (3) days before the start
of the sale and shall be removed within one day following the sale.
      3.   No more than one sign shall be permitted on premises, and no more
than two (2) signs shall be permitted off premises.
      4.   Sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the road
surface.
   L.   Gasoline Service Station Price Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet in area.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed a height of ten feet (10') where pole signs
are permitted and five feet (5') in all other locations. A price sign may be
attached to and supported by a pole sign.
      3.   Only one price sign shall be permitted on any frontage, and no more
than two (2) price signs shall be permitted per business.
      4.   Credit card or charge plate signs shall be permitted as a part of or
in lieu of gasoline service station price signs, subject, however, to the
location and size standards contained herein.
   M.   Grand Opening; Anniversary Signs:
      1.   Grand opening signs shall be permitted only once for a business and
shall be in place for a period no longer than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Anniversary signs shall be permitted only once for a business in any
calendar year and shall be in place for a period no longer than fourteen (14)
days.
      3.   Flag ropes, pennants, ribbons, flags, streamers, inflatable signs,
balloons, or other air or gas filled devices are allowed during grand opening
and anniversary celebrations. Portable signs may be utilized.
   N.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Signs Along Route 116 Or Its Parallel Frontage Road Or Corner Lot
Parcels That Intersect Parallel Frontage Roads:
         a.   Sign area shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of
either the surface of the building wall which they are in front of or relate to
or the adjacent building wall. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter,
the maximum square footage of the sign shall be limited in relation to its
height, as follows:
Height No More Than Maximum Square Footage
Height No More Than Maximum Square Footage
5 feet              125 square feet
6 feet              121 square feet
7 feet              116 square feet
8 feet              112 square feet
9 feet              107 square feet
10 feet             103 square feet
11 feet             98 square feet
12 feet             94 square feet
13 feet             89 square feet
14 feet             85 square feet
15 feet             80 square feet
18 feet             80 square feet
 
         b.   Only one ground sign shall be permitted per frontage. No more
than two (2) ground signs shall be permitted for each building; except, that
only one ground sign shall be permitted if used in combination with a pole
sign.
         c.   Sign shall not exceed a height of eighteen feet (18').
         d.   A ground sign shall not be permitted in combination with a pole
sign on the same frontage.
      2.   Signs Not Along Route 116 Or Its Parallel Frontage Road:
         a.   Sign area shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the
surface of the building wall which they are in front of or relate to.
         b.   Only one ground sign shall be permitted per frontage. No more
than two (2) ground signs shall be permitted for each building.
         c.   Sign shall not exceed a height of five feet (5').
   O.   Hanging Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
      2.   Clearance from the sidewalk or other ground surface to the bottom of
the hanging sign shall not be less than seven feet (7').
      3.   No more than one hanging sign shall be permitted per business.
   P.   Home Occupation Signs:
      1.   No more than one home occupation sign shall be permitted per
dwelling unit. In addition, a sign not to exceed one square foot in size shall
be permitted at the entrance to the home occupation if the entrance is not the
main entrance to the building.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area; it shall be
attached to the wall of the residential unit, no higher than six feet (6')
above grade. Lettering shall not exceed six inches (6") in height.
      3.   Sign shall reference the home occupation on the same premises.
   Q.   Off Premises Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area;
      2.   Sign shall not exceed a height of eighteen feet (18'). The sign's
height measurement shall include the base, apron, or support structure, and
shall be measured from the lowest point of the same to the highest element of
the sign or its structure;
      3.   Sign shall not exceed a width of ten feet (10'), inclusive of sign
structure and supports;
      4.   Sign shall not be located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a
residential property, school, park, or place of worship;
      5.   Sign shall not be erected further than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from Route 116;
      6.   Sign shall not be erected within one thousand feet (1,000') of an
off premises sign on the same side of the roadway;
      7.   Sign shall not be illuminated; and
      8.   Sign shall not use automatic changeable technology or contain moving
parts.
   R.   On Site Informational Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, but may be
increased up to a maximum of twenty four (24) square feet in area by written
authority of the Zoning Officer after review of the public necessity and/or
safety purpose of the sign.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed a height of three feet (3') in any location
within twenty feet (20') of a public right-of-way or within ten feet (10') of
any property line, nor shall a sign elsewhere on the lot or premises exceed a
height of four feet (4').
      3.   Credit card or charge plate signs shall not be construed as on site
informational signs.
   S.   Permanent Window Signs: Permanent window signs, including borders,
shall not cover more than a total of sixty percent (60%) of the combined area
of the window or glass door to which they are applied.
   T.   Pole Signs:
      1.   A pole sign shall only be permitted for use by businesses located on
Route 116 or its parallel frontage road.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided herein, no advertising other than a
registered trademark, copyrighted logo, or name of a business shall be
permitted on any pole sign. More than one (1) business may advertise on the
same pole sign.
      3.   Notwithstanding the general restriction of subsection T2 of this
section, a gasoline service station price sign or a “drive-through” sign may be
attached to and supported by the one (1) permissible pole sign.
      4.   Only one (1) pole sign shall be permitted per building, even if the
building contains multiple tenants.
      5.   Sign shall not exceed a height of twenty five feet (25').
      6.   Sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area. An attached
gasoline service station price sign shall not be included in this forty (40)
square foot restriction, but a pole sign and attached “drive-through” sign
shall not exceed this forty (40) square foot restriction in the aggregate.
      7.   A pole sign shall not be permitted in combination with a ground sign
on the same frontage, unless: a) the pole sign is located on a lot bordering
more than one (1) street, one of which is the Route 116 parallel frontage road
and b) the pole sign is within the frontage of both streets on which the lot
borders.
      8.   No pole sign shall have more than two (2) poles, and no single pole
on a two (2) pole sign shall have a cross sectional area at any point greater
than one hundred forty (140) square inches. If the pole sign is supported by
only one pole, that pole shall not have a cross sectional area greater than two
hundred ten (210) square inches.
      9.   Sign within Ballfield shall face inward towards field. No sign shall
be permitted on the reverse, facing outward from the field.
   U.   Political Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not
exceed a height of four feet (4').
      2.   Sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the edge of
the roadway.
      3.   Signs may be placed on residential property during any period of
time.
   V.   Pylon Signs:
      1.   Sign shall be permitted only for shopping center developments
consisting of a single lot at least fifteen (15) acres in size, or multiple
lots totaling at least fifteen (15) acres in size that are part of one
development and are subject to an annexation agreement with the Village.
      2.   Only one sign shall be permitted per shopping center development.
      3.   Sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area and
shall not exceed a height of thirty feet (30').
      4.   No advertising other than the name of the shopping center
development and its related businesses shall be permitted on a pylon sign. No
advertising for businesses that are off premises is permitted, except for
advertisements by or for nonprofit organizations.
      5.   No pylon sign shall be supported by more than two (2) poles, and no
single pole on a two (2) pole pylon sign shall have a cross sectional area at
any point greater than one hundred forty (140) square inches. If the pylon sign
is supported by only one pole, that pole shall not have a cross sectional area
greater than two hundred ten (210) square inches. The foregoing pole size
restrictions apply solely to sign supports and shall not apply to a skirt or
other nonstructural material surrounding the sign support.
   W.   Real Estate Signs:
      1.   No more than one sign shall be permitted on each frontage; except,
that one additional open house sign is permitted for a period of three (3) days
per open house, beginning two (2) days before the open house.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area in residential
districts, or thirty two (32) square feet in area in agricultural, commercial
or industrial districts.
      3.   Sign shall be removed within seven (7) days after sale closing or
lease initiation date.
      4.   Sign shall not exceed a height of four feet (4') in residential
districts, or a height of five feet (5') in agricultural, commercial or
industrial districts.
   X.   Real Estate Directional Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not
exceed a height of four feet (4').
      2.   Sign shall be removed within one day following the rental, lease or
sale.
      3.   No more than two (2) signs shall be permitted off premises.
      4.   Sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the edge of
the roadway.
   Y.   Special Signs:
      1.   A special sign may be in the form of a banner. Signs/banners shall
be limited to four (4) per year per frontage (up to a maximum of 2 frontages).
Permits will be for a period of twenty (20) days. Permits may be strung
together in successive twenty (20) day periods, but each twenty (20) day period
counts against the annual limitations.
      2.   Sign, either singly or in the aggregate, shall not exceed thirty two
(32) square feet in area and shall not exceed a height of five feet (5').
   Z.   Subdivision Identification Signs:
      1.   Sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area; provided,
that the sign structure shall not be included when determining sign area.
      2.   Sign, including structure, shall not exceed a height of five feet
(5').
      3.   Only one sign shall be permitted per entrance road.
      4.   A homeowners' association shall be responsible for the maintenance
of each sign.
   AA.   Subdivision Real Estate Signs:
      1.   Only one sign shall be permitted per subdivision.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and shall
not exceed a height of five feet (5').
      3.   Sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the sale of
ninety percent (90%) of the homes or lots advertised in the subdivision.
   BB.   Temporary Window Signs:
      1.   The combined area of temporary window signs and permanent window
signs shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the window to which they are
applied.
      2.   The combined area of temporary door signs and permanent door signs
shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the door to which they are applied.
   CC.   Vending Machine Signs:
      1.   Sign area shall not be included in the aggregate sign display area
limitations of this chapter.
      2.   Sign shall not exceed a height of six and one-half feet (6.5').
      3.   No more than three (3) signs shall be permitted per business.
      4.   Vending machine signs shall only identify vended products.
   DD.   Village Provided Signs:
      1.   The village board may, at its discretion, provide for signs to be
erected on private property for the purpose of identifying and providing
direction to businesses that are not located on Route 116, but whose access
roads intersect Route 116 in the village. Village provided signs are allowed in
commercial and industrial district per IDOT's requirement and cannot be closer
than every three hundred feet (300') or exceed eight feet by ten feet (8' x
10'). They require a permit from IDOT with written permission from the property
owner.
      2.   The village board may erect sign structures that provide multiple
sign slots that can be filled by the owners of approved businesses. One sign
will be permitted per approved business. The design will be provided by the
village, and the support structure will be maintained by the village. Business
owners/proprietors will be responsible for maintaining individual sign panels,
and panels may be removed by the village board if they fall into disrepair.
      3.   Only businesses located within the village or the one and one-half
(11/2) mile planning area of the village may apply for a sign space. Upon
receipt of an application for sign space of this type, the village board will
make the determination if the business should be provided sign space. The
village board will make this determination taking into consideration the nature
of the business and the importance of the sign to the economic viability of
that business. The owner/proprietor has the right to provide written or oral
testimony to the village board on his own behalf. The village board will decide
by a simple majority vote. The decision of the village board will be final.
      4.   The village board may, at any future time, remove any or all of the
village provided sign structures, without cause, at which time the advertising
panels will be returned to the respective businesses.
   EE.   Pole Banners: Temporary pole banners placed by the village or with the
consent of the village board of trustees celebrating and promoting the
Germantown Hills community, civic organizations or public events subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   A pole banner may be a maximum of eighteen (18) square feet.
      2.   A pole banner may be attached solely to a streetlight or utility
pole approved by the village board of trustees.
      3.   A minimum of sixty five percent (65%) of the area of a pole banner
sign must be dedicated to artwork or text which is consistent with the purposes
for which pole banners may be displayed. The remainder shall be limited to the
business name of the sponsor, the sponsor's logo, the year in which the sponsor
was established and the sponsor's web address.
      4.   No permit or fee shall be required for pole banners displayed by the
village.
      5.   No pole banner may be displayed without the Village Board of
Trustees' prior approval of the design and location of the pole banner.
      6.   The duration for which a pole banner may be displayed shall be
ninety (90) days, except as otherwise determined by the Village Board of
Trustees.
   FF.   Utility Improvement Signs:
      1.   Sign shall be made of plastic, wood or metal and may possess colors,
characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations.
      2.   Sign is permitted in residential, commercial or industrial zoning
districts.
      3.   One sign not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet and a height not
exceeding six feet (6') shall be permitted at each entrance to the subdivision.
Sign shall be placed at least ten feet (10') off of all property lines.
      4.   Sign shall not be erected prior to sixty (60) days before the
beginning of construction of the utility improvement project. Sign shall be
removed within twelve (12) months of the beginning of construction of the
utility improvement project.
      5.   Written documentation showing the property owner's permission for
the sign to be temporarily placed on the owner's property must accompany the
application for permit described in subsection
8-3-5B of this chapter.
   GG.   Feather Flags:
      1.   Owners And Operators: For purposes of this subsection regarding
feather flags, "owner" signifies the owner of a business property, which
includes the land and any buildings. "Operator" signifies the operator of a
particular business within a building located on a business property.
      2.   Permitted Districts: Feather flags are permitted in commercial and
industrial districts. They may also be used in residential districts on
properties with non-profit operations, such as schools and churches.
      3.   Size Limitations: Each feather flag shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet in total area, and shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') tall.
      4.   Placement: Feather flags must be located outside of the public
right-of-way and any clear vision triangle, as determined by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
      5.   Right To Display: The right to display feather flags is extended to
owners. Owners are responsible for securing feather flag permits and for
otherwise assuring compliance with this chapter, not only for themselves and
their businesses, if any, but for all operators and their businesses. Owners
may designate an agent to act on their behalf with respect to feather flag
matters, but the owners remain responsible. If an owner wishes to designate an
agent to deal with feather flag matters, the owner must inform the Zoning
Officer of that designation in writing, providing all contact information for
the agent.
      6.   Responsibilities: If an owner's building contains two (2) or more
operators, it is the owner's responsibility to allocate among the operators
opportunities for them to display feather flags, consistent with the
requirements of this chapter, and to apply for feather flag permits on behalf
of the operators, and to assure the operators' compliance with this chapter,
including abiding by all permit requirements. The Village will not be in the
business of mediating disputes among owners and operators, or among various
operators, concerning any perceived "unfairness" in the allocation of
opportunities to display feather flags. Finally, consistent with the owner's
ultimate responsibility, if an operator violates any part of this chapter, the
owner will be liable for any penalty imposed under this chapter.
      7.   Minimum Distance: All feather flags must be a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') apart.
      8.   Off Premises: Feather flags may not be located off premises.
      9.   Permits:
         a.   No feather flag sign shall be erected or installed except
pursuant to a permit issued by the Zoning Officer.
         b.   Permits for feather flags will be for a period of twenty (20)
days. A twenty (20) day period may be divided among multiple operators so long
as the division among operators is specified in the permit application. A
period of at least one week must elapse between the end of one permit period
and the beginning of the next permit period.
         c.   An owner whose building contains a single business is limited to
four (4) feather flag permits per year per frontage (up to a maximum of 2
frontages).
         d.   An owner whose building contains two (2) or more businesses is
limited to six (6) feather flag permits per year per frontage (up to a maximum
of 2 frontages).
         e.   No feather flag permit may be issued while a B/TS permit is in
effect, or during the one week period after the expiration of a B/TS permit.
         f.   The feather flag permit cost is ten dollars ($10.00) per permit.
      10.   Flag Maintenance: Displayed feather flag signs must be in good
condition and maintained at all times. Failure to comply will be a violation of
this chapter and may result in the flag being removed.
      11.   Illumination: A feather flag may be externally illuminated.
      12.   Signage Allowed Exception: A feather flag shall not count against
the allowable square feet of signage otherwise permitted in this chapter.
   HH.   Billboard Signs:
      1.   A billboard sign shall only be permitted on properties located on
Route 116.
      2.   A billboard sign shall be permitted only for property consisting of
a single lot at least fifteen (15) acres or more in size, is subject to an
annexation agreement with the Village, and is pre-existing prior to the
approval of the annexation agreement.
      3.   No billboard sign may be expanded to a size or height beyond that
which exists as of the date of the annexation agreement approving such
billboard sign.
      4.   A billboard sign shall remain in the same location it occupies as of
the date of the annexation agreement approving such billboard sign.
      5.   No more than two billboard signs shall be permitted per parcel.
      6.   Billboard signs shall comply with all local, state, and federal
ordinances, laws, statutes, and regulations.
   II.   Summary Of Standards: The following summary is provided solely as a
convenience and shall not be construed to modify the specific standards set
forth in this section:
Sign Type Maximum Area Maximum Height Minimum Setback
Sign Type                                            Maximum    Maximum    Minimum
                                                     Area       Height     Setback
A-frame                                              12 sq. ft. 5 ft.      -
Apartment identification                             24 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
Attached                                             -          25 ft.     -
Banner                                               Variable   Variable   10 ft.
                                                     Shall not  Shall not  Shall not
                                                     exceed     exceed     exceed
                                                     size and   size and   size and
                                                     setback    setback    setback
Billboard Signs                                      which      which      which
                                                     exists as  exists as  exists as
                                                     of date of of date of of date of
                                                     annexation annexation annexation
                                                     agreement  agreement  agreement
Church identification/church bulletin board          Variable   6 ft.      10 ft.
Construction:                                                             
   Agricultural/residential                       16 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
   Agricultural/R-2, and non-residential lots in R16 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
   Commercial/industrial                          32 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
   Residential Lots in R-1                        6 sq. ft.  4 ft.      10 ft.
Directional                                          4 sq. ft.  3.5 ft.    10 ft.
Electronic message boards/LED                        24 sq. ft. Variable   10 ft.
Feather flags                                        32 sq. ft. 15 ft.     10 ft.
Garage sale                                          4 sq. ft.  4 ft.      5 ft.
Gasoline service station price                       36 sq. ft. Variable   10 ft.
Grand opening/anniversary                            -          -          10 ft.
Ground                                               Variable   Variable   10 ft.
Hanging                                              6 sq. ft.  -          -
Home occupation                                      2 sq. ft.  2.5 ft.    -
Off premises                                         80 sq. ft.            
On site informational                                Variable   Variable   -
Permanent window                                     60 percent -          -
Pole                                                 40 sq. ft. 25 ft.     10 ft.
Pole banner                                          18 sq. ft. -          -
Political                                            6 sq. ft.  4 ft.      10 ft.
Pylon                                                300 sq.    30 ft.     10 ft.
                                                     ft.
Real estate:                                                              
   Directional                                    6 sq. ft.  4 ft.      5 ft.
   Residential                                    6 sq. ft.  4 ft.      10 ft.
   Subdivision                                    32 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
   Other                                          32 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
Special                                              32 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
Subdivision identification                           32 sq. ft. 5 ft.      10 ft.
Temporary                                            Variable   Variable   10 ft.
Temporary window                                     60 percent -          -
Utility improvement                                  32 sq. ft. 6 ft.      10 ft.
Vending machine                                      -          6.5 ft.    -
Village provided                                     80 sq. ft. 8 ft.      -
 
(Ord. 688, 7-21-2011; amd. Ord. 704, 6-28-2012; 2012 Code; Ord. 743, 2-26-2015;
Ord. 763, 4-7-2016; Ord. 769, 6-23-2016; Ord. 785, 7-27-2017; Ord. 790, 10-26-
2017; Ord. 808, 8-16-2018; Ord. 853, 11-17-2022; Ord. 876, 11-21-2024; Ord.
878, 1-16-2025)
8-3-11: AGGREGATE SIGN DISPLAY AREA LIMITATIONS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS:
All permitted signs in commercial and industrial districts shall be governed by
the following standards: (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
   A.   Maximum Display Area:
      1.   Single Walls: Subject to the limitations of an individual sign area
set out in section
8-3-10 of this chapter, the maximum aggregate sign display area (for all types
of signs not otherwise exempt) for a single side of a building shall be limited
to fifteen percent (15%) of the total surface area of the wall (including
windows and doors) of the building occupied by the business as its business
premises. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011; amd. Ord. 743, 2-26-2015)
   B.   Exclusions: The following types of signs shall not be included in the
aggregate square footage limitations contained in this section:
      All signs permitted in agricultural or residential districts.
      Construction signs.
      Directional signs.
      Gasoline service station price signs.
      Grand opening/anniversary signs.
      On site informational signs.
      Pylon signs.
      Real estate signs.
      Special signs.
      Temporary window signs.
      Vending machine signs.
   C.   Multiple Frontages: When a business has more than one display frontage,
the restrictions on the number of signs and sign area shall comply with
subsections A and B of this section, subject to the following additional
restrictions:
      1.   No signs permitted by one frontage may be transferred to another
frontage.
      2.   Double faced signs erected on or near the corner of a building or
parcel so as to be equally visible from each frontage shall be counted as part
of the permitted sign area for each frontage.
   D.   Multiple Occupants: In buildings with multiple business occupants, each
occupant shall be allotted a sign area based upon the display frontage
proportional to the ratio of total floor area in the building. Common areas
shall not be included in this calculation. Every occupant shall be allowed a
minimum sign area of sixteen (16) square feet.
      1.   Subject to the restrictions in subsection A1 of this section, if the
number of business occupants times the minimum sign area per occupant results
in a sum larger than one hundred twenty five (125), then the maximum aggregate
sign display area for a single side of a building shall be the larger sum. In
no case, however, shall the sum exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the wall area
nor shall the area of any single sign exceed one hundred twenty five (125)
square feet.
      2.   Subject to the restrictions in subsection A2 of this section, if two
(2) times the allowable area determined in subsection D1 of this section
results in a sum larger than two hundred fifty (250), then the maximum
aggregate sign display area for all sides of a single building shall be the
larger sum.
      3.   Any sign that identifies one or more businesses and is attached to a
building that contains multiple businesses shall be located in close proximity
to the business(es) that it identifies.
   E.   Signs With Two Faces: For all signs with two (2) faces, the faces shall
be parallel and located no more than two feet (2') apart. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Every sign constructed, installed, erected, relocated or altered after
the effective date hereof shall conform to its provisions. A sign that fails to
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or to come into compliance within
the time allotted by this section, is an unlawful sign.
   B.   All nonconforming signs (including subdivision identification signs)
must come into compliance with this chapter if they are replaced, relocated or
subject to a repair or alteration which constitutes at least fifty percent
(50%) of the value of the sign at the time of the repair.
   C.   Every sign in existence on the effective date hereof or the effective
date of any amendment hereto that does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter or such amendment shall be removed, replaced, relocated or altered so
as to conform with the provisions of this chapter and any amendment within one
year. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-13: UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
   A.   Existing Unlawful Signs:
      1.   Every sign in existence on the effective date hereof which was
unlawful under the prior version of this chapter and which continues to be
unlawful under the present version of this chapter shall be removed, replaced,
relocated or altered so as to conform with the provisions of this chapter
within six (6) months after its effective date.
      2.   Upon the effective date hereof, the zoning officer shall identify
all unlawful signs subject to this subsection. The zoning officer shall then
provide notice, in writing, by certified mail to the owner of the unlawful
sign, or the owner of the property on which the unlawful sign is located, or
both. The notice shall describe the sign and state the reasons why it is
unlawful under this subsection. Finally, the notice shall state the compliance
requirements of this subsection. If any unlawful sign is not brought into
compliance as required by this subsection, it shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, and such owner will be subject to the penalty provisions of this
chapter.
   B.   Violations And Enforcement: As to all situations not covered by
subsection A of this section, it is hereby declared to be a violation of this
chapter for any person to allow the existence of an unlawful sign. The zoning
officer may, after inspection, declare a sign to be unlawful and shall provide
notice, in writing, by personal delivery or certified mail to the owner of the
unlawful sign or the owner of the property on which the unlawful sign is
located, or both. The notice shall describe the sign and state the reasons for
the zoning officer’s declaration and shall order the removal, repair,
relocation or alteration of the unlawful sign.
      1.   In the case of the following signs that are exempt from the permit
requirements, the person to whom the notice is sent or delivered shall bring
the unlawful sign into compliance within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving
the notice:
         a.   Garage and yard sale signs;
         b.   Political signs;
         c.   Real estate signs;
         d.   Temporary window signs;
         e.   Vending machine signs; and
         f.   Village provided signs.
      2.   In all other cases, the person to whom the notice is sent or
delivered shall be given no less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20)
days in which to comply with the order, except as follows:
         a.   If, in the discretion of the Zoning Officer, compliance will
reasonably take more than 20 days, the person to whom notice is sent may be
given additional time, but no more than 30 days;
         b.   If the person to whom the notice is sent has violated this
section within _____ months prior to the current violation, then the notice
shall require immediate compliance.
      3.   If an unlawful sign is not brought into compliance as directed by
the zoning officer, it shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and such
owner will be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Removal Of Signs Required After Business No Longer Conducted: A sign
shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is
located when the business which the sign advertises no longer is conducted on
the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the zoning
officer shall notify the owner or lessee in writing, and allow thirty (30) days
for removal of such sign. Upon failure of the owner or lessee to comply with
the notice, the zoning officer may remove the sign at the cost and expense of
the owner or lessee.
   D.   Removal By Village; Costs: Where a sign has not been removed, repaired,
relocated, or altered pursuant to notice requiring the same by the zoning
officer, the zoning officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of said sign,
and any cost or expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner and/or
other person in control of the premises on which said sign is located. Such
costs, if not reimbursed, shall constitute a lien against the premises upon
which the sign is located.
   E.   Inspections: The zoning officer is empowered to enter or inspect any
building, structure, or premises in the village for the purpose of inspection
of a sign and its structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance
with all applicable codes and ordinances. Such inspections shall be carried out
during business hours unless an emergency exists. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011; amd.
Ord. 833, 1-21-2020; Ord. 867, 7-20-2023)
8-3-14: VARIANCES:
   A.   Application For Variance; Fee: A request for a variance of this chapter
shall be submitted to the zoning officer on forms provided by the zoning
officer. The application fee for a variance shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) which shall be in addition to the fee for the sign.
   B.   Hearing: The zoning officer shall forward all information to the zoning
board of appeals, which shall hold a public hearing on the application at a
regularly scheduled or special meeting. Notice of the time and place of the
hearing, together with a brief description of the subject matter, shall be
published one time not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the village.
   C.   Grounds For Granting Variance: Variations from the regulations of this
chapter shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in accordance with
the standards established in this section, and may be granted only in the
following instances, and in no others:
      1.   To permit a setback of less than ten feet (10') from the property
line;
      2.   To permit an increase in the height of a sign of not more than forty
percent (40%) of the maximum permitted under the applicable regulation; and
      3.   To permit an increase in the area of a wall or freestanding sign of
not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the maximum permitted under the
applicable regulation. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
      4.   Notwithstanding the provision of subsection C3 of this section, to
permit an electronic message board/LED sign of not more than forty eight (48)
square feet when mounted on a pylon sign.
      5.   Notwithstanding the provision of subsection C3 of this section, to
permit an increase in the area of a pylon sign of not more than thirty five
percent (35%) of the maximum permitted under the applicable regulation. (Ord.
764, 4-7-2016)
   D.   Findings: The zoning board of appeals shall not vary the regulations of
this chapter, as authorized in this section, unless it shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
      2.   The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable,
generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
      3.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property;
      4.   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this chapter and has
not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property;
      5.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located; and
      6.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion of the
public street, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
   E.   Conditions And Restrictions: The zoning board of appeals may impose
such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as
may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this section, to
reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other properties in the
neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of this chapter.
   F.   Resubmission Of Application: The same application for a variance may
not be resubmitted within six (6) months of the decision of the zoning board of
appeals unless, in the judgment of the zoning officer, the original application
has been substantially amended. (Ord. 688, 7-21-2011)
8-3-15: PENALTIES:
The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is declared to be an offense. Any person violating any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
688, 7-21-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 4
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Powers And Duties Of Director
8-4-3: Regulation Of Demolition Contractors
8-4-4: Regulation Of Property Owners
8-4-5: Permits; Fees
8-4-6: Demolition Inspections
8-4-7: Demolition Requirements
8-4-8: Violations, Penalties
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
DEMOLITION: The removal, in whole or part, of any structure or building, the
removal of demolition debris, or the installation of fill material and final
grading in connection with such removal.
DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm engaged in the business of demolition
of buildings or structures by contract.
DIRECTOR: The director shall be the village superintendent of public works.
(Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
In addition to the other powers and duties prescribed in this chapter, the
director shall have the right during reasonable hours, or at any time when an
extreme danger exists, to enter any premises for which a demolition permit has
been issued or applied for to determine the progress of work or to determine if
a safety hazard exists. The director shall have the authority to order the
discontinuation or modification of any demolition work when the director
determines that a hazardous condition may result from continued work. The
director shall approve or disapprove all applications for demolition permits.
The director shall approve all bonds required under this chapter. The director
shall submit an accounting of all fees collected to the village clerk. (Ord.
737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-3: REGULATION OF DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Bonding Required: Prior to the issuance of any demolition permit, a
demolition contractor shall provide the director with the following:
      1.   License And Permit Bond: A license and permit bond specifically
covering demolition work and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, such bond to be in the amount of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), and with the following further conditions:
         a.   To pay all damages that may occur to any tree, pavement, street,
sidewalk, telegraph pole or wire, or any other village property, within the
village, whether caused or inflicted by the applicant or his agents, employees,
or subcontractors;
         b.   To indemnify the village for all liabilities, judgments, costs
and expenses, including attorney fees, that may in any way accrue against it on
account of the issuance of the demolition permit;
         c.   To remove any and all debris and other unsightly materials
remaining after any of the building is razed or demolished and fill in the
excavation to grade level; and
         d.   To comply with the provisions of this chapter, with all other
applicable laws of the village, and with the conditions and requirements of all
permits granted to the applicant.
   B.   Bond Period; Additional Bond: The bond furnished by the applicant or
demolition contractor shall remain in full force and effect for a period of six
(6) months and shall cover any and all wrecking, demolishing or tearing down of
buildings performed by the applicant during the six (6) month bond period. In
the event any work commenced during the six (6) month bond period is not
completed, a new bond shall be furnished by the applicant before additional
work is undertaken. (Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-4: REGULATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
Owners of real property may demolish their own buildings or structures.
However, the director shall not issue a demolition permit until the owner has
provided the following:
   A.   Bond: A cash bond equal to fifty cents ($0.50) per one square foot of
ground floor area of all buildings named in the application for a demolition
permit. Such bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. Such
bond shall be canceled and all monies returned to the owner upon completion of
the demolition to the reasonable satisfaction of the director.
   B.   Entry Agreement: An agreement signed by the owner granting permission
to employees or agents of the village to enter the named property to complete
all work required under this chapter if such work is uncompleted on the date of
expiration of the demolition permit. Any expenses incurred by the village as a
result of such entry and work shall be deducted from the bond. (Ord. 737, 11-
13-2014)
8-4-5: PERMITS; FEES:
   A.   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish any
building or structure, or any structural part thereof, without having first
obtained a demolition permit from the director. Application for a permit shall
be made on a form prescribed by the director and submitted to the zoning
officer. The zoning officer shall then submit the application to the director
for review.
   B.   Expiration Of Permits: Permits for demolition shall expire thirty (30)
days after issuance. The director may, upon good cause shown, extend such date
of expiration for a successive fifteen (15) day period.
   C.   Denial Of Permit: The director may refuse to issue a demolition permit
when the requirements of this chapter are not met or where a permit has already
been issued for a specific property and no significant progress has been made
toward complete demolition.
   D.   Drawings Required: Applicants for a demolition permit shall provide
drawings indicating the height and location of buildings on the site, distance
from property lines and adjacent buildings, final grading, party walls,
protective canopies and such other information as may be reasonably requested
by the director. The director may, if he determines that the safety of persons
or property will not be adversely affected, waive the requirements of this
subsection D.
   E.   Permit Fees: The director shall collect fees for all demolition permits
according to the following schedule:
1. Residential:                                                           
 First dwelling unit on lot                                             $50.00
 Each additional dwelling unit on lot                                   25.00
 Each accessory building                                                15.00
2. Nonresidential:                                                        
 Up to 1,000 square feet of ground floor area of building lot           50.00
 For each additional 1,000 square feet of ground floor area of building 10.00
  on lot
3. Fees for demolition work started prior to the issuance of a permit shall be
doubled.
 
(Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-6: DEMOLITION INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspections Required: The director shall cause an inspection to be made
of all demolitions upon the completion of work and at such other stages of work
as he may determine to be necessary.
   B.   Notification For Inspection: The person carrying out a demolition shall
notify the director that the site is ready for final inspection. The director
shall cause an inspection within twenty four (24) hours of such notification,
nonworking days excluded.
   C.   Discontinuance Of Demolition For Safety Reasons: If, after inspection,
the director finds continued demolition will create a hazard to the public, he
shall order demolition discontinued and recommend a safer method of demolition
to be used. (Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-7: DEMOLITION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General: All demolition work shall be carried out in safe and
workmanlike manner to minimize hazard to adjacent property and the public. This
shall include the installation of an appropriate silt fence to control sediment
migration.
   B.   Subterranean Walls, Floors, Footings: All subterranean walls, floors
and footings shall be removed.
   C.   Fill Material: All depressions, cavities, cisterns or wells shall be
filled with approved granular material or compacted structural clay to within
six inches (6") of final grade.
   D.   Finish Grade: The final grading shall be such that no depressions or
cavities exist and stormwater cannot stand on the demolition site. Six inches
(6") of earth shall be installed over any depression, cavity, cistern or well
filled with fill material.
   E.   Removal Of Debris: All debris resulting from demolition shall be
removed from the site where demolition occurs in a timely manner. In no event
shall debris be used for fill material.
   F.   Barricades, Fencing And Canopies: Where necessary to protect public
health and safety, the director may require the erection of fencing, barricades
or protective canopies around the perimeter of the demolition site.
   G.   Working Hours: No demolition work shall be conducted between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless previously
approved by the director.
   H.   Closing Of Streets: Streets, roadways and alleys adjacent to a
demolition site may be closed only after approval by the director. The director
shall, prior to approval of such closing, consult with the fire chief, sheriff
and superintendent of public works.
   I.   Disconnection Of Utilities: It is the responsibility of the owner or
his agent to arrange the disconnection of all utilities to a demolition site
prior to demolition. All water, sewer and gas lines shall be properly capped
and sealed. Sewer lines shall be disconnected in accordance with the
requirements of all applicable law.
   J.   Party Walls: Before a permit required by this chapter is issued for the
wrecking of a structure that has one or more party walls in common with one or
more buildings, there shall be delivered to the division of inspection services
a certificate by a licensed architect or licensed structural engineer to the
effect that the adjoining premises do not require anchorage; or if such
certificate indicates that anchorage is necessary, the certificate shall be
accompanied by a drawing signed and sealed by such architect or engineer and
approved by the code official indicating adequate anchorage, and the adjoining
premises shall be anchored in compliance with such drawing. The written consent
of the owner of the adjoining premises permitting the anchorage shown on such
drawing shall also accompany the certificate.
   K.   Party Wall Responsibility: It shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner and/or demolition contractor to procure and pay for the report as
outlined in subsection J of this section. Any party wall damage during the
demolition process shall be the responsibility of the demolition contractor.
   L.   Warning Signs: Signs stating "Wrecking And Demolition Work In Progress
- No Trespassing" shall be erected on each side of the building that faces a
public street, alley or sidewalk. (Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
8-4-8: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Defined: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
cause or allow demolition to occur on any property under his ownership or
control except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Penalty For Violation: Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists or opposes the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or who shall proceed to engage in the demolition of any structure
without having first obtained a demolition permit therefor shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision of this
chapter shall continue.
   C.   Penalty Does Not Excuse Violation: The imposition of a penalty
hereunder shall not excuse the violation, nor shall it permit the continuance
of any such violation. (Ord. 737, 11-13-2014)
TITLE 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, SCOPE AND VALIDITY
SECTION:
9-1-1: Short Title
9-1-2: Scope
9-1-3: Validity
9-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
VILLAGE OF GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-1-2: SCOPE:
It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances, or
resolutions, except those specifically repealed by this title or amendments
hereto, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, or
other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to
which the village is a party. Where this title imposes a greater restriction
upon land, buildings, or structures than is imposed or required by such
existing provisions of law, ordinance, resolution, contract, or deed, the
provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-1-3: VALIDITY:
The invalidity of any provision of this title shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of this title. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall
declare invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular
property, structure, or land, such ruling shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, structure, or land not specifically
included in said ruling. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The following rules shall apply in the construction and interpretation of this
title and of the terms used herein:
   A.   The present tense includes the future tense.
   B.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter genders.
   C.   The singular number includes the plural, and vice versa.
   D.   The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always
permissive.
   E.   The word "person" includes a partnership, association, firm, trust,
club, company, or corporation as well as the individual.
   F.   The word "used" or "occupied" or "located", as applied to any land,
building, use, structure, or premises, shall be construed to include the words
"intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied or located".
   G.   The word "lot" shall include the words "plot" and "parcel". (Ord. 158,
6-15-1978)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, for the purpose of this title, the following
terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings herein
indicated:
   A.   Governmental units, boards and officials:
    PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Germantown Hills, county of Woodford, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD: The governing body of the village.
   ZONING BOARD OR BOARD: The zoning board of appeals of the village.
   ZONING OFFICER: The officer designated by the village board to enforce this
title.
   B.   General terms:
    ACCESSORY: As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental and subordinate to the main or principal structure or
use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use.
   ALTER; ALTERATION: Any change in the bearing walls, columns, beams, girders,
or supporting members of a structure; any change or rearrangement in the floor
area of a building; any enlargement of a structure, whether by extending
horizontally or by increasing in height; and/or any movement of a structure
from one location or position to another.
   BLOCK FRONT: Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the
two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
unsubdivided area, or other definite boundary.
   DWELLING: A building designed for residential living purposes and containing
one or more dwelling units and/or lodging units.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one and not more than two (2)
roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink and other kitchen
facilities.
   FAMILY: 1. An individual; or
      2.   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
      3.   A maximum of five (5) persons not so related, together with his or
their domestic servants and gratuitous guests maintaining common household in a
dwelling unit or lodging unit.
   FENCE: A structure forming a physical barrier which is so constructed that
not less than thirty percent (30%) of the vertical surface is open to permit
the transmission of light, air and vision through such surface in a horizontal
plane, in contrast to a wall which need have no openings in the vertical
surface.
   HEIGHT: The vertical measurement from the average level of the surface or
the ground immediately surrounding a structure to a point midway between the
ridge and eave lines of the roof of the structure, or if unroofed, to the
highest point of such structure.
   JUNKYARD: A lot, land, building, or structure, or part thereof, used
primarily for the collecting, storage, and/or sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap
metal, or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storing, and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for sale of
parts therefrom.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot located:
      1.   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting
streets; or
      2.   At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline
or high water line of a stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin; or
      3.   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more stormwater or
floodwater runoff channels or basins; or
      4.   At and abutting the point of abrupt change of a single street where
the interior angle is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) and the
radius of the street is less than one hundred feet (100').
   LOT DEPTH: The average distance from the front to the rear lot lines,
measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
along a straight line between them at points in the side lot lines which are
distant from the front lot line at the minimum front yard depth.
   LOT; ZONING LOT: A single property, parcel, unit, tract, plot, or otherwise
designated, to be used as a unit under single ownership or control, and which
may be occupied by one or more structures and the accessory structures or uses
customarily incidental thereto, including such open spaces as are arranged and
designed to be used in connection with such structure. A "zoning lot" may or
may not coincide with a lot of record.
   PREMISES: A lot or tract of land and any structure located thereon.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: A system of providing a potable water supply to two (2)
or more premises including all associated structures, wells, and distribution
systems and which is approved by the Illinois department of public health as a
public water supply.
   SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of
liquid and solid sewage wastes from two (2) or more premises, other than
stormwater, to a sewage treatment plant, and which is approved by the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
   SETBACK LINE: The building restriction line nearest the front and across a
lot establishing the minimum distance to be provided between the line of a
structure located on said lot and the nearest street right of way line or
centerline or the nearest shoreline or high water line of a stormwater or
floodwater runoff channel or basin.
   STREET: A thoroughfare within the right of way which affords the principal
means of access to abutting property. A street may be designated as: an avenue,
a boulevard, a drive, a highway, an arterial, a lane, a parkway, a place, a
road, a thoroughfare, or by other appropriate names. Streets are identified
according to type of use by the major thoroughfare plan, as follows:
   Arterial: A street designated on the official zoning map and representing a
partially access controlled divided facility serving speeds for trip lengths
generally in excess of three (3) miles.
   Collector: A street designated on the official zoning map and generally
meant to serve secondary traffic generators and to collect and distribute
traffic between arterials and minor streets.
   Minor: A street primarily designed to provide access to abutting property
and to gather individual trips for delivery to a collector street.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
surface of the ground or affixed to something having a fixed location on the
surface of the ground, including, but not limited to: buildings, walls,
swimming pools, fences, billboards, and signs.
   STRUCTURE, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: The structure in or on which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which it is located.
   SUBDIVISION: Any division, development, or resubdivision of any part, lot,
area, or tract of land by the owner or agent, either by lots or by metes and
bounds, into lots two (2) or more in number, for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement, or sale, with the appurtenant
streets, alleys, and easements, dedicated to public use or for the use of the
purchasers or owners within the tract subdivided. The division of land for
agricultural purposes not involving any new street, alley, or other means of
access shall not be deemed a subdivision for the purpose of the regulations and
standards of this title.
   TRAILER COACH: Any portable or mobile vehicle or mobile home used for
residential living purposes by a family. For the purpose of this title, such a
vehicle shall be classified as a trailer coach, whether or not its wheels,
rollers, skids, or other rolling equipment have been removed, or whether or not
any addition thereto has been built on the ground.
   USE: The specific purpose for which land, a structure or premises is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
   YARD: An open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a structure,
lying between the structure and the nearest lot line, and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the surface of the ground upward except as may be
specifically provided by this title.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
Where a lot is located such that its rear and front lot lines each abut a
street right of way line, both such yards shall be classified as front yards.
Every yard of a corner lot facing a street right of way line shall be
classified as a front yard.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of a lot and situated between
the rear lot line and the nearest line of a structure located on said lot.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard situated between the side lot line and the nearest line
of a structure located on said lot and extending from the rear line of the
front yard to the front line of the rear yard. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012
Code)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-3-1: Zoning Officer
9-3-2: Zoning Use Permit
9-3-3: Zoning Compliance Certificate
9-3-4: Commercial Pad Sites Exempt From Provisions
9-3-5: Fees
9-3-6: Amendments
9-3-7: Appeals
9-3-8: Violations; Penalties
9-3-1: ZONING OFFICER:
This title shall be administered and enforced by the zoning officer. No zoning
use permit or zoning compliance certificate shall be issued by him except where
there has been compliance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 158, 6-15-
1978)
9-3-2: ZONING USE PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: A zoning use permit shall be obtained from the zoning
officer by the owner, lessee, or other person having the right to possession,
or his authorized agent, of any property or structure before commencing:
      1.   To establish, occupy, or change the use of a structure or land
either by itself or in addition to another use;
      2.   To construct or erect a new structure or part thereof;
      3.   To extend or move any structure or part thereof;
      4.   To change one nonconforming use to another such use or to a special
use;
      5.   To extend, expand, change, or reestablish any nonconforming use;
provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to those persons, nor
to property, structures, or uses, exempted from the regulations of this title
by statute or by other provisions of this title, except to the extent
specifically provided herein.
   B.   Application For Permit: Application for zoning use permits shall be
filed in the office of the zoning officer on forms prescribed thereby. Such
applications shall:
      1.   State the location, street number, and lot, block and/or tract
comprising the legal description of the property.
      2.   State the name and address of the owner, the applicant if different
from the owner, and the contractor if known.
      3.   State the estimated costs.
      4.   Describe the uses to be established or expanded.
      5.   Be accompanied by a plan in duplicate, or duplicate prints thereof,
drawn approximately to scale, showing:
         a.   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
         b.   The size, shape, and location of the use to be established or the
structure to be constructed.
         c.   The size, shape, and location of all existing structures and uses
located on the lot.
         d.   The minimum floor elevations and highest known flood level, where
applicable.
         e.   Ingress and egress.
         f.   Off street parking spaces and loading berths.
         g.   Water supply and sewage disposal facilities, including a true and
correct copy of any permit.
         h.   Other information as may be necessary to provide for the proper
administration and enforcement of this title.
      6.   Include any accessory structure or use established or constructed at
the same time the main or principal structure or main or principal use is
established or constructed.
   C.   Issuance And Scope Of Permit:
      1.   If the zoning officer determines that an application for zoning use
permit and the use applied for conform to the applicable regulations and
standards of this title, and if an application for a zoning compliance
certificate has been made, he shall issue a zoning use permit.
      2.   Each zoning use permit for a main or principal structure or main or
principal use shall also cover any accessory structure or accessory use
established or constructed at the same time on the same lot or tract of land.
      3.   The zoning officer shall issue an original and a duplicate copy of
the zoning use permit to the applicant and shall retain another duplicate copy
for his records. The applicant's duplicate copy shall be posted in plain sight
on the premises for which it is issued until the zoning compliance certificate
has been issued.
   D.   Expiration Of Permit:
      1.   If the work described on any zoning use permit shall not have begun
within ninety (90) days from the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and
be canceled by the zoning officer, and written notice thereof shall be given to
the applicant.
      2.   If the work described on any zoning use permit shall not have been
substantially completed within three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days
from the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the
zoning officer, and written notice thereof shall be given to the applicant,
together with notice that further work as described on the canceled permit
shall not proceed until a new permit shall have been issued; provided, however,
that for commercial and industrial buildings, the permit shall extend for such
period as set forth in the application for the zoning use permit as the time
necessary to complete the building.
      3.   If a new zoning use permit is issued granting additional time for
completion of the work, such new permit may require, at the discretion of the
zoning board of appeals, a limitation on time allowed for the completion of the
work and a performance bond to ensure completion within the time set. Such new
permit shall not, in any case, be valid after three hundred sixty five (365)
consecutive days from the date of issuance thereof.
      4.   A zoning use permit issued for the establishment of the use of land
where no structure is involved, or on which land a structure is accessory to
the main or principal use not involving any structure, shall not expire. The
land so used shall be inspected by the zoning officer at one year intervals
from the date of issuance of such zoning use permit to ensure compliance with
the regulations and standards of this title. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3-3: ZONING COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE:
   A.   Certificate Required: No land shall be occupied or used and no building
hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a
zoning compliance certificate shall have been issued by the zoning officer.
   B.   Application For Certificate; Issuance:
      1.   No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration or
repairs to, any building shall be issued until an application has been made for
a zoning compliance certificate.
      2.   All zoning compliance certificates shall be applied for coincident
with the application for a zoning use permit, and said certificate shall be
issued within three (3) days after the erection or alteration shall have been
approved.
      3.   Zoning compliance certificates for the use of vacant land shall be
applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used, and a zoning
compliance certificate shall be issued within three (3) days after the
application has been made, provided such use is in conformity with the
provisions of this title.
   C.   Records Kept: The zoning officer shall maintain a record of all
certificates, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having
proprietary on tenancy interest in the building affected. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3-4: COMMERCIAL PAD SITES EXEMPT FROM PROVISIONS:
If a parcel of land has been approved as a commercial pad site in accordance
with section
10-3-6 of this code, the zoning officer shall issue a zoning use permit and a
zoning compliance certificate under sections
9-3-2 and
9-3-3 of this chapter without requiring compliance with provisions of this
title that are rendered inapplicable by virtue of the proposed construction of
a building so as to occupy all or nearly all of the pad site. (Examples of
provisions rendered inapplicable are maximum building coverage, yard
requirements, off street parking space, and off street loading space.) Building
setback requirements from streets or other rights of way continue to apply to
the siting of the proposed commercial building upon the pad site as though the
shopping center developer continued to own the pad site as part of the shopping
center development. The zoning officer shall specifically review the request
for a zoning use permit to confirm that the size of the proposed commercial
building in relation to the size of the commercial pad site continues to
satisfy the requirements of section
10-3-6 of this code. (Ord. 435, 9-23-1999)
9-3-5: FEES:
   A.   Established: The following fees shall be charged for the processing of
applications and the issuance of zoning use permits, and shall be collected by
the zoning officer, who shall be accountable to the village for such fees:
1.  New construction of a main or principal structure of 1,000 square    $20.00
    feet of floor area or less
    New construction of a building of more than 1,000 square feet of
2.  floor area, per 100 square feet of floor area or additional fraction 2.00
    thereof
3.  New construction of an accessory structure                           6.00
4.  Alter, remodel, or extend a major or principal structure for the     6.00
    first 300 square feet of floor area or less
5.  Alter, remodel, or extend a main or principal structure per 100      2.00
    square feet of floor area or fraction thereof over 300 square feet
6.  Alter, remodel, or extend an accessory use                           3.00
7.  Establish a use of land where no structure is involved               20.00
8.  Move a structure from one lot to another                             10.00
9.  Change in use                                                        6.00
10. Demolish any principal structure                                     10.00
    Applications for variance or special use: A non-refundable fee of $100.00
11. for each zoning lot shall be deposited with the zoning officer at the time
    of application.
 
   B.   Refunds: There shall be no refund on any zoning use permit fees paid
hereunder; except, that on written application, the village board may refund,
at its discretion, a portion of the fee which the village board determines
exceeds the cost of zoning administration; provided, that the work authorized
by such zoning permit is completed within the original time limit.
   C.   Additional Fees: No additional fee shall be charged for a permit
renewal unless there is a change in the plans, in which case, the application
shall be filed as a new application with a proper fee. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978;
amd. Ord. 452, 8-10-2000; Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3-6: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards, restrictions, and district boundaries set forth
in this title may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, or
repealed. No such action may be taken unless and until:
   A.   Application For Amendment; Fee: A written application is submitted to
the zoning board of appeals. Such application may be initiated by the village
board, the planning commission, or the owners of more than fifty percent (50%)
of the area involved. Each such application, except that initiated by the
village board or by the planning commission, shall be accompanied by a fee, as
may be determined by the village board, to be paid by the applicant.
   B.   Notice Of Amendment: At least fifteen (15) days' but not more than
thirty (30) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing of such action
shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the village, and a copy of the application shall be referred to
the planning commission for its recommendation.
   C.   Hearing:
      1.   A public hearing shall be held. Any person may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney. The report of the planning commission shall be made a
part of the public hearing.
      2.   The zoning board of appeals may, by majority vote, postpone or
adjourn, from time to time, any public hearing. In the event of such
postponement or adjournment, further publication of such action need not be
made.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing, the
zoning board of appeals shall make a report to the village board on amendments
to this title.
   D.   Village Board Action:
      1.   In the event that the report of the zoning board of appeals is
adverse to such action referred thereto, such action shall not be passed except
by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the village
board.
      2.   In case of a written protest against any such action: a) signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage, the zoning
classification of which is proposed to be altered; or b) signed and
acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley from the frontage, the zoning classification of
which is proposed to be altered; or c) signed and acknowledged by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite from the frontage, the
zoning classification of which is proposed to be altered; and filed with the
village clerk, such action shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the village board. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3-7: APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals To Zoning Board Of Appeals:
      1.   Right To Appeal; Notice: An appeal to the zoning board of appeals
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or
bureau of the village. The appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of
the action complained of by filing with the zoning officer from whom the appeal
is taken and with the zoning board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying
the grounds thereof. The zoning officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978;
amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the zoning officer from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has
been filed with him, that, by reason stated in the certificate, a stay would,
in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the zoning board of appeals or by a court of record on
application, and on notice to the zoning officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
      3.   Hearing: The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide
the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
      4.   Board Of Appeals Decision: The zoning board of appeals may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and, to that
end, has all the powers of the zoning officer from whom the appeal is taken.
   B.   Appeals To Courts:
      1.   Right To Appeal; Compliance With State Law: All final administrative
decisions of the zoning board of appeals under this title shall be subject to
judicial review, which appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any
officer, department board, or bureau of the village, pursuant to the provisions
of the "administrative review law", approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments
and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. The term
"administrative decision" is defined as in section 1 of the "administrative
review law".
      2.   Notice Of Appeal: Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days
from the date of the action appealed from by filing with the zoning officer and
the zoning board of appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
The zoning officer shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals all
papers constituting the record upon which the actions appealed from were taken.
      3.   Stay Of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the zoning officer certifies to the zoning
board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him, that,
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order of record on application, on
notice to the zoning officer and on due cause shown. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Complaint Of Violation: Whenever a violation of this title occurs or is
alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the causes and bases thereof and shall be filed
with the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall record properly such
complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided by this
title.
   B.   Court Action: In case any structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, or converted, or any structure or land is used in
violation of this title, the zoning officer or any owner or tenant of real
property in the same contiguous zoning district as the structure or land in
question, in addition to other remedies, may institute an appropriate action or
proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction:
      1.   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, or use of a structure.
      2.   To prevent the occupancy of the structure or land.
      3.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about
such structure or land.
      4.   To restrain, correct, or abate the violation. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   C.   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation, or agent, employees or
contractors of such, who violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply
with, or who resist enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be
subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense, and said person, firm or corporation shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Additional Remedies: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the village
from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
ARTICLE A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
9-3A-1: Established; Membership; Appointment; Terms
9-3A-2: Organization
9-3A-3: Vacancies And Removals
9-3A-4: Powers And Duties
9-3A-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
A zoning board of appeals is hereby established. The zoning board of appeals
shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the village board of trustees.
The members of the zoning board of appeals shall serve respectively for the
following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3)
years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years,
and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve
for a term of five (5) years. From the effective date hereof, all terms of
office are declared to begin July 1 of a particular year and are declared to
end on June 30 five (5) years later. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. Ord. 262, 11-
17-1988)
9-3A-2: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Chair: The board of trustees shall designate one of the appointed
members as chair of said zoning board of appeals at the time of his
appointment, and said appointed chair shall hold his office as chair until his
successor is appointed. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   B.   Meetings:
      1.   All meetings may be held at the call of the chair, or as determined
by the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   Such chair, or in his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses.
      3.   All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be open to the
public.
   C.   Minutes: The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member on every question. If any member is
absent or fails to vote, the minutes shall indicate such fact.
   D.   Rules Of Procedure: The zoning board of appeals shall adopt its own
rules of procedure not in conflict with the statutes of the state. (Ord. 158,
6-15-1978)
9-3A-3: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
Vacancies upon the zoning board of appeals shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant. The board of trustees shall
have the power to remove any member of the zoning board of appeals for cause
and after a public hearing. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning officer. The board
shall also hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under this title. The concurring vote of four (4) members of
the zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify or amend the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
to the extent and in the manner that the zoning board of appeals may decide to
be fitting and proper, and to that end, the zoning board of appeals shall also
have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The zoning board
of appeals shall have the power to: (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   Permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown of record.
   B.   Interpret the provisions of this title where the street layout actually
on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the district map fixing
the several districts.
   C.   Grant a variance when it is determined in specific cases that there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of any of the regulations and standards of this title. A variance
from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the board unless and
until:
      1.   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
         a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land or structure involved which are not applicable to other
lands or structures in the same district.
         b.   That the literal interpretation of the provisions of this title
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other lands or
structures in the same district under the terms of this title.
         c.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant.
         d.   That the granting of the variance requested will not confer on
the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands
or structures in the same district.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands or structures in the same district
and no permitted use of land or structures in other districts shall be
considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
      2.   The application is in proper form and a fee as may be determined by
the village board has been paid.
      3.   The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on such
matter in accordance with the provisions of section
9-3-6 of this chapter. Reasonable special conditions and safeguards for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare may be imposed by the
zoning board of appeals if it grants the application for variance. (Ord. 158,
6-15-1978)
ARTICLE B. SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
9-3B-1: Policy And Purpose
9-3B-2: Definition
9-3B-3: Application For Special Use
9-3B-4: Board Of Appeals Recommendation
9-3B-5: Board Of Trustees Approval Or Denial
9-3B-6: Enumeration Of Special Uses
9-3B-7: Application Of District Regulations
9-3B-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
It is hereby declared the policy and purpose of this title to employ the
special use as a flexible means of permitting certain exceptions to the
districts established and the rules and regulations adopted herein, in cases
where the public benefit of such uses outweighs the potential harm, and under
such conditions imposed as are necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare and individual property rights. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3B-2: DEFINITION:
As used in this article, a "special use" is a use which is necessary or
desirable for the public welfare, but which is potentially incompatible with
the uses normally permitted in the zoning districts established herein. (Ord.
158, 6-15-1978)
9-3B-3: APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE:
An application for one of the special uses of land specified in section
9-3B-6 of this article shall be made by filing a written application or
petition to the zoning board of appeals. Such application shall:
   A.   State the names and addresses of applicant and owner.
   B.   State the location of property for which the special use is sought.
   C.   State the specific special use desired.
   D.   State facts sufficient to demonstrate that the conditions prescribed in
section
9-3B-4 of this article exist and support such statement with any plans and/or
data as are required by the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3B-4: BOARD OF APPEALS RECOMMENDATION:
The zoning board of appeals shall make recommendations in regard to
authorization of special use permits by the village board in accordance with
the procedure set forth in this article when it appears:
   A.   That it is reasonably necessary for the public convenience at that
location.
   B.   That it is so designed, located and proposed as to be operated so that
it will not be injurious to the district in which it shall be located or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
   C.   That it conforms to the applicable regulations and standards of and
preserves the essential character of the district in which it shall be located.
   D.   That, in the case of an existing nonconforming use, it will make such
use more compatible with its surroundings. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3B-5: BOARD OF TRUSTEES APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the village board of trustees in
accordance with the provisions of section
9-3-6 of this chapter, which is applicable to amendments of this title, and the
regulations and conditions set forth in this article and this title for special
uses. No application for special use shall be acted upon by the village board
of trustees until after:
   A.   A public hearing has been held by the zoning board of appeals, after
due notice by publication as prescribed in section
9-3-6 of this chapter; and
   B.   A written report of the findings and recommendations of the zoning
board of appeals is prepared and forwarded to the village board of trustees.
The written report shall be forwarded to the village board of trustees within
thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-3B-6: ENUMERATION OF SPECIAL USES:
Special uses which may be authorized are as follows:
   Cemeteries in the R-1 residential and A agricultural districts.
   Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, Sunday schools,
rectory or parsonage in the R-1 and R-2 residential, A agricultural and C
commercial and CPD commercial planned development districts.
   Clubs, private clubs, private lodges, country clubs, golf courses and lakes
in the R residential, C commercial, CPD commercial planned development and A
agricultural districts.
   Daycare centers in R-1 and R-2 residential districts.
   Electric and/or gas substations, public waterworks and appurtenant
structures, telephone exchanges, police stations, fire stations, and
governmental administration buildings in all districts.
   Hospitals, nursing homes, doctor clinics, and veterinarian clinics in the R-
1 and R-2 residential, C commercial, CPD commercial planned development, and A
agricultural districts.
   Junk dealers in the I industrial district, provided a fence is constructed
in accordance with section
9-4-9 of this title.
   Keeping, raising, or feeding livestock or poultry, including dairying,
poultry, swine, sheep, goats, beef cattle, pony and horse productions, fur
farms, or beekeeping, or such structures for housing livestock, poultry or
bees, or for preparing livestock or poultry products for market in the R-
1 residential, C commercial, CPD commercial planned development, I industrial
and A agricultural districts within four hundred feet (400') of any residential
district boundary subject to the following standards:
   A.   At no point on the lot line of such special use shall any noise, smoke
and particulate matter, vibrations, toxic or noxious matter, odors, vapors, or
gases of such use be objectionable to the occupant of any adjacent property.
   B.   No such special use shall discharge into any drainage channel or
watercourse material which would contaminate or make undesirable any lands or
waters outside of the lot.
   Mixed Use Districts in C commercial districts, subject to the requirements
of Section
9-7A-4 of this Code.
   Multi-family dwelling in the R-2 residential district with public water
supply and public sanitary sewer, a minimum lot area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet per dwelling unit, and subject to the standards and regulations of
section
9-6B-3 of this title.
   Personal wireless service facilities in all districts, in accordance with
the requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   Planned unit development which may consist of one or more permitted uses in
the R-1 and R-2 residential districts. Such a development shall be
substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan
and must have a major land use which corresponds to the most general category
of land use proposed in the comprehensive plan for the area involved.
      A planned unit development shall be comprised of a minimum area of ten
(10) acres or be bounded on all sides by streets, alleys, easements, public
open spaces, or boundaries of differing zoning classifications. This
requirement may be waived upon determining that an adequate development can be
accomplished on a parcel of lesser size, upon the recommendation of the
planning commission.
      Although one part of the area may be developed in excess of the permitted
density and another part under the permitted density, the overall density of
the development must not exceed the density rate permitted in that particular
district.
      The front yard required in the particular district in which the
development is located shall be provided at all points along the perimeter of
the development area.
   Off street parking shall be provided for all uses included within the
development and at the usual rate. All requests for a planned unit development
shall be accompanied by a site plan, elevations, and other data in sufficient
detail to permit the planning commission to properly review the proposed
development.
   Public libraries, museums, art galleries, community centers and parks in the
R-1 and R-2 residential, C commercial, CPD commercial planned development and A
agricultural districts.
   Public, parochial or private schools (which may include a convent or
teacherage) in the R-1 and R-2 residential, A agricultural, C commercial and
CPD commercial planned development districts.
   Sanitary landfill in the A agricultural and I industrial districts.
   Sewage treatment plants in the A agricultural and I industrial districts.
   Topsoil removal in all districts.
   Trailer coach parks in the R-2 residential and A agricultural districts
subject to regulations of the districts and the following:
   A.   The applicant shall submit approval of license by the appropriate
authority.
   B.   The applicant shall submit a plan and specifications for the proposed
trailer coach park. The site shall not contain less than three (3) acres, have
not less than fifteen (15) trailer coach spaces at first occupancy and have no
more than ten (10) trailer spaces per gross acre. The minimum size of all
spaces shall be not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
   C.   All trailer coach spaces shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system
and public water supply.
   D.   Each trailer coach space shall be provided with one off street
automobile parking space.
   E.   Each trailer coach park shall be limited to provide no more than one
sign of not more than eight (8) square feet in size, per public road entrance.
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. Ord. 570, 3-23-2006; Ord. 829, 11-18-2020)
9-3B-7: APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
In addition to any special conditions or restrictions recommended by the zoning
board of appeals, the yard and setback line regulations and standards of the
district in which the special use is located shall apply. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
ARTICLE C. CONDITIONAL USES - ADULT-USE CANNABIS
SECTION:
9-3C-1: Purpose And Applicability
9-3C-2: Application Procedure
9-3C-3: Conditional Use
9-3C-4: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
9-3C-5: Security And Other Improvements
9-3C-6: Co-Location Of Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
9-3C-7: On-Site Use Or Consumption Prohibited
9-3C-8: Enumeration Of Conditional Uses
9-3C-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
It is the intent and purpose of this Section to provide regulations regarding
the dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of
the Village of Germantown Hills. Such facilities shall comply with all
regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027)
(Act), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is
amended, the more restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-2: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An application for a Conditional Use under this Article shall be processed in
the same manner and with the same review and approval process as required for a
special use under Article B of this Chapter, except the standards set forth in
Section
9-3C-2 of this Article shall apply in lieu of the special use standards set
forth in Section
9-3B-4 for special uses. Further, the other provisions of Article B of this
Chapter shall apply to a Conditional Use granted under this Chapter except as
otherwise provided herein. The application for a Conditional Use filed by a
petitioner shall include an affidavit affirming compliance with the applicable
section of this Chapter, all requirements of the Act, and any stipulations or
conditions imposed during the review and approval process. The application must
be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as provided in Section
9-3-5 of this Code. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-3: CONDITIONAL USE:
An Adult-Use Cannabis facility shall require approval as a Conditional Use in
the respective zoning use district in which such facility is to be located. In
determining compliance with this Article and eligibility as a Conditional Use,
the following standards shall be evaluated for the proposed Adult-Use Cannabis
Facility based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular
property for which the Conditional Use is sought in the context of the existing
and intended future use of the adjacent and nearby properties:
   A.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
   B.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including co-
tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
   C.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/ employees.
   D.   Anticipated parking demand based on Section
9-7A-3.E. of this Code and available private parking supply.
   E.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
   F.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
   G.   Proposed signage plan.
   H.   Compliance with all requirements provided in Section
9-3C-4.
   I.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
Section
9-3C-4. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-4: ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning districts in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   A.   Time: A dispensary may operate between 8:00 a.m and 7:00 p.m.
   B.   Place:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the property line
of a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential
purposes.
   C.   Manner:
      1.   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by a
dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the dispensing
organization as authorized by the Act, and no dispensing organization shall
also sell food for consumption on the premises.
      2.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      3.   Facility shall not be issued a permit to host on-site consumption of
cannabis.
      4.   Signs for the facility shall not contain any images of cannabis leaf
or bud, or designed or likely to appeal to minors.
   D.   Number of Cannabis Business Establishments: Only one (1) Adult-Use
Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall be granted a conditional use permit
under this Article or otherwise permitted to operate in the Village.
   E.   Parking: For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as “Retail Stores, Shops” per Section
9-7A-3.E. of this Code; provided, however, that the Village may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
Section
9-3C-3. herein.
   F.   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed to enter an
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   G.   No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in an Adult-
Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   H.   No outdoor seating areas shall be permitted at an Adult-Use Cannabis
Dispensing Organization.
   I.   No drive-through services or sales shall be permitted at an Adult-Use
Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   J.   The Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall operate the
facility in compliance with all applicable state and local laws, including the
Act and the provisions of this Article. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-5: SECURITY AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:
A petitioner shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the conditional use permit, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the adult-use cannabis business
establishments, as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be determined
based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for an Adult-Use
Cannabis Business Establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent
with the requirements of the Act. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-6: CO-LOCATION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
Co-location of an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization with an Adult-Use
Cannabis Craft Grower Center or an Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization, or
both, shall not be permitted. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-7: ON-SITE USE OR CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
No on-site use or consumption of cannabis shall be permitted at any Adult-Use
Cannabis Business Establishment in the Village or at any other retail or
service business, private club, or similar organization location in the
Village. Additionally, no onsite consumption shall be permitted of food,
beverages, or other products sold at an Adult-Use Cannabis Business
Establishment in the Village. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
9-3C-8: ENUMERATION OF CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional Uses which may be authorized are as follows:
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization, as defined in Section
3-7-1 of this Code, in the C commercial and I industrial districts. Such use
may be permitted only in specific situations in accordance with the procedures
and requirements of this Article C. (Ord. 819, 11-21-2019)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Minimum Requirements
9-4-2: Compliance Required
9-4-3: Existing Structures
9-4-4: Accessory Uses And Structures
9-4-5: Access
9-4-6: Height Limit Modifications And Exceptions
9-4-7: Required Open Space
9-4-8: Lot Depth
9-4-9: Obstructions In Yards
9-4-10: Trailer Coaches
9-4-11: Home Occupations
9-4-12: Fencing
9-4-13: Screening Requirements
9-4-1: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The regulations and standards set by this title within each district shall be
minimum regulations and standards and shall apply uniformly to each class,
kind, or type of structure, use, or land except as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
remodeled, extended, or moved unless in conformity with all the regulations and
standards herein specified for the district in which it shall be located.
   B.   No structure shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered,
remodeled, extended, or moved:
      1.   To exceed the height;
      2.   To occupy or house a greater number of families;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of the lot area;
      4.   To exceed the density;
      5.   To have smaller or less habitable floor area per dwelling unit or
lodging unit;
      6.   To exceed the maximum floor area;
than hereinafter required or in any manner contrary to the regulations and
standards of the district in which it is located.
   C.   No part of a yard, buffer strip, or other open space, off street
parking space or loading berth, or lot area required about or in connection
with any structure or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations and
standards of this title shall be included as part of a yard, buffer strip, or
other open space, off street parking space or loading berth, or lot area
similarly required for any other structure or use, except as provided herein.
   D.   No yard, buffer strip, or other open space, off street parking space or
loading berth, or lot existing on the effective date hereof shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the requirements set forth herein. Yards, buffer
strips, or other open spaces, off street parking spaces or loading berths, or
lots created or established after the effective date hereof shall meet at least
the minimum requirements established by this title. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-3: EXISTING STRUCTURES:
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any structure existing or upon which
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof; provided,
that such structure shall be completed within one calendar year from the
effective date hereof. Any structure existing prior to the effective date
hereof may be converted to any use permitted by the zoning district in which
such structure is located. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-4: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
No accessory use shall be established prior to the establishment of the main or
principal use, and no accessory structure shall be constructed, erected,
altered, remodeled, extended, or moved prior to the establishment of
construction of the main or principal structure except those accessory uses and
structures of a temporary nature required for the establishment of the main or
principal use, or for the construction of the main or principal structure.
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-5: ACCESS:
No structure shall be constructed or erected on a lot or tract of land, or
moved to a lot or tract of land, which does not abut a public street with right
of way at least sixty feet (60') in width unless said street, on the effective
date hereof, had a lesser width. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-6: HEIGHT LIMIT MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The height of any main or principal structure or accessory building may
exceed the maximum permitted height by one foot (1') for each additional foot
by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard dimension for the
district in which such structure is located. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   B.   Unless height regulations or standards are imposed by other provisions
of this title, height regulations and standards shall not apply to spires,
belfries, penthouses, or domes not used for human occupancy nor to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, utility poles and towers,
silos, grain elevators and other necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided
their location shall conform, where applicable, to the regulations and
standards of the federal communications commission, the civil aeronautics
administration, and other public authorities having jurisdiction. (Ord. 570, 3-
23-2006)
9-4-7: REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
Lots hereafter platted or created shall have adequate lot area, width and depth
to provide for required off street parking spaces and loading berths, yards,
buffer strips, and open spaces. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-8: LOT DEPTH:
No lot hereafter platted or created shall be less than one hundred feet (100')
in depth. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-9: OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS:
The following yard regulations and standards shall apply to all lots or tracts
of land on which a structure is located:
   A.   Unobstructed Yards Generally: Yards shall be kept unobstructed for
their entire depth except as specified in this section.
   B.   Permitted Obstructions: Private driveways, service drives, easements,
sidewalks, flagpoles, arbors, trellises, fences, walls, columns, light poles,
hydrants, patios, accessory signs, and other decorative recreational and
utility devices and equipment may be placed in any yard.
   C.   Visibility Regulations; Fences, Walls And Hedges: Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this title, the following visibility regulations and
standards shall apply: (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
      1.   Interior lot fences, walls, and/or hedges may be placed in any yard
or along the edge of any yard; provided, that no fence, wall, or hedge, except
in the case of a junkyard, shall exceed the height of six feet (6'). (Ord. 452,
8-10-2000)
      2.   On a corner lot, nothing shall be constructed, erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision
between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') above the centerline grades
of the intersecting streets in a triangular area bounded by the right of way
lines of such corner lot and a line joining points along the right of way lines
fifty feet (50') from the point of intersection of the right of way lines. In
all other areas, subsection C1 of this section shall apply.
      3.   Any scrap, junk, salvage, reclamation or similar yard, or any auto
salvage yard shall provide a solid fence or wall on all setback lines with only
such openings as are necessary for ingress or egress. Said fence or wall shall
be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance and shall be of such height that
any materials stored within the confines of the fence cannot be seen above a
line of sight established between a point four and one-half feet (41/2') above
the centerline of the street nearest to that fence and the top of said fence.
      4.   Privacy fences and screenings may be placed in back yards between
the setback lines and the structure, provided the height of eight feet (8') is
not exceeded. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-10: TRAILER COACHES:
Except as permitted under the provisions of section
9-3B-6 of this title, no occupied trailer coach shall be permitted on any lot
or tract of land outside of a trailer coach park except the trailer coach of a
bona fide guest of the occupant of a dwelling located on such a lot or tract of
land. Such temporary location of a trailer coach shall not exceed thirty (30)
consecutive days and two (2) such thirty (30) day periods within one calendar
year. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-11: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Definition: A "home occupation" shall be defined as a gainful
occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling, or conducted in
connection with a dwelling, and carried on by the residents therein, provided
such occupation or profession is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the dwelling for residential living purposes, and no persons other than those
using the premises for residential living purposes are engaged in the conduct
of the home occupation. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Regulations:
      1.   Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of one
floor of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
      2.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.
      3.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or
which causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
      4.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale except such as may be
produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises.
      5.   No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
      6.   No home occupation shall be conducted without a permit issued by the
village board of trustees. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-4-12: FENCING:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall install a fence in the village without
first obtaining a fence permit and complying in all respects with the terms and
conditions of the permit and of this section. A fence permit shall be valid
only for the term of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. A fence
permit is not required for painting, maintenance, or repair of a fence.
      1.   Permit Application: A fence permit application shall be filed with
the zoning officer, consisting of the following:
         a.   A written application for a fence permit and payment of full
permit fee, which shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
         b.   A drawing, site plan or plat map displaying property boundaries,
the location of the buildings and structures on the property, the proposed
location of the fence and the distances from the proposed fence to the existing
structures on the property.
         c.   If the fence is proposed to be installed on rented or leased
property, the written consent of all of the owner(s) of the property.
         d.   Other information as may be required by the village to assist in
the review of the application.
      2.   Application Review And Approval Required, Permit Issuance: The
zoning officer shall review, approve and issue the fence permit provided that
the application is in compliance with this section and the standards of this
section for the fence to be installed have been met. The fence permit may
contain reasonable conditions stated in the permit.
      3.   Completion Of Installation: A fence authorized by a fence permit
shall be fully installed in accordance with this section and permit conditions,
and within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of permit issuance. A
fence permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of
issuance. After a fence permit expires, no work requiring such a permit shall
be commenced, resumed or undertaken until a new permit is issued or the
original permit is extended.
The permit applicant may file a written request for an extension of the fence
permit, stating the reason for the request, for up to one hundred eighty (180)
additional days to complete the fence installation. The zoning officer, in
administering this code, shall grant the request if the applicant demonstrates
that unusual conditions have prevented the timely completion of the
installation of the fence.
      4.   Responsibility Of Applicant: The applicant is solely responsible for
installing the fence:
         a.   Within the boundaries of the applicant's property named in the
fence permit application and determined by the drawing, site plan or plat map,
in compliance with this section and the permit, including, but not limited to,
proper materials, height, and setback requirements.
         b.   In compliance with any subdivision covenants or restrictions,
deed restrictions, utility easement restrictions, land use restrictions of
record, including applicable plan review and approval, or waiver requirements.
         c.   In a manner as will not obstruct stormwater drainage, violate a
village approved stormwater plan, or unreasonably divert stormwater onto the
property of another.
   B.   Fence Installation And Requirements: No fence shall be installed,
except in strict compliance with this section, site specific permit conditions,
and the following requirements:
      1.   Structural and support components of a fence shall face away from
adjacent properties and public rights of way.
      2.   Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent
property or public right of way, and the fence posts must be located on the
inside of the fence facing the property on which the fence is located.
      3.   Fences shall be installed plumb and the top finish of the fence
shall be uniform. Fences shall follow the contour of the ground to the extent
practical. Adjustments for grade shall occur at the bottom of the fence.
      4.   The height of the fence shall be controlled by the applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance for the district in which the fence will be
located. Fence height shall be measured from the surface of the ground
immediately below the fence. A front yard fence cannot exceed four feet (4') in
height, regardless of which district it is located within.
      5.   The project site shall be marked by JULIE before digging holes for
fence installation.
      6.   The height of walls and fences shall be measured vertically from the
finished grade on the exterior side of the fence. Raising the finished grade by
placing fill is prohibited. If a fence is placed on a berm, the berm shall be
included in the height of the fence and the height shall be measured vertically
from the base of the berm, unless said fence is approved in conjunction with a
variance granted by the zoning board of appeals.
      7.   All fences shall be no closer than two feet (2') to the public
sidewalk and no closer than two feet (2') to any public right of way.
   C.   Obstruction Of Ingress/Egress Area Of A Dwelling: No fence shall be
installed in any yard that will obstruct the view of any window or opening in a
habitable space of a dwelling. A minimum distance of three feet (3') shall be
maintained between any solid fence and any such window or opening in a
dwelling.
   D.   Approved Fence Materials: All fences shall meet the following material
requirements:
      1.   Fences to be situated in side and/or rear yards shall be constructed
using materials suitable for residential style fencing, including, but not
limited to, brick, fieldstone, wrought iron, vinyl, chainlink (with a minimum
thickness of 9-gauge and a required top rail support), stockade or board on
board wood.
      2.   No fence shall be constructed of used or discarded materials in
disrepair, including, but not limited to, pallets, tree trunks, trash, tires,
junk, or other similar items.
      3.   Agricultural/farm fences shall only be permitted in agriculturally
zoned or used districts and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
      4.   Residential front yard fences shall be fifty percent (50%) open (see
through) and be of split rail, wrought iron or picket design. Chainlink fencing
is not permitted in residential front yards.
      5.   Residential side yard fences on corner lots shall be of split rail,
wrought iron, picket design, or decorative wood design. Chainlink and stockade
style fences are not permitted in residential side yards on corner lots.
   E.   Fence Maintenance: Fences shall be maintained in a manner as to prevent
rust, corrosion and deterioration, so as not to become a public or private
nuisance, and so as not to be dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property
owners or the public. Fences shall not be in a state of disrepair. Every fence
installed shall be maintained by the owner in such a way that it will remain
plumb and in good repair.
   F.   Prohibitions: No person shall install:
      1.   An electric or razor wire fence.
      2.   Barbed wire may not be installed on fences, except that barbed wire
may be installed above the top line of a six foot (6') fence located in a
Nonresidential Zoning District and enclosing a storage area. Barbs on chainlink
fences are not allowed on any exposed portion of the fences below six feet
(6').
      3.   Any wire or chainlink type fence with the cut or salvage end of the
fence exposed at the top.
      4.   A fence which creates a hazard to users of the street, sidewalk or
to nearby property.
      5.   A fence composed solely of fence posts.
      6.   An incomplete fence, consisting only of posts and supporting
members.
   G.   Enforcement:
      1.   It shall be a violation of this section to erect or maintain a fence
that does not comply with the requirements of this section.
      2.   Any person or entity believing a fence violates this section may
file a complaint with the Zoning Officer that details the location of the
fence, identifies the property owner(s), if known, and describes the provision
(s) of this section with which it is not compliant.
      3.   The Zoning Officer, or another Village employee designated by the
President, shall verify the complaint's allegations. The Zoning Officer, or
another Village employee designated by the President, shall have the authority
to investigate compliance with this section if they have reason to suspect a
violation, regardless of whether a complaint has been filed. If a violation is
confirmed, the Zoning Officer, or another Village employee designated by the
President, shall cause a notice of noncompliance to be served upon the property
owner on which the fence is located.
      4.   An owner shall remedy any violations within sixty (60) days' receipt
of the notice of noncompliance. Any owner who fails to remedy any violation
within sixty (60) days shall be subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine
beginning on the sixty first day following receipt of the notice, and an
additional one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine every thirty (30) days thereafter,
until such time as all violations stated in the notice are remedied and
approved of by the Zoning Officer or another Village employee designated by the
President, who shall not unreasonably withhold approval.
   H.   Applicability: Fences existing upon passage of this section shall be
grandfathered and protected from the application of this section's requirements
unless they are hereafter significantly modified. Additionally, if a
nonconforming structure is destroyed, replaced, or changed by any means to an
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 710, 10-25-2012)
9-4-13: SCREENING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Definitions:
    BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to screen and
visually separate in part or entirely, one area, site or property from the view
of another area.
   GARDEN WALL: An opaque masonry wall delineating a private area.
   PRIVACY FENCE: An opaque fence made of vinyl. Privacy fences shall not
enclose front yards.
   B.   Screening: Screening shall be designed, planted, or constructed and
maintained anywhere within a green space in accordance with the following
general guidelines:
      1.   A thirty foot (30') rear green space ("green space") and twenty foot
(20') side green space and permanent screening during all seasons shall be
required for industrial or commercial use property adjoining an R-1 District or
an R-2 District.
      2.   No screening shall interfere with sight requirements for safe
ingress and egress or otherwise interfere with sight lines for traffic.
      3.   Any screening proposed within an existing underground or overhead
utility easement or a drainage easement shall be coordinated with the affected
utility.
      4.   No parking area, storage area, storage building, trash receptacle,
driveway, vehicle turn-around, building or accessory construction, or other
above-ground improvements may be placed or permitted within the green space.
      5.   The following screening types shall be used for the side and rear
green space:
         a.   A dense compact screen of plantings ("plantings") to attain the
dimensions specified in this chapter within a two (2) year time span; and
         b.   Either:
            (1)   A privacy fence or garden wall at least six feet (6') in
height, with zero percent (0%) open. Chain link style fences shall not be used;
or
            (2)   A ground contoured earthen berm. Berms shall have a side
slope not more than four feet (4') horizontal distance for each one foot (1')
of vertical distance and not less than three feet (3') horizontal distance for
each one foot (1') of vertical distance with a minimum top width of four feet
(4'). The berm shall be landscaped with grass or other plantings.
      6.   All types of screening shall be six feet (6') in height.
      7.   If a combination of plantings and a berm is used, the plantings may,
but are not required to be, on top of the berm, and each shall be at least six
feet (6') in height.
      8.   If a combination of plantings and privacy fence or garden wall is to
be used, the plantings shall be placed on the outside perimeter of the fencing.
      9.   A plan specifying dimensions, locations, and types of screening
shall be supplied at the time a building permit is applied for.
      10.   Screening shall be in place prior to occupancy of the property.
      11.   Developments proposing a garden wall within a required green space,
may be allowed a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the required green space as
part of the Zoning Officer's review of the application for building permit.
Such request shall be submitted in writing by the owner or owner's agent with
the application for building permit and shall include provisions by the owner
for maintenance of the green space and the garden wall.
   C.   Maintenance:
      1.   All fences, walls, berms, plantings, and other barriers shall be
maintained in good repair, meaning structurally sound and attractive in
appearance. All fences, required or otherwise, shall have the finished face
directed toward residential property, where a residential property is adjacent
to or across from the subject site.
      2.   In the event that any planting is damaged, it shall be replaced
within one year or one growing season, whichever is sooner.
      3.   In the event that any berm is damaged, it shall be repaired within
sixty (60) days weather permitting.
      4.   In the event any fence/garden wall is damaged, it shall be repaired
within sixty (60) days weather permitting.
   D.   Dense Compact Plantings - Minimum Plant Material Size: All required
plantings shall, at the time of planting be of the following minimum size.
Trunk caliper shall be measured two feet (2') above the ground:
      1.   Shade trees: Trunk caliper (diameter) of two and one-half inches
(21/2").
      2.   Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') in height.
      3.   Intermediate trees:
         a.   Single stem varieties shall have a trunk caliper (diameter) of
one and one-half inches (11/2").
         b.   Multi-stem varieties shall have a minimum height of six feet
(6').
      4.   Shrubs (all): Two feet (2') in height or spread.
   The following trees may not be used in meeting any of the requirements of
this chapter.
         Ailanthus (tree of heaven).
         All fruit trees.
         Ash trees.
         Black locust.
         Box elder.
         Elm trees.
         European mountain ash.
         European white birch.
         Mulberry.
         Poplar.
         Purple-leaf plum.
         Russian olive.
         Siberian elm.
         Silver maple.
         Willow.
      Any plant that is exceptionally invasive and/or harmful to native
ecosystems and all plants specifically listed on the Illinois Banned Species
List. (Ord. 813, 2-21-2019)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
9-5-1: Districts Established
9-5-2: Official Zoning Map
9-5-3: Determination Of District Boundaries
9-5-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
9-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare, the village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
 
R-1 Residential district
R-2 Residential district
C   Commercial district
CPD Commercial planned development district
I   Industrial district
A   Agricultural district
 
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-5-2: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this title are as
shown on the zoning map herein referred to and identified by the title "village
of Germantown Hills, Illinois, official zoning map". All explanatory matter
thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this title. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-5-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Streets And Alleys: Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   B.   Lot Lines: Boundaries indicated as approximately following recorded lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   C.   Village Limits: Boundaries indicated as approximately following village
limits shall be construed as following such village limits.
   D.   Railroad Lines: Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
   E.   Parallels Or Extensions: Boundaries indicated as parallel to or
extensions of features indicated in subsections A, B, C and D of this section
shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official
zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
   F.   Authority To Interpret District Boundaries: Where physical or cultural
features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the
official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A
through E of this section, the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the
district boundaries. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-5-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the village shall be considered
as being classified in accordance with the following schedule until otherwise
changed by ordinance:
Classifications In County  Classifications In Village
Classifications In County              Classifications In Village
Residential AR districts       shall be R-1 residential district
Residential AS or CS districts shall be R-2 residential district
Commercial district            shall be C commercial district
Industrial district            shall be I industrial district
Agriculture district           shall be A agricultural district
Conservation A or B district   shall be A agricultural district
No classification              shall be R-1 residential district
 
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6A-1: Purpose
9-6A-2: Permitted Uses
9-6A-3: Regulations And Standards
9-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 residential district is intended to provide the area covered by this
title with a low density residential district. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Within the R-1 residential district, the following uses are permitted:
   Conversion of any existing building to a permitted use.
   Home occupations.
   One-family dwellings.
   Public parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-6A-3: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
The following regulations and standards shall apply to all dwellings:
   A.   Occupancy: Residential occupancy per dwelling unit shall be limited to
one family and not more than two (2) roomers or boarders.
   B.   Location: Dwellings shall be located so as to abut a collector or minor
street but may abut an arterial only if access to and from such street is
provided by a merging feeder system.
   C.   Habitable Floor Area: The minimum habitable floor area per dwelling
unit shall be one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet.
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off
street parking spaces located on the same lot or tract of land as the dwelling
served.
      2.   Such off street parking space shall total at least three hundred
(300) square feet for each space required.
      3.   Not more than one such space within a private garage or private
carport shall be rented or leased to a nonresident of the premises.
      4.   No such space shall be located less than thirty feet (30') from any
front lot line and shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15') from any
side or rear lot line.
   E.   Minimum Lot Size:
              Minimum Area            Minimum Width           Maximum Building
Dwelling Type Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot Coverage
                Minimum Area            Minimum Width           Maximum
Dwelling Type                                                   Building
                Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot Coverage

Without public
water supply                                                 
and sanitary
sewer:
   One-family30,000       30,000     120          150        30%
With public
water supply or                                              
sanitary sewer:
   One-family15,000       15,000     100          115        30%
With public
water supply                                                 
and sanitary
sewer:
   One-family10,000       10,000     100          100        30%
 
   F.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Where the lot abuts an arterial as designated on the official
zoning map, the front yard shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60') as measured
from the nearest right of way line.
         b.   Where the lot abuts a collector street as designated on the
official zoning map, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty feet
(30') from the nearest right of way line.
         c.   Where the lot abuts a minor street, the minimum depth of the
front yard shall be thirty feet (30') from the nearest right of way line.
         d.   Where the lot abuts a collector or minor street with a right of
way width of less than sixty feet (60'), the minimum depth of the front yard
shall be sixty feet (60') from the centerline of such right of way.
         e.   Where twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots within a
block abut collector or minor streets and where occupied by main or principal
structures prior to the effective date hereof, the setback line of the
remaining vacant lots within such block shall be the average of the existing
setbacks, except where the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare
are endangered.
         f.   Where the lot abuts a stormwater or floodwater channel or basin
as designated on the official zoning map or on the official map of the map,
plat and subdivision ordinance, the minimum setback line shall be fifty feet
(50') from the nearest shoreline or high water line. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
      2.   Side Yard: The minimum side yard width of each yard shall be fifteen
feet (15') except that those lots of eighty feet (80') or less in width,
measured at the front building setback line, shall have a minimum side yard
width of ten feet (10'). No accessory buildings shall project into the required
side yard space. (Ord. 740, 12-11-2014)
      3.   Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard depth shall be thirty feet (30').
Accessory buildings may be erected in a rear yard, provided they are located at
least fifteen feet (15') from the rear lot or side lot line, and provided
further, that the maximum lot coverage is not exceeded.
   G.   Building Height: Except as provided in subsection
9-4-6A of this title, no principal building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in
height, and no accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
ARTICLE B. R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6B-1: Purpose
9-6B-2: Permitted Uses
9-6B-3: Regulations And Standards
9-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 residential district is intended to provide the area covered by this
title with a medium density residential district. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Within the R-2 residential district, the following uses are permitted:
   Conversion of any existing building to a permitted use.
   Four-family dwellings.
   Home occupations.
   One-family dwellings.
   Public parks and playgrounds.
   Three-family dwellings.
   Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-6B-3: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
The following regulations and standards shall apply to all dwellings:
   A.   Occupancy: Residential occupancy per dwelling unit shall be limited to
one family and not more than two (2) roomers or boarders.
   B.   Location: Dwellings shall be located so as to abut a collector or minor
street but may abut an arterial only if access to and from such street is
provided by a merging feeder system.
   C.   Habitable Floor Area: The minimum habitable floor area per dwelling
unit shall be nine hundred (900) square feet for single-family dwellings and
seven hundred (700) square feet per dwelling unit for two-, three- and four-
family dwelling units.
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two (2) off
street parking spaces located on the same lot or tract of land as the dwelling
served; except, that for three- family dwellings and above, there shall be
provided a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) off street parking spaces located
on the same lot or tract of land as the dwelling served. (Ord. 452, 8-10-2000)
      2.   Such off street parking space shall total at least three hundred
(300) square feet for each space required.
      3.   Not more than one such space within a private garage shall be rented
or leased to a nonresident of the premises.
      4.   No such space shall be located less than thirty feet (30') from any
front lot line and shall be located not less than fifteen feet (15') from any
side or rear lot line. For three- and four-family dwellings, all parking shall
be located behind the buildings.
   E.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot sizes shall be as shown in the
following table:
MINIMUM LOT SIZE
 Minimum Area            Minimum Width          Minimum
 Interior    Corner Lot  Interior   Corner Lot  Depth   Public Public Water
 Lot (Square (Square     Lot (Feet) (Feet)      (Feet)  Sewer
 Feet)       Feet)
           Minimum Area            Minimum Width          Minimum
           Interior    Corner Lot  Interior   Corner Lot  Depth   Public Public
           Lot (Square (Square     Lot (Feet) (Feet)      (Feet)  Sewer  Water
           Feet)       Feet)
One-family 30,000      30,000      120        150         100     No     No
Two-family 40,000      40,000      150        200         100     No     No
                                                                   
One-family 15,000      15,000      90         115         100     (Either)
Two-family 20,000      20,000      110        135         100     (Either)
Three-     30,000      30,000      140        180         100     (Either)
family
                                                                   
One-family 6,000       7,500       60         75          100     Yes    Yes
Two-family 8,000       10,000      80         95          100     Yes    Yes
Three-     10,000      12,000      90         105         100     Yes    Yes
family
Four-      12,000      14,000      100        115         100     Yes    Yes
family
 
Maximum building coverage shall be 30 percent.
   F.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   Where the lot abuts an arterial as designated on the official
zoning map, the front yard shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60') as measured
from the nearest right of way line.
         b.   Where the lot abuts a collector street as designated on the
official zoning map, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be thirty feet
(30') from the nearest right of way line.
         c.   Where the lot abuts a minor street, the minimum depth of the
front yard shall be thirty feet (30') from the nearest right of way line.
         d.   Where the lot abuts a collector or minor street with a right of
way width of less than sixty feet (60'), the minimum depth of the front yard
shall be sixty feet (60') from the centerline of such right of way.
         e.   Where twenty five percent (25%) or more of the lots within a
block abut collector or minor streets and where occupied by main or principal
structures prior to the effective date hereof, the setback line of the
remaining vacant lots within such block shall be the average of the existing
setbacks, except where the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare
are endangered.
         f.   Where the lot abuts a stormwater or floodwater channel or basin
as designated on the official zoning map or on the official map of the map,
plat and subdivision ordinance, the minimum setback line shall be fifty feet
(50') from the nearest shoreline or high water line.
      2.   Side Yard: The minimum side yard width of each yard shall be fifteen
feet (15'). No accessory buildings shall project into the required side yard
space.
      3.   Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard depth shall be thirty feet (30').
Accessory buildings may be erected in a rear yard, provided they are located at
least fifteen feet (15') from the rear lot or side lot line, and provided
further, that the maximum lot coverage is not exceeded.
   G.   Building Height: Except as provided in subsection
9-4-6A of this title, no principal building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in
height, and no accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 7
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7A-1: Purpose
9-7A-2: Permitted Uses
9-7A-3: Regulations And Standards
9-7A-4: Mixed Use Zoning In Commercial District
9-7A-1: PURPOSE:
The commercial district is intended to provide space for those retail
businesses, service businesses and office uses serving the Germantown Hills
area. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-7A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Within the commercial district, the following uses are permitted:
   Agricultural uses for the growing, harvesting and storing of crops,
including legume, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture,
horticulture, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, and greenhouse.
   Farm buildings used for growing, harvesting and preparing crop products for
market, or for use on the farm, or for storing and protecting farm machinery
and equipment from the elements.
   Silos, grain storage bins, or drying facilities shall not be permitted in
the district.
   Automobile service stations and public garages; new or used car sales areas;
new or used farm equipment sales areas; but not including the storage of
wrecked vehicles or farm equipment.
   Banks; post office; medical or dental clinics; business or professional
offices.
   Convenience store/gas station.
   Customary accessory uses located on the same or adjacent lot with a
permitted use.
   Hotel, motel, boarding or lodging houses and dwelling units located on the
same lot with such a permitted use.
   Retail stores and shops; lumberyards without manufacturing; restaurants and
taverns.
   Service type business such as barbershop; beauty parlor; laundromat; music,
dancing, art or photography studio; servicing or repair of home appliances or
farm equipment; and similar uses.
   Theaters and bowling alleys. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. Ord. 701, 6-14-2012;
Ord. 736, 8-28-2014)
9-7A-3: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size: None specified.
   B.   Maximum Coverage: The amount of the total lot area which may be covered
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed eighty percent (80%).
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   C.   Yards:
      1.   Front Yard:
         a.   There shall be a front yard for each lot side abutting a street
as shown on the official zoning map.
         b.   The minimum front yard depth shall be seventy feet (70') from the
centerline of arterial and collector streets, but no building shall be placed
less than thirty feet (30') from any right of way line of any public street.
         c.   If the building is to be constructed in an established block
where there are existing buildings, the front yard depth shall be the average
of the yard depth of the buildings on the block face where the building is to
be located.
      2.   Side Yard: The side yard minimum width is twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
371, 8-8-1996)
      3.   Rear Yard: The rear yard minimum depth is thirty feet (30'). Except
that, where the rear yard adjoins another property with a C (Commercial) Zoning
classification and where loading and unloading space is not located at the rear
of the building and the building is not more than one story in height, the rear
yard may be reduced to ten feet (10'). In such case, no vehicular traffic shall
be permitted to the rear of the building. (Ord. 371, 8-8-1996; amd. Ord. 736,
8-28-2014)
      4.   Vehicle Parking: Vehicle parking shall not be permitted in the first
five feet (5') of all yards. (Ord. 736, 8-28-2014)
      5.   Landscaping: Landscaping shall be placed, maintained in a healthy
condition, and replaced as necessary in those areas of all required yards where
parking is prohibited, recognizing that some of those areas will contain
driveways where landscaping would be impossible. The Village does not specify
or require any particular landscaping scheme, preferring to rely on the good
faith of its business community, but the landscaping scheme shall include a
combination of grass, shrubs, and trees at a minimum, among other landscaping
elements. This landscaping requirement is intended to promote aesthetically
pleasing development which will protect and preserve the current rural
character of the Village and will enhance the public health, safety and
welfare. In addition to the foregoing, where a lot abuts a lot in a Residential
District, there shall be provided screening as required in chapter 4 of this
title. (Ord. 813, 2-21-2019)
      6.   Specific Setbacks: Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, fuel dispensers, fuel pump islands and detached canopies shall be set
back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from all property lines. (Ord. 736, 8-28-
2014)
   D.   Building Height: Except as provided in subsection
9-4-6A of this title, no principal building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in
height, and no accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   E.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking spaces shall be provided as
follows:
One off street parking space shall be provided per dwelling unit or lodging
unit on the same lot or tract of land of such dwelling unit or lodging unit
served. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
Automobile or machine sales and service 1 space for each 800 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Banks and saving and loan associations  1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Barbershops and beauty shops            3 parking spaces for each barber or
                                        beauty chair
                                        5 spaces for each alley, plus the
Bowling alleys                          spaces required for restaurants, bars
                                        and any other activities
Business and professional offices,      1 space for each 400 square feet of
except medical and dental offices       gross floor area
Convenience store/gas station           1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Furniture and major home appliance      1 space for each 600 square feet of
sales                                   gross floor area
Gasoline service stations               1 space for each service bay, plus 1
                                        space for each 2 employees
Libraries, museums or galleries         1 space for each 600 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Medical and dental clinics or offices   1 space for each 150 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
                                        1 space for each guestroom, plus the
Motel                                   spaces required for restaurant, bar or
                                        other activities
                                        1 space for each 200 square feet of
Nursery or other plant sales            indoor gross floor area used for retail
                                        sales, and 1 space for each 800 square
                                        feet of open air sales and display area
Restaurants:                             
   Drive-in                          1 space for each 50 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
   Indoor; bars and nightclubs       1 space for each 100 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Retail stores, shops                    1 space for each 175 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
 
(Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. Ord. 736, 8-28-2014)
In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in this subsection, the
requirements for off street parking facilities shall be the same as for a use
which is so mentioned and to which such use is similar as determined by the
Zoning Officer. If the use is not similar to a use mentioned above, one space
shall be provided for each one hundred seventy five (175) square feet of gross
floor area.
   F.   Off Street Loading:
      1.   Loading spaces shall be provided and maintained on the same premises
with every building with uses involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles
of material or merchandise.
      2.   Such space shall be adequate for standing, loading, and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or
alleys.
      3.   Loading and unloading space shall not be occupied or considered as
any part of the required off street parking.
      4.   The off street loading space to be provided shall include a ten foot
by twenty five foot (10' x 25') loading space with a fourteen foot (14') height
clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in
excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet of building floor.
      5.   Each required loading space shall be served by appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will not unreasonably
interfere with traffic movement.
      6.   All open loading space shall be graded and paved or otherwise
improved with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete.
      7.   No storage, motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall
be permitted within any required loading space.
      8.   Off street loading space shall be screened from public view. (Ord.
158, 6-15-1978)
9-7A-4: MIXED USE ZONING IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the mixed use overlay district is to
accommodate retail, service, and office mixed uses that enhance and revitalize
commercial districts. The following zoning district provisions represent a
commercial zoning classification that permits, rather than mandates, a mix of
commercial and residential uses within the same building. The district is
intended to accommodate a physical pattern of development often found in
neighborhood commercial areas that promote livable community schemes and in
areas that can accommodate the need for affordable rental housing.
   B.   Special Use For Mixed Use: All mixed uses will be a special use, and
coordinated with the permitted uses described in this Section
9-7A-4. A Mixed Use District is intended to permit a complementary mix of
residential and commercial uses in a single district. The procedure to obtain
approval of a mixed use special use shall be the same as other special uses
described in Article B of Chapter 3 of Title 9 of this Code.
   C.   Applicability: Only properties zoned Commercial are eligible for a
special use as provided in this Chapter.
   D.   Permitted Uses: Within the commercial district, only the following uses
are permitted for mixed use zoning:
      Automobile service stations and public garages; new or used car sales
areas; new or used farm equipment sales areas; but not including the storage of
wrecked vehicles or farm equipment.
      Banks; post office; medical or dental clinics; business or professional
offices.
      Offices for governmental, educational, professional, and religious
organizations.
      Convenience store/gas station.
      Customary accessory uses located on the same or adjacent lot with a
permitted use.
      Hotel, motel, boarding or lodging houses and dwelling units located on
the same lot with such a permitted use.
      Retail stores and shops; lumberyards without manufacturing; storage
facility.
      Restaurants and taverns.
      Service type business such as barbershop; beauty parlor; laundromat;
funeral home, music, dancing, art or photography studio; servicing or repair of
home appliances or farm equipment; and similar uses.
      Theaters and bowling alleys.
   E.   Mixed Uses/Residential: In a Mixed Use District:
      1.   Residential uses are allowed on the second floor or higher floors. A
separate access shall be provided to the residential use.
      2.   Residential uses are allowed on the main floor provided sixty
percent (60%) of main floor is used for retail, office or service. A separate
access shall be provided to the residential use.
      3.   Residential uses are allowed on a basement level provided there is
an egress window and a separate access to the residential use.
   F.   Special Conditions: Mixed Use Districts are subject to the following
special conditions:
      1.   There shall be no outside storage of goods, materials, or products.
This does not prohibit the display of merchandise for sale.
      2.   All building permit applications are subject to site plan review.
      3.   All provisions in the Zoning Ordinance apply unless there is a
specific provision in this chapter to the contrary.
      4.   Residential occupancy per dwelling unit shall be limited to one
family and not more than two (2) roomers or boarders.
      5.   The minimum habitable floor area per dwelling unit shall be nine
hundred (900) square feet for single-family dwellings and seven hundred (700)
square feet per dwelling unit for two-family dwelling units and above.
      6.   Off Street Parking:
         a.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of two (2)
off street parking spaces located on the same lot or tract of land as the
dwelling served; except, that for two- family dwellings and above, there shall
be provided a minimum of two and one-half (21/2) off street parking spaces
located on the same lot or tract of land as the dwelling served.
         b.   Such off-street parking space shall total at least three hundred
(300) square feet for each space required.
         c.   Along with the residential off-street parking requirement, the
commercial district off-street parking requirements pertinent to the specific
commercial use must be met. (Ord. 829, 11-18-2020)
ARTICLE B. CPD COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-7B-1: Purpose
9-7B-2: Permitted Uses
9-7B-3: Regulations And Standards
9-7B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the CPD commercial planned development district is to create
areas that can be developed or redeveloped with maximum flexibility in design;
to promote the efficient use of land; and to facilitate an economic arrangement
of buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities while preserving the
existing landscape to the greatest extent possible. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Within the CPD commercial planned development district, the following uses are
permitted:
   Banks; post office; medical or dental clinics; business or professional
offices.
   Retail stores and shops; restaurants and taverns.
   Service type businesses, such as barbershop; beauty parlor; laundromat;
music, dancing, art or photography studio; and servicing or repair of home
appliances.
   Theaters and bowling alleys. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. Ord. 701, 6-14-2012)
9-7B-3: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Size: The CPD commercial planned development district shall be
comprised of a parcel or parcels of land not less than five (5) contiguous
acres. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   B.   Yards: There shall be a front yard for each lot side abutting a street
as shown on the official zoning map. The minimum front yard depth shall be
seventy feet (70') from the centerline of arterial and collector streets, but
no building shall be placed less than thirty feet (30') from any right of way
line of any public street. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Building Height: Except as provided in subsection
9-4-6A of this title, no principal building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in
height, and no accessory building shall exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   D.   Off Street Parking: There shall be five and one-half (51/2) off street
parking spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Vehicle parking shall not be permitted in front, side, or rear yard areas.
   E.   Off Street Loading:
      1.   Loading spaces shall be provided and maintained on the same premises
with every building with uses involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles
of material or merchandise.
      2.   Such space shall be adequate for standing, loading, and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of the
streets or alleys.
      3.   Loading and unloading space shall not be occupied or considered as
any part of the required off street parking.
      4.   The off street loading space to be provided shall include a ten foot
by twenty five foot (10' x 25') loading space with a fourteen foot (14') height
clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in
excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet of building floor.
      5.   Each required loading space shall be served by appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will not unreasonably
interfere with traffic movement.
      6.   All open loading space shall be graded and paved or otherwise
improved with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete.
      7.   No storage, motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall
be permitted within any required loading space.
      8.   Off street loading space shall be screened from public view. (Ord.
158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 8
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-8-1: Permitted Uses
9-8-2: Regulations And Standards
9-8-2-1: Performance Standards
9-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
Within the industrial district, the following uses are permitted:
   Agricultural use for the growing, harvesting and storing of crops, including
legume, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture,
horticulture, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, and greenhouse.
   Farm buildings used for growing, harvesting and preparing crop products for
market, or for use on the farm, or for storing and protecting farm machinery
and equipment from the elements.
      The keeping, raising, or feeding of livestock or poultry, including
dairying, poultry, swine, sheep, goats, beef cattle, pony and horse
productions, fur farms, or beekeeping or such structures for housing livestock
or poultry, products for market; such use shall not be located closer than five
hundred feet (500') to the residential district boundaries.
   Customary accessory uses.
   Fuel storage, lumberyards with manufacturing, building material storage
yards or similar storage yards, but not including salvage yards or junkyards.
   Grain storage; feed mills; fertilizer storage and processing.
   Manufacture or processing of goods or products.
   Railroad yards, siding and switching facilities; public utilities.
   Wholesale, storage and warehouse facilities, except those specifically
prohibited. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-8-2: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size: None specified.
   B.   Maximum Coverage: The amount of the total lot area which may be covered
by all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty percent (50%).
   C.   Yards And Open Spaces: On every lot in the industrial district, yards
shall be required as follows:
      1.   Front Yard Abutting Street, Side And Rear Yard: A front yard on each
lot line abutting a street, a side and a rear yard; except, in the case where
three (3) lot sides abut a street, there shall be required in addition to three
(3) front yards, a side yard.
         a.   Front Yard:
            (1)   The depth where a lot abuts an arterial or collector street
as designated on the official zoning map shall be seventy feet (70') from the
centerline of such a right of way, but not less than thirty feet (30') from the
right of way line.
            (2)   Where a lot abuts a minor street as designated on the
official zoning map, the minimum depth shall be fifty five feet (55') from the
centerline but not less than thirty feet (30') from the right of way line. If
the building is to be constructed in an established block where there are
existing buildings, the yard depth shall be the average of the yard depths of
buildings existing on the block face where the building is to be located.
         b.   Side Yard: The side yard width shall be twenty feet (20') or
greater. No accessory building shall project into the required side yard space.
         c.   Rear Yard: The rear yard depth shall not be less than forty feet
(40').
      2.   Loading And Unloading: Within the required yards or in addition
thereto, there shall be sufficient space for the loading and unloading of motor
vehicles off the street. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
      3.   Screening And Fencing:
         a.   Where a lot abuts a lot in a Residential District, there shall be
provided screening as required in chapter 4 of this title. Where the transition
from the Industrial District to the Residential District is a public street,
the front yard in the Industrial District shall be suitably landscaped.
         b.   Storage or outdoor work areas shall be screened from public view
by trees, hedges or other similar vegetation that will provide screening in all
seasons, fencing, or a combination of both. (Ord. 813, 2-21-2019)
   D.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided as follows:
      1.   One off street parking space per person normally employed on the lot
or tract of land.
      2.   One off street parking space for each truck or other vehicle
incidental to the use of such lot or tract of land. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-8-2-1: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Noise: Any use established in the I District after the effective date
hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum performance standards
governing noise set forth in this subsection. No use already established on the
effective date hereof shall be so relocated, altered or modified as to exceed
the maximum performance standards governing noise set forth in this subsection.
      1.   Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature shall be controlled
so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, at no point
along the boundaries of any Residential or Commercial District shall the sound
pressure level of any individual use permitted in the I District exceed the
prescribed levels of the following table:
Frequency Of Sound In Cycles Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Per Second                   Residential District  Commercial District
                             Boundaries (Decibels) Boundaries (Decibels)
Frequency Of Sound In Cycles Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Per Second                   Residential District  Commercial District
                             Boundaries (Decibels) Boundaries (Decibels)
0 - 75                       72                    79
76 - 150                     67                    74
151 - 300                    59                    66
301 - 600                    52                    59
601 - 1200                   46                    53
1201 - 2400                  40                    47
2401 - 4800                  34                    41
Above 4800                   32                    39
 
Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and an associated
filter manufactured according to the standards prescribed by the American
Standards Association. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   B.   Vibration: Any use established in the I District after the effective
date hereof shall be so operated such that no shaking vibrations shall be
noticeable at any district boundaries separating residential and commercial
uses from an Industrial District. Any use already established on the effective
date hereof shall be so relocated, altered, or modified such that no shaking
vibrations shall be noticeable at any district boundaries separating
residential and commercial uses from an Industrial District. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this title, any use permitted in the I District
creating intense earthshaking vibrations, such as are created by heavy drop
forges, shall be set back at least six hundred feet (600') from the lot lines
of such establishment on all sides. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: Any use established in the I District
after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the
maximum performance standards governing smoke and particulate matter set forth
in this subsection. No use already established on the effective date hereof
shall be relocated, altered, or modified as to exceed the maximum performance
standards governing smoke and particulate matter set forth in this subsection.
      1.   In addition to the performance standards specified in this
subsection, the emission of smoke or particulate matter in such a manner or
quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
henceforth be unlawful.
      2.   The emission from all sources within any lot area during any one
hour period of particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by
weight of particles having a particle density larger than forty four (44)
microns is prohibited.
      3.   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, streets, and so forth within lot lines shall
be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, oiling, or other acceptable
means.
      4.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
chart currently published and used by the United States bureau of mines shall
be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to
or greater than number 3 on the Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all times
except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
      5.   The location within lot lines of smoke densities shall be determined
as follows: Total smoke emission per use, the number of stacks being optional:
         a.   Up to fifteen (15) smoke units per hour:
            (1)   Smoke stack setback from lot lines on all sides: Fifty feet
(50') minimum.
            (2)   During one hour period in each twenty four (24) hour period,
each stack may emit up to thirty (30) smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning
fires with no more than eight (8) minutes of smoke of a density of Ringelmann
number 2. Only during such fire cleaning periods shall smoke of a density of
Ringelmann number 3 be permitted, and then not for a period in excess of four
(4) minutes.
         b.   Sixteen (16) to thirty (30) smoke units per hour:
            (1)   Smoke stack setback from lot lines on all sides: Two hundred
fifty feet (250').
            (2)   During one hour period in each twenty four (24) hour period,
each stack may emit up to forty five (45) smoke units when blowing soot or
cleaning fires with no more than eight (8) minutes of smoke of a density of
Ringelmann number 2. Only during such fire cleaning periods shall smoke of a
density of Ringelmann number 3 be permitted, and then not for a period in
excess of four (4) minutes.
         c.   Thirty one (31) and up smoke units per hour:
Smoke stack setback from lot lines on all sides: Not permitted.
   D.   Toxic Or Noxious Matter:
      1.   Any use established in the I district after the effective date
hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum performance standards
governing toxic or noxious matter set forth in this subsection. No use already
established on the effective date hereof shall be relocated, altered, or
modified as to exceed the maximum performance standards governing toxic or
noxious matter set forth in this subsection.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no use permitted
in the I district shall, for any period of time. discharge across the lot lines
of the lot on which it is located toxic or noxious matter in such
concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare of, or cause injury to, property or business.
   E.   Odorous Matter:
      1.   Any use established in the I district after the effective date
hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum performance standards
governing odorous matter set forth in this subsection. No use already
established on the effective date hereof shall be relocated, altered, or
modified as to exceed the maximum performance standards governing odorous
matter set forth in this subsection.
      2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the emission of
odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable without
instrument at any point along district boundaries is prohibited.
   F.   Fire And Explosive Hazards: Any use established in the I district after
the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the maximum
performance standards governing fire and explosive hazards set forth in this
subsection. No use already established on the effective date hereof shall be
relocated, altered, or modified as to exceed the maximum performance standards
governing fire and explosive hazards set forth in this subsection.
      1.   The storage, use or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      2.   The storage, use or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from free to active burning to intense burning is permitted, provided
the following condition is met: Said materials shall be stored, used, or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior
walls and protected throughout by an effective automatic fire extinguishing
system, or said materials may be stored outdoors with at least one hundred feet
(100') clearance from all property lines.
      3.   The storage, use, or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials
which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted in
accordance with the following regulations, exclusive of storage of finished
products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted:
         a.   All aboveground storage tanks containing less than five hundred
(500) gallons shall be located at least one hundred feet (100') from any lot
line. All aboveground storage tanks containing five hundred (500) to one
hundred thousand (100,000) gallons shall be located at least five hundred feet
(500') from any lot line. All storage tanks in excess of one hundred thousand
(100,000) gallons shall be located underground and at least two hundred feet
(200') from any lot line.
         b.   Each aboveground storage tank containing over five hundred (500)
gallons shall be surrounded by earth dikes high enough to contain the total
gallonage for each tank.
         c.   When flammable gases are stored, used, or manufactured and
measured in cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at standard temperature and
pressure) permitted shall not exceed three hundred (300) times the quantities
as listed in this subsection F3 where the factor three hundred (300) is the
volume in cubic feet occupied by one gallon of most liquids. (Ord. 158, 6-15-
1978)
   G.   Glare And Heat:
      1.   Any use established in the I district after the effective date
hereof shall be so operated such that operations producing intense light or
heat shall be performed within an enclosed building and not be noticeable
beyond any lot line bounding the property where the use is conducted. Any use
established on the effective date hereof shall be relocated, altered, or
modified such that operations producing intense light or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building and not be noticeable beyond any lot line
bounding the property where the use is conducted. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd.
2012 Code)
      2.   Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed
within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence or wall in such a manner as
to be undetectable without instruments from any point along lot lines. (Ord.
158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 9
A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-9-1: Permitted Uses
9-9-2: Regulations And Standards
9-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
Within the agricultural district, the following uses are permitted:
   Dwellings, one-family; provided, that the minimum lot area for each dwelling
unit is one acre. The regulations and standards of section
9-6A-3 of this title shall apply.
   Farm buildings used for growing, harvesting and preparing crop products for
market, or for use on the farm, or for storing and protecting farm machinery
and equipment from the elements.
   Farm dwellings occupied by farm owners, operators, tenants or seasonal or
year round hired farmworkers.
   Growing, harvesting and storing of crops, including legume, hay, grain,
fruit and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture, horticulture, mushroom
growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry, and greenhouse.
   Keeping, raising, or feeding livestock or poultry, including dairying,
poultry, swine, sheep, goats, beef cattle, pony and horse productions, fur
farms, or beekeeping or such structures for housing livestock or poultry,
products for market; such use shall not be located closer than four hundred
feet (400') to the residential district boundaries. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-9-2: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres, with a
minimum lot width of two hundred twenty feet (220').
   B.   Yards And Open Space: The following setback line regulations and
standards shall apply to all structures, except as are permitted in yards:
      1.   Front Yards:
         a.   Where the lots abut an arterial street as designated on the
official zoning map, the minimum setback shall be one hundred fifty feet (150')
from the centerline of such right of way, but not less than fifty feet (50')
from the right of way line.
         b.   Where the lot abuts a collector or a minor street as designated
on the official zoning map, the minimum setback line shall be one hundred feet
(100') as measured from the centerline of such right of way, but not less than
sixty feet (60') from the right of way line. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
      2.   Side Yard: Each side yard shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'),
and for each additional story above the first two (2) stories, an additional
ten feet (10'). (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Rear Yard: The rear yard shall be a minimum of one hundred feet
(100'). (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
CHAPTER 10
LIGHTING
SECTION:
9-10-1: Purpose
9-10-2: Definitions
9-10-3: Certification Of Compliance Required; Exceptions
9-10-4: Outdoor Light Fixtures
9-10-5: Light Trespass
9-10-6: Illuminance Requirements
9-10-7: Energy Conservation
9-10-8: Exemptions From Provisions
9-10-9: Nonconformities
9-10-10: Violation; Penalty
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
The village board of trustees finds that the regulation of outdoor lighting in
the village is necessary to prevent misdirected or excessive artificial light
caused by inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures that produce glare, light
trespass, and/or unnecessary sky glow; and also that regulation is necessary to
discourage the waste of electricity, to improve or maintain nighttime public
safety and security, and to otherwise preserve and enhance the rural character
of the village. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
9-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
FOOT-CANDLE: The illuminance on a surface of one square foot in area on which
there is uniformly distributed a light flux of one lumen.
GLARE: The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is
sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
IES: Illuminating Engineering Society Of North America, an organization that
establishes standards for the lighting industry.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Any form of artificial illumination emanating from a light
fixture or illuminated sign that penetrates other property as specified in
subsection
9-10-5A of this chapter.
LUMEN: A unit of measure of the quantity of light which falls on an area of one
square foot, every point of which is one foot (1') from the source of one
candela. A light source of one candela emits a total of 12.57 "lumens".
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE: A device that will sense motion electronically and switch
on security lighting for a brief duration.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT LIGHT EMISSIONS: Direct light emissions offensively
visible above a height of five feet (5') at the subject property line. A bulb,
a reflective device, a refractive lens device, a globe, or diffuse panel shall
be considered a direct light emission source.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE: An electrically powered illuminating device containing a
total light source of more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) initial
lumens per fixture (this is greater than a single 100 watt incandescent lamp,
or two 75-watt reflectorized incandescent bulbs), which is permanently
installed outdoors, including, but not limited to, devices used to illuminate
any site, architectural structure, or sign.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE: A light fixture with cutoff optics that allows no
direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of ninety degrees (90°)
for street lighting and of eighty degrees (80°) for all other lighting, through
the light fixture's lowest light emitting part. Any structural part of the
light fixture providing this cutoff angle must be permanently affixed. (Ord.
377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-3: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
Other than fixtures serving one- or two-family dwellings, no outdoor light
fixtures shall be installed or modified on any property in the village until
the zoning officer has received a certification from the owner or developer of
the property, or the architect or engineer, that the fixtures and their
illumination comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, to
the best of his/her knowledge and ability. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-4: OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURES:
All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained, other than
those serving one- or two-family dwellings, shall comply with the following
requirements:
   A.   Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways, roadways,
and parking lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be used.
   B.   Where used for commercial or industrial purposes such as in merchandise
display areas; work areas; platforms; signs; and architectural, landscape, or
sports or recreational facilities, all light fixtures shall comply with the
following:
      1.   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other
objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a narrow cone beam
of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated object.
      2.   For other upward directed architectural, landscape, and decorative
lighting, direct light emissions shall not be visible above the building
roofline.
      3.   Recreational and sports facility lighting shall comply with IES
recommendations and shall be shielded whenever possible.
      4.   Externally illuminated building identification or other signs shall
only use shielded light fixtures mounted on the top of the sign structure.
      5.   All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures. (Ord.
377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-5: LIGHT TRESPASS:
   A.   Generally: All light fixtures, except street lighting and those used on
one- or two-family dwellings, shall be designed, installed, and maintained to
prevent light trespass, as follows:
      1.   At the property line of the subject property, illumination from
light fixtures shall not exceed 0.1 foot-candle on residential zoned property
or 0.5 foot-candle on commercial zoned or industrial zoned property, measured
in a vertical plane.
      2.   Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained
shall be directed so that there will be no objectionable direct light
emissions.
Note: Light fixtures near adjacent property may require special shielding
devices to prevent light trespass.
   B.   Residential Light Trespass: Outdoor light fixtures installed and
thereafter maintained on one- or two-family dwellings shall be positioned so
that there are no objectionable direct light emissions that can be seen from
adjacent residential properties. This subsection will only apply when the
offended resident registers a formal complaint. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-6: ILLUMINANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   For street lighting, average IES illuminance recommendations shall not
be exceeded. IES average to minimum illuminance uniformity ratios are to be
used as a guide for designing safe and adequate roadway lighting.
   B.   The village does not require owners to illuminate outdoor parking
facilities. For those owners who elect to do so, requirements for outdoor
parking facilities shall be determined as follows: Maintained horizontal
illuminance (after depreciation) for parking and pedestrian traffic shall not
exceed an average of six (6.0) foot-candles. Maximum to minimum illuminance
ratios shall not exceed fifteen to one (15:1).
   C.   Illuminance at the level of an illuminated American flag shall not
exceed five (5.0) foot-candles.
   D.   All other illuminance uses shall not exceed IES recommendations. (Ord.
377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-7: ENERGY CONSERVATION:
The design and installation of outdoor lighting shall be constructed so as to
conform to the following standards:
   A.   All outdoor lighting not necessary for security purposes shall be
reduced, activated by motion sensor devices, or turned off during nonoperating
hours. Illuminated signs are excluded from this requirement.
   B.   All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light and to maximize energy efficiency. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to the state of Illinois acting through
its department of transportation, but shall apply to the corporate authorities
of the village.
   B.   Except as provided in section
9-10-9 of this chapter, this chapter shall not apply to outdoor light fixtures
installed as of the effective date hereof, but shall apply to any later
modification to such light fixtures. Bulb replacement and normal maintenance is
not considered modification of a fixture. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-9: NONCONFORMITIES:
All nonconforming fixtures, uses, and illumination shall be brought into full
compliance with this chapter no later than December 31, 2016, unless earlier
compliance is required by subsection
9-10-8B of this chapter. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-10-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is declared to be an offense. Any person violating any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. This
section shall apply to violations of this chapter rather than the penalty
provisions stated in section
9-3-8 of this title of which this chapter is a part. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 11
NOISE
SECTION:
9-11-1: Purpose
9-11-2: Test Procedures
9-11-3: Impact On Properties
9-11-4: Unreasonable Noises
9-11-5: Exemptions From Provisions
9-11-6: Violation; Penalty
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
The village board of trustees finds that the regulation of sound across
property lines within the village is necessary to prevent noise pollution or a
nuisance and to otherwise preserve and enhance the rural character of the
village. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-11-2: TEST PROCEDURES:
Test procedures to determine whether emission of sound is in conformance with
the limitations contained in this chapter shall be made in substantial
conformity with standards and recommended practices established by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), and the latest revisions thereof.
Measured sound shall be corrected, or electronically filtered, to provide "A"
frequency rating, in addition to being mean square averaged (loudness
equivalent). The resulting A-weighted noise level, abbreviated "Leq", shall be
reported in decibels. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-11-3: IMPACT ON PROPERTIES:
   A.   Residential Properties: With respect to sound emitted from a property
to a residential zoned property, except as described in this chapter, no use
shall cause or allow the emission of sound which exceeds fifty five (55)
decibels Leq for the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. of each day, or forty four (44) decibels Leq for the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. through seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of each day, as measured
at any property line of the residential zoned property.
   B.   Commercial And Industrial Properties: With respect to sound emitted
from a property to commercial zoned or industrial zoned property, except as
described in this chapter, no use shall cause or allow the emission of sound
which exceeds sixty two (62) decibels Leq, as measured at any property line of
the commercial zoned or industrial zoned property. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-11-4: UNREASONABLE NOISES:
Notwithstanding other sections of this chapter, and without having to use the
test procedures stated in section
9-11-2 of this chapter, no person shall cause or allow the following noises:
horns, signal devices, audio equipment, musical instruments, yelling, steam
whistles, motor vehicle exhaust sounds, or loudspeakers, which, by reason of
their frequency or habitual nature, unreasonably disturb the ability of others
in the surrounding neighborhood to exercise the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of
their property, taking into account the character, intensity, duration, and
time of day of the noises. This section will only apply when the offended
resident registers a formal complaint. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-11-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The limitations described in this chapter shall not apply to the following:
   A.   Sound emitted from emergency warning devices and unregulated safety
relief valves.
   B.   Sound emitted from lawn maintenance equipment and snowblowers used
during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of
each day (provided, however, that the foregoing shall not prohibit the use of
trucks with plows or blades to move or scrape snow from commercial, industrial,
municipal, or educational parking areas or accessways during any time of the
day).
   C.   Sound emitted from equipment being used for construction activities
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of
each day.
   D.   Sound emitted from trucks and vehicles entering and leaving property.
Sound emitted from trucks and vehicles under the control of the property owner
and/or user that are not entering or leaving the property (examples of such
sound are idling engines and trailer mounted refrigeration units) are required
to meet all of the noise regulations established in this chapter; except, that
the limitations under subsection
9-11-3A of this chapter shall be sixty (60) decibels Leq for the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of each day, and fifty (50)
decibels Leq for the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. of each day.
   E.   Activities, events, or uses approved in advance by the village board of
trustees. Examples might be the village Octoberfest celebration, neighborhood
or block parties, and the like. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996)
9-11-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is declared to be an offense. Any person violating any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. These
penalty provisions shall apply to violation of this chapter rather than the
penalty provisions stated in section
9-3-8 of this title of which this chapter is a part. (Ord. 377, 12-19-1996;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 12
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES AND ANTENNAS
SECTION:
9-12-1: Purposes
9-12-2: Definitions
9-12-3: Collocation Required; Exemptions
9-12-4: General Facility And Antenna Requirements
9-12-5: Accessory Utility Buildings
9-12-6: Obsolete Or Unused Facilities, Antennas And Accompanying Buildings
9-12-7: Special Use Procedural Requirements
9-12-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by
regulating personal wireless service facilities and antennas;
   B.   To ensure the provision of personal wireless services within the
boundaries of, and for the benefit of the residents of, the village;
   C.   To minimize the visual impact of personal wireless service facilities,
antennas, and associated buildings through design and siting standards;
   D.   To maximize the use of existing and approved facilities and buildings
to accommodate multiple antennas in order to reduce the number of facilities
needed to serve the village; and
   E.   To avoid damage to adjacent properties from facility failure through
structural standards and setback requirements. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006)
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: A type of personal wireless service facility equipment used to provide
personal wireless services, which is attached to a tower, building or other
structure. This definition shall not include private residence mounted
satellite dishes or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including,
without limitation, ham or citizen band radio antennas that comply with
existing regulations.
BASE TRANSCEIVER STATION: Equipment that provides the link between wireless
communications and land based public telephone switching networks, including
radio frequency transceivers, backup power amplifiers, and signal processing
hardware, typically contained in a small building or cabinet.
COLLOCATION: The location of personal wireless service equipment from more than
one provider on a common tower, building or structure.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES (PWSF): Facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services, including, but not limited to, structures, other
than a building, such as a monopole or self-supporting or guyed tower, designed
and used to support communication antennas.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (PWS): Licensed commercial wireless communication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (EMR), paging and similar services.
STEALTH TOWER: A PWSF tower which appropriately models or mimics in size,
shape, and color something in the immediate landscape which could legally be
placed there at the time the application is submitted, such as a silo in farm
settings, a flagpole in an urban area, or a tree in forested areas and which is
unrecognizable to a casual observer as a tower. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006)
9-12-3: COLLOCATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
No request for the construction of a PWSF will be approved unless the finding
is made that the PWSF cannot reasonably be accommodated on an existing
conforming collocation tower, structure, utility pole or other PWSF, inside or
outside the village borders, due to one or more of the following reasons:
   A.   The proposed or planned PWS equipment, if installed, would exceed the
structural capacity of any existing or approved tower, structure, utility pole,
or other PWSF, as documented by a licensed structural engineer, and all
existing and approved towers, structures, utility poles or other PWSF cannot be
reenforced, modified or replaced to accommodate the planned PWS equipment at a
reasonable cost.
   B.   The planned PWS equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at an existing or approved
tower, structure, utility pole or other PWSF, as documented by a licensed
professional engineer, and interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
   C.   Existing or approved towers, structures, utility poles or other PWSF
cannot accommodate the planned PWS equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably, as documented by a licensed professional engineer.
   D.   The owner(s) or lessor(s) of existing or approved towers, structures,
utility poles or other PWSF are unwilling to allow collocation upon their
facilities at a reasonable cost.
   E.   Other unforeseen reasons make it unfeasible to locate the proposed or
planned PWS equipment upon an existing or approved tower, structure, utility
pole, or other PWSF, as documented by a licensed professional engineer, as
appropriate. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006)
9-12-4: GENERAL FACILITY AND ANTENNA REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any PWSF to be constructed following the effective date hereof, if a
tower, shall only be approved if the PWSF is either 1. a "stealth tower" or 2.
a monopole tower not exceeding seventy-two (72) inches in diameter, with no
external support system (e.g. guy wires).
   B.   The height of any PWSF or antenna to be installed on an existing tower,
pole or structure shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above the highest point of
the existing tower, pole or structure.
   C.   Except for base transceiver stations, the minimum setback for PWSF from
any property line or public roadway shall be equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the height of the PWSF. The setback for a base transceiver station
shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district in which the
transceiver station is located. The Village Board may alter the setbacks for
PWSFs that are not transceiver stations if a collapse of the tower will not
impact neighboring properties, as documented by a licensed professional
engineer.
   D.   All proposed PWSF and antennas to be mounted on a building or other
structure shall be certified by a licensed structural engineer that the
proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building
or other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the
location of the PWSF or antennas.
   E.   Any applicant proposing a PWSF or antenna to be mounted on a building
or other structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings,
for retention by the village, indicating how the PWSF or antenna will be
mounted on the structure.
   F.   Any applicant proposing a PWSF or antenna to be mounted on a building
or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements
necessary to provide access to the building or structure on which the tower or
antenna is to be mounted so that the installation and maintenance of the PWSF
or antenna can be accomplished.
   G.   Every PWSF and antenna shall comply with all applicable standards
established by the federal communications commission (FCC) governing human
exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
   H.   PWSF and antennas shall not interfere with public safety
communications.
   I.   No PWSF or antenna shall have affixed or attached thereto in any way
any lights, reflectors, flashers, strobes, or steady nighttime light or other
illuminating devices except as may be required by the federal aviation
administration (FAA).
   J.   No PWSF or antenna shall have constructed thereon or attached thereto
any signs and/or advertising of any description.
   K.   Every PWSF shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower or
other equipment by any unauthorized person.
   L.   The owner or operator of the PWSF and antennas shall be licensed, if
applicable, by the federal communications commission (FCC) to operate the PWSF
and antennas.
   M.   PWSF shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in height
from existing grade. The Village Board may alter this requirement and allow a
PWSF no higher than one hundred sixty feet (160') from the existing grade if
the applicant demonstrates, with documentation from a licensed professional
engineer, an RF engineer, or another appropriate practicing engineer, that such
additional height is necessary to extend the PWSF's coverage area to meet a
need in the community. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006; amd. Ord. 844, 1-20-2022)
9-12-5: ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS:
Utility buildings, equipment sheds or structures housing a base transceiver
station or related equipment shall be architecturally designed to blend in with
the surrounding environment. Such utility buildings, sheds or structures shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district and
shall be secured with fencing and a locked gate. Further, the utility
buildings, sheds or structures shall be screened from view, either by means of
the security fencing or by vegetation. If screening is accomplished by means of
the security fencing, the site shall incorporate landscaping elements to blend
the site into the surroundings. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006)
9-12-6: OBSOLETE OR UNUSED FACILITIES, ANTENNAS AND ACCOMPANYING BUILDINGS:
   A.   All obsolete, unused or abandoned PWSF, antennas or accompanying
accessory utility buildings shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the
cessation of operations unless a time extension is approved by the village
board of trustees. The owner of the PWSF or antennas shall provide the village
with a copy of any notice to the FCC of the intent to cease operations.
   B.   The owner of a PWSF, antenna or accompanying accessory utility building
shall deposit cash security with the village or provide the village with a bond
or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount that will secure the cost of
removing a PWSF, antenna or accessory utility building that has been abandoned
or is obsolete or unused.
   C.   In the event that a PWSF, antenna or accessory utility building is not
removed in a timely manner as provided herein, said structure may be removed by
the village and the cost of removal assessed first against the cash security
fund, bond, or letter of credit, and then otherwise against the owner. (Ord.
570, 3-23-2006; amd. Ord. 844, 1-20-2022)
9-12-7: SPECIAL USE PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All applicants requesting a special use permit for the construction of
a PWSF or antenna shall submit the following information:
      1.   Written findings and related information by the applicant, and by a
licensed professional engineer, as appropriate, evidencing compliance with each
provision of this chapter.
      2.   A description of the PWSF or antenna height and design, including a
cross section in elevation.
      3.   Photographs of the proposed site, and an artist or architect sketch,
concept or rendition of the site as built which demonstrates that the proposed
site will be, as aesthetically as possible, in keeping with its surroundings,
including elevations, landscaping, screening, appropriate camouflage, and
fencing.
      4.   An estimate of the cost of removing the proposed PWSF, antennas and
accessory utility buildings so as to establish the amount of the cash security
or letter of credit described in subsection
9-12-6B of this chapter.
      5.   Written proof of liability insurance which protects against losses
due to personal injury or property damage resulting from the construction,
operation, or collapse of the PWSF, antennas and/or accessory utility
buildings. In addition to the insurance required, the applicant shall agree to
execute and deliver to the village an agreement in which the applicant agrees
to save and hold the village, its trustees, officers, agents and employees,
harmless from any and all liabilities of any kind or nature whatsoever which
may arise as a result of the applicant being issued a special use permit as
described herein, including, but not limited by, enumeration, reasonable
attorney fees and court costs incurred by the village in defending against any
such claim. In addition, the applicant shall enter into a written agreement
that it will reimburse the village for all reasonable attorney fees, costs and
expenses the village may incur in enforcing the requirements of this chapter.
The above written documents shall be executed prior to the issuance of a
special use permit.
      6.   A scaled site plan which shows property lines, public roadways,
locations of the PWSF and/or antennas, setback distances, any accessory utility
buildings, fencing and proposed landscaping, and all other information
necessary for the village to evaluate the request in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The village shall charge reasonable fees to evaluate applications. Such
fees shall include the following:
      1.   Application Fee: The basic application fee shall be one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      2.   Special Fee: The village may retain engineers or other technical
consultants and/or experts as it deems necessary to properly evaluate
applications for PWSF and antennas. These special fees shall be charged to the
applicant and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the hourly rate of
the engineer, technical consultant or expert.
      3.   Other Fees: Any other fee imposed under the provisions of this
title.
   C.   The procedure for the Village Board's approval or denial of the
proposed special use shall be as prescribed in Section
9-3B-5  of this Code. The Village Board may impose such conditions as are
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and individual
property rights. (Ord. 570, 3-23-2006; amd. Ord. 844, 1-20-2022)
CHAPTER 13
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
SECTION:
9-13-1: Purpose
9-13-2: Compliance Required
9-13-3: Permit Requirements
9-13-4: Barrier Requirements
9-13-5: Exemptions From Provisions
9-13-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall control the requirement, design, and
permitting of barriers for outside residential swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs. The design controls are intended to restrict access to outside
residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs in certain instances to afford
protection to small children (ages 8 and under) from accidental drowning or
other injury. (Ord. 578, 7-13-2006)
9-13-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Responsibility For Compliance: Each owner and/or occupant of property
on which a swimming pool, spa or hot tub is located is responsible for
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Time For Compliance: Except as follows, the provisions of this chapter
apply immediately on the effective date hereof:
      1.   All inground and aboveground (or partly inground and partly
aboveground) swimming pools installed year round, and all spas and hot tubs in
existence on the effective date hereof shall be brought into compliance with
the provisions of this chapter no later than May 1, 2008.
      2.   Moreover, even when an owner and/or occupant believes that an
existing inground or aboveground (or partly inground and partly aboveground)
swimming pool, spa or hot tub complies with all provisions of this chapter, the
owner and/or occupant must nevertheless, by May 1, 2008, apply for a permit as
required by section
9-13-3 of this chapter, providing to the zoning officer all pertinent
information concerning the already built swimming pool, spa or hot tub, and
concerning any required permanent barrier, so that the zoning officer may
certify such compliance. If the zoning officer certifies that the existing
inground or aboveground (or partly inground and partly aboveground) swimming
pool, spa or hot tub complies with all provisions of this chapter, the permit
fee shall be waived. (Ord. 578, 7-13-2006)
9-13-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit is required for all inground and aboveground
(or partly inground and partly aboveground) swimming pools installed year
round, and for all spas and hot tubs.
   B.   Application For Permit: When applying for a permit, the applicant shall
submit the following to the zoning officer:
      1.   A site plan and building plan indicating all dimensions, including
location, length, width, and depth, of the swimming pool, spa or hot tub.
      2.   For an aboveground (or partly inground and partly aboveground)
swimming pool, information concerning retractable ladders and deck barriers, if
required.
      3.   For a spa or hot tub, information showing compliance of the safety
cover with ASTM designation F1346-91, or showing a safety cover designed by the
manufacturer for the specific spa or hot tub.
      4.   If a permanent barrier is required, a site plan showing the location
of the barrier and information indicating its height and, if the barrier is a
fence, information showing that its design complies with the requirements of
subsection
9-13-4A1 of this chapter.
   C.   Permit Fee: The cost of a permit for a swimming pool and/or fence is
twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 578, 7-13-2006)
9-13-4: BARRIER REQUIREMENTS:
A permanent barrier (either a fence or a wall) to restrict access to a swimming
pool, spa or hot tub is required as set forth in this section. The barrier
shall be constructed to restrict access to the swimming pool, spa or hot tub
itself, or to the yard in which the swimming pool, spa or hot tub is located,
so long as the purpose of affording protection to small children is met.
Placement and construction of the barrier on the property must meet all other
requirements of this title, in addition to the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Inground Swimming Pools:
      1.   A permanent barrier of four feet (4') minimum height shall be
constructed to completely enclose the yard or swimming pool area for all pools
built below ground level. If the barrier is a fence, it shall be constructed so
as not to allow a four inch (4") diameter sphere to pass through the fence. All
gates, door openings or other means of access into the yard or swimming pool
area shall be maintained and secured with such safety features as will provide
an effective barrier to restrict access to the pool by small children.
      2.   No inground swimming pool shall be filled with water until such time
that a permanent barrier is completed. A temporary fence shall be in place
during construction of an inground swimming pool to restrict access to the
construction site until a permanent barrier is in place. If a permanent barrier
becomes damaged and there is open access, a safety fence shall be in place
until the barrier is repaired.
   B.   Aboveground Swimming Pools: Aboveground (or partly inground and partly
aboveground) swimming pools installed year round shall meet the permanent
barrier requirements for inground swimming pools; except, that aboveground (or
partly inground and partly aboveground) swimming pools shall be exempt from the
permanent barrier requirements so long as the top pool edge is four feet (4')
minimum above grade level. Each aboveground (or partly inground and partly
aboveground) swimming pool that is exempt from the barrier requirements shall
nevertheless have retractable ladders installed in such a way as to restrict
access to the pool by small children. The ladders must be retracted whenever
the pool is not in use. If a deck adjoins an aboveground (or partly inground
and partly aboveground) swimming pool, a fence or railing shall be constructed
on the deck to restrict access to the pool by small children.
   C.   Portable Swimming Pools: Swimming pools with a water capacity of twenty
four inches (24") in depth or more (even if regularly filled to a depth of less
than 24 inches), that are not installed year round, and that may be readily
disassembled for storage are characterized as portable swimming pools. Portable
swimming pools are exempt from the permanent barrier requirements for inground
swimming pools, and a permit is not required for such pools. Nevertheless, a
temporary fence of four feet (4') minimum height shall be in place before a
portable swimming pool is filled with water, and shall be kept in place and in
good repair so long as the pool is filled with water. A temporary fence does
not require a permit. A fence installed on a permanent basis, however, does
require a permit.
   D.   Kiddie Swimming Pools: Swimming pools with a water capacity of less
than twenty four inches (24") in depth, that are not installed year round, and
that may be readily disassembled for storage are characterized as kiddie
swimming pools. They are exempt from all provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Spas Or Hot Tubs: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies
with ASTM designation F1346-91, which is hereby incorporated by reference, or
with a safety cover designed by the manufacturer for the specific spa or hot
tub shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Otherwise, spas and
hot tubs shall be considered aboveground swimming pools and shall meet the
requirements of subsection B of this section. (Ord. 578, 7-13-2006)
9-13-5: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
In addition to specific exemptions stated in section
9-13-4 of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to inside
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, nor do they apply to birdbaths, fish ponds,
fountains, dams, and water supply/storage tanks. (Ord. 578, 7-13-2006)
CHAPTER 14
ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
9-14-1: Definitions
9-14-2: Enumeration Of Adult Uses
9-14-3: Restrictions
9-14-4: Measurement Of Distance
9-14-5: License Requirements
9-14-6: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
9-14-7: Notices
9-14-8: Violation; Penalty
9-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively prescribed to them by this section:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its stock
in trade, books, magazines, films, records, recording tapes, videotapes, or
other periodicals, for sale or for viewing, either on or off the premises,
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT DEVICE STORE: An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its
stock in trade, any device, appliance, instrument or object which is
represented either by the operator of the establishment or by its packaging,
advertising or other literature furnished therewith as enhancing, assisting,
representing, depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages and which features
entertainers, dancers, waitresses, waiters or any other employees acting in
such a way as to display, depict, describe or relate to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or drive-in theater,
with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building or a drive-in theater, with
a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used regularly and routinely for
presenting motion pictures having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or special anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
APPLICANT: Includes any owner, partner, or limited partner of a partnership
applicant and any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any
stockholder holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of a corporate
applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or
operation of an adult business.
BODY SHOP OR MODEL STUDIO: Any public or private establishment which describes
itself as a body shop or model studio, or where, for any form of consideration
or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided
to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, or where, for any
form of consideration or gratuity, nude or seminude dancing, readings,
counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that present materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are
provided for observation by or communication to persons paying such
consideration or gratuity.
BUILDING STRUCTURE: Any structure or group of structures housing two (2) or
more businesses which share a common entry, exit, wall or frontage wall,
including, but not limited to, shopping centers, shopping plazas, or shopping
squares.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts
of the body with the hands or other parts of the human body or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this
practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment having a fixed place of business where
any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on, or
permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned in the
definition of "massage" in this section; provided, however, that the term
massage establishment shall not apply to hospitals, physical rehabilitation
centers, nursing homes or sanatoriums. The term massage establishment shall
also not apply to a spa, salon, barbershop or other establishment focused on
grooming wherein a massage is given by a cosmetologist, barber, or masseuse
licensed by the state of Illinois, in accordance with such license; and
provided, that such establishment does not permit anyone or any thing to
display or depict specified anatomical areas and does not permit anyone or any
thing to engage in, display, or depict specified sexual activities.
NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the
showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following conditions:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; or
      2.   Buttock; or
      3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following conditions:
   A.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, and flagellation, in
addition to any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
   B.   The actual or simulated sexual touching, caressing or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
   C.   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair,
anus, vulva or genitals.
   D.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
otherwise set forth in this definition. (Ord. 679, 5-25-2011)
9-14-2: ENUMERATION OF ADULT USES:
The following shall be considered adult uses for the purpose of this chapter:
   A.   Adult bookstore;
   B.   Adult motion picture theater;
   C.   Adult mini-motion picture theater;
   D.   Adult entertainment cabaret;
   E.   Massage establishment;
   F.   Body shop or model studio;
   G.   Adult device store; or
   H.   An establishment that conducts a substantial portion of its business
through some combination of any of the adult uses listed in this section. (Ord.
679, 5-25-2011)
9-14-3: RESTRICTIONS:
Adult uses shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, an adult
use shall not feature or allow a person who knowingly or intentionally, in the
view of or in close proximity to any person:
      1.   Engages in sexual intercourse;
      2.   Engages in deviate sexual conduct;
      3.   Appears in a state of nudity; or
      4.   Fondles the genitals of himself or another person.
   B.   All adult uses shall be located only in I industrial districts, and
within such districts, an adult use shall not be located within one thousand
feet (1,000') of another preexisting adult use. (Ord. 679, 5-25-2011)
   C.   An adult use shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
a preexisting residence, public park, forest preserve, cemeteries, school,
daycare center, or place of worship. (Ord. 679, 5-25-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   An adult use shall not be located in a building structure in which
alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed.
   E.   Any adult use doing business at the effective date hereof shall have
one year from the effective date hereof to comply with the provisions of
subsections A, B, C and D, inclusive, of this section.
   F.   Any adult use doing business at the effective date hereof shall have
thirty (30) days from said effective date for the issuance of an adult use
license.
   G.   An adult use shall not be located in a building structure that contains
another business that is operated as a bottle club, nor shall such adult use
otherwise permit patrons to bring their own alcoholic beverages into the
establishment or to consume alcoholic beverages while on the premises.
   H.   Any adult use providing private/semiprivate booths for viewing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall not have doors
on said booths, nor shall such areas have openings between adjacent booths that
could allow for the pass through of items or parts of the body between the
partitions that divide such booths.
   I.   A zoning use permit and zoning compliance certificate shall be obtained
when and as required by this title.
   J.   Any adult uses shall not operate during the following hours:
      2:00 A.M. until 8:00 A.M., Monday through Friday;
      2:30 A.M. until 8:00 A.M., Saturday; and
      2:30 A.M. until 12:00 P.M., Sunday.
(Ord. 679, 5-25-2011)
9-14-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
For the purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property
line of the lot or parcel containing the adult use to the property line of the
lot or parcel containing the nearest adult use, public park, school, daycare
center, place of worship or district zoned for residential use. (Ord. 679, 5-
25-2011)
9-14-5: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in,
conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on,
in or upon any premises in the village, the operation of an adult use as herein
defined without first having obtained a separate license for such adult use
from the village president.
   B.   Application For License; Fee: Every applicant for a license to
maintain, operate or conduct an adult use shall file an application, in
duplicate, under oath, with the village president upon a form provided by the
village clerk and shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) to the clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall be
attached to the application filed with the village president. An applicant for
a license shall furnish the following information under oath:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in
the case of a copartnership or association, names and addresses of the persons
entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for
profit, the date and state of incorporation, the date of qualification to do
business in Illinois (if not an Illinois corporation), the object for which it
was organized, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and managers,
and also the names and addresses of every stockholder owning in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation; and
      2.   Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of
age; and
      3.   Location of where the adult use is to be operated; and
      4.   A statement that the applicant either owns the premises for which
the license is sought or that he has a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued. In the case of a lease, a copy of same shall
be submitted with the application; and
      5.   A description of the specific adult use for which the applicant
seeks a license; and
      6.   A statement by the applicant that he or she, the owner(s), manager
(s), and people in control of the day to day operations of the proposed adult
use have not been convicted of a felony or any other crime or ordinance
violation related to drugs, theft, obscenity, violence, prostitution, or sexual
assault, or a crime involving deceit, fraud, or dishonesty; and
      7.   A statement demonstrating that the proposed adult use would be in
compliance with:
         a.   All zoning and licensing restrictions imposed by this chapter;
         b.   Any applicable health department regulations; and
         c.   Any applicable fire and building codes; and
      8.   An agreement not to violate any laws of the state or of the United
States, or any ordinance of the village in the conduct of the adult use.
   C.   Approval, Denial Or Further Investigation:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving the application, the village
president shall notify the applicant that his application is granted, denied,
or held for further investigation. Such additional investigation shall not
exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the village
president shall advise the applicant in writing whether the application is
granted or denied.
      2.   Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation,
the village president shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action.
      3.   Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant
to the investigation of the application, failure or refusal to appear at any
reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said
application, or refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection or
investigation required by this chapter shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds
for denial thereof by the village president.
   D.   Renewal License Application: A licensee intending to continue an adult
use beyond the license expiration date shall apply for a subsequent license no
more than forty five (45) days and no less than thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration of the current license to avoid a temporary shutdown of operations
during the review of such application.
   E.   Issuance Of License: The village president shall issue or renew a
license to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult use unless he finds:
      1.   That the applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years or under
any legal disability.
      2.   That the location where the adult business is proposed to be
operated does not comply with the limitations set forth in this chapter.
      3.   That the applicant, owner(s), manager(s), or people in control of
the day to day operations of the proposed adult use has been convicted of a
felony or any other crime or ordinance violation related to drugs, theft,
obscenity, violence, prostitution, or sexual assault, or a crime involving
deceit, fraud, or dishonesty.
   F.   Termination Of License: Every adult use license issued pursuant to this
chapter will terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its
issuance, unless sooner revoked.
   G.   Display Of License: Every licensee shall display a valid license in a
conspicuous place within the premises where the adult use is operated so that
same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
   H.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   Any license issued for an adult use may be revoked or suspended by
the village president if he shall find:
         a.   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter regulating adult uses.
         b.   That the licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading
information or withheld relevant information on any application for any license
required by this chapter or knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or
withhold such information on his or her behalf.
      2.   The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his agents,
servants, and employees; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense
by a licensee where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty
shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days if the village president
shall find that the licensee had no actual or constructive knowledge of such
violation and could not, by the exercise of due diligence, have had such actual
or constructive knowledge.
      3.   The village president, before revoking or suspending any license,
shall give the licensee at least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges
against him or her. The licensee may, within five (5) days of receipt of said
notice, file notice of a request for a public hearing before the village
president, at which time, the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the
question.
   I.   Judicial Review Of Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   If an application for license is denied or such license is suspended
or revoked, the effect of such action shall automatically be stayed and the
status quo shall be maintained pending prompt judicial review. The automatic
stay shall remain in effect for ten (10) days after the village president gives
notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation. The licensee or applicant must
notify the village president during this ten (10) day time if the licensee or
applicant intends to seek judicial review of the action denying, suspending, or
revoking the license in order to extend the automatic stay beyond the initial
ten (10) days.
      2.   An applicant or licensee shall initiate judicial review within
thirty (30) days of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation.
      3.   A licensee or applicant who fails to notify the village president
within the ten (10) days, as provided by this subsection, or who does so but
fails thereafter to initiate judicial review within thirty (30) days as
provided by this subsection, is deemed to have waived the right to judicial
review, and the automatic stay shall be lifted, and the denial, suspension, or
revocation shall then have immediate and final effect. (Ord. 679, 5-25-2011)
9-14-6: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Display: No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that
permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by display,
decoration, sign, show window, or other opening from any public way or from any
property not registered in the license as the location where the adult use is
to be operated.
   B.   Employment Of Persons Under Eighteen: It shall be unlawful for any
adult use licensee or his manager or employee to employ, in any capacity within
the adult business, any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
   C.   Illegal Activities: No licensee, or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall engage in any
activity or conduct, or permit any other person to engage in any activity or
conduct, in or about the licensed premises which is prohibited by an ordinance
of the village or laws of the state of Illinois or of the United States. (Ord.
679, 5-25-2011)
9-14-7: NOTICES:
   A.   Village Notices: Any notice by the village president pursuant to this
chapter may be delivered personally to the licensee, by posting on the premises
where the adult use is located, or by United States postal service certified
mail, return receipt requested. Notice by these methods shall be effective upon
such personal delivery, posting, or as shown by the return receipt. The village
president may also give notice by mailing through the United States postal
service with first class postage paid; such mailing is deemed effective three
(3) days after mailing.
   B.   Applicant Or Licensee Notices: Notice by an applicant or licensee as
provided in this chapter shall be to the village president at:
      Village President
      Village Hall
      216 Holland Road
      Germantown Hills, IL 61548
(Ord. 679, 5-25-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
9-14-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation. A person who is convicted shall be punished
by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). This section shall supersede all other
penalties provided by this title for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 679, 5-
25-2011)
CHAPTER 15
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
9-15-1: Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use
9-15-2: Change To Conforming Use
9-15-3: Enlargement Or Expansion
9-15-4: Repairs And Maintenance
9-15-5: Damaged Structure
9-15-6: Single-Family Nonconforming Lots Of Record
9-15-1: DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
If a nonconforming use has ceased for a period of one year or more, it shall
not be a reestablished use unless the nonconforming use was in a building
designed, arranged or intended for such use, and which building does not
reasonably lend itself to occupancy by a conforming use. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-15-2: CHANGE TO CONFORMING USE:
Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to
revert to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-15-3: ENLARGEMENT OR EXPANSION:
A nonconforming use of land, premises, or structure shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded, or extended after the effective date hereof by the attachment of a
structure, premises, or land, or additional signs intended to be seen off the
premises or land, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be
prohibited in the district involved. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-15-4: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, or which
itself is nonconforming, work may be done in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not to exceed ten
percent (10%) of the then current replacement value of the structure; provided,
that the volume of such building or the size of such structure as it existed at
the effective date hereof shall not be increased or nothing in this title shall
be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with
protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 158, 6-15-
1978)
9-15-5: DAMAGED STRUCTURE:
If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
9-15-6: SINGLE-FAMILY NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this title, a single-family dwelling
and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any lot which is a lot
though such lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that
are generally applicable in the district; provided, that yard dimension and
other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lots shall
conform to the following regulations:
   A.   Front Yard: The front yard regulations and standards of the district in
which such lot is located shall apply.
   B.   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations and standards of the district in
which such lot is located shall apply. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978)
   C.   Side Yards: The side yards shall be provided, each at least one-sixth
(1/6) the width of the lot, but not wider than required for the district in
which such lot is located. (Ord. 158, 6-15-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 16
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
9-16-1: Definitions
9-16-2: Personal Solar Energy System (PSES)
9-16-3: Community Garden Energy System (CGES)
9-16-4: Solar Farm Energy System (SFES)
9-16-5: Indemnification And Liability
9-16-6: Cessation Of Operations
9-16-7: Penalties
9-16-8: Building Permits
9-16-9: Non-Conforming Systems
9-16-10: Administration And Enforcement
9-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY: As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal structure
or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use.
DISTRIBUTED GENERATION INSTALLER: A person who has completed all requirements
to be certified by the State of Illinois and the Illinois Commerce Commission
in order to install renewable energy appliances and equipment.
GROUND MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is directly
installed into the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing
structure.
NET METERING: A billing arrangement that allows solar customers to get credit
for excess electricity that they generate and deliver back to the grid so that
they only pay for their net electricity usage at the end of the month.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the
form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): The components and subsystems required to convert
solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the
system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which extends
to any fencing.
   Community Garden Energy System (CGES): A community solar- electric
(photovoltaic) array, of no more than fifteen (15) acres in size, that provides
retail electric power (or financial proxy for retail power) to multiple
households or businesses residing in or located off-site from the location of
the solar energy system.
   Personal Solar Energy System (PSES): Any device or combination of devices or
elements which rely upon direct sunlight as an energy source including but not
limited to any substance or device which collects sunlight for generating
electricity for use on-site. However, the energy output may be delivered to a
power grid to offset the cost of energy on-site.
   Solar Farm Energy System (SFES): A commercial facility that converts
sunlight to electricity, whether by photovoltaics, concentrating solar thermal
devices, or various experimental technologies for on-site or off-site use with
the primary purpose of selling wholesale or retail generated electricity in
excess of fifteen (15) acres.
SOLAR PANEL: A device for the direct conversion of solar energy into
electricity or heat.
STRUCTURE MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system in which solar
panels are mounted on a structure. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-2: PERSONAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (PSES):
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the installation and use of
PSESs designed for on-site home, farm, and small commercial use that are used
primarily to reduce on- site consumption of utility power. The intent of these
regulations is to protect the public health, safety, and community welfare
without unduly restricting the development of PSESs.
   B.   Permitted Use: Personal Solar Energy Systems shall be considered an
accessory use to a principal permitted use in any zoning district.
   C.   Special Requirements: Personal Solar Energy Systems shall be subject to
the requirements included in this title unless otherwise stated herein:
      1.   Generally:
         a.   Compliance: All applicable laws, statutes, regulations and
ordinances shall be followed.
         b.   Use: The PSES shall provide electricity or heat for on-site use
by the owner. This does not prohibit an owner from making excess power
available for net metering.
         c.   Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system
components must have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing or approved
equivalent.
         d.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall
be oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
         e.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors. They shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the
building or be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way provided
that the screening shall not affect the operation of the system.
         f.   Utility Notification: All grid-integrated solar energy systems
shall comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility.
Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
      2.   Ground Mounted PSES: Ground mounted PSES shall be subject to the
following requirements:
         a.   Height: Shall not be greater than ten feet (10') at maximum tilt
of the solar panel(s) in any zoning district.
         b.   Lot Size: The lot on which the PSES is to be installed must be no
smaller than one acre.
         c.   Setbacks: The PSES shall maintain perimeter setbacks of no less
than thirty feet (30'). No PSES shall be permitted to be located in the
required front yard.
         d.   Coverage: Ground mount systems shall not exceed half the building
footprint of the principal structure and shall be exempt from impervious
surface calculations if the soil under the collector is not compacted and
maintained in vegetation. Foundations, gravel, or compacted soils are
considered impervious.
         e.   Variance: If any of these specifications cannot be met, a
variance must be applied for and obtained prior to installation.
      3.   Roof Mounted PSES: Roof mounted PSES shall be subject to the
following requirements:
         a.   Height:
            (1)   Shall not project more than twelve inches (12") above the
roof; and
            (2)   Shall not be greater than the allowable height of any
structure within the zoning district in which the PSES is to be installed,
except that if an existing roof is within twelve inches (12") of the maximum
allowable height, then the PSES may project no more than twelve inches (12")
above the roof, even if it exceeds the maximum allowable height.
         b.   Safety: Roof mount solar energy systems, excluding building
integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for firefighting
purposes to the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels are mounted.
         c.   Roof Coverage: Roof mount solar energy systems shall not occupy
more than eighty percent (80%) of the aggregate square footage of the roof
area. The roof shall be considered a part of a building completely covering and
permanently attached to such building and can be flat or pitched.
         d.   Variance: If any of these specifications cannot be met, a
variance must be applied for and obtained prior to installation. (Ord. 814, 2-
21-2019)
9-16-3: COMMUNITY GARDEN ENERGY SYSTEM (CGES):
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the installation and use of
CGESs designed for multiple households or businesses to reduce the on-site
consumption of utility power. The intent of these regulations is to protect the
public health, safety, and community welfare without unduly restricting
development of CGESs.
   B.   Special Use: Community Garden Energy Systems shall require a special
use permit within all zoning districts and shall be subject to the procedures
and standards included in special uses unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
   C.   Special Requirements: Community Solar Energy Systems shall be subject
to the requirements included in this title unless otherwise stated herein:
      1.   Roof Mounted: Community solar gardens may be located on rooftops.
Roof mounted CGES shall be subject to the same requirements as roof mounted
PSES described in section
9-16-2 of this chapter.
      2.   Ground Mount Gardens: Ground mount community solar energy systems
must be less than fifteen (15) acres in total size, and require a special use
permit in all districts. Ground mount solar developments covering more than
fifteen (15) acres shall be considered a solar farm.
      3.   Interconnection Agreement: An interconnection agreement must be
completed with the electric utility in whose service territory the system is
located.
      4.   Dimensional Standards: All solar garden related structures in newly
platted and existing subdivisions shall comply with the principal structure
setback, height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system
is located.
      5.   Ground Mount Standards: Ground Mount Systems shall comply with all
required standards for structures in the zoning district in which the system is
located. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-4: SOLAR FARM ENERGY SYSTEM (SFES):
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of these regulations is to provide a
uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the installation and use of
SFESs designed for commercial energy production. The intent of these
regulations is to protect the public health, safety, and community welfare
while allowing development of solar energy resources for commercial purposes.
   B.   Special Use: Solar Farm Energy Systems shall require a special use
permit within Industrial and Agricultural Districts and shall be subject to the
procedures and standards included in special uses unless otherwise stated in
this chapter.
   C.   Special Requirements: SFESs are subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Height: Shall not exceed twenty feet (20') at maximum tilt of the
solar panel(s).
      2.   Property Size: The property on which the SFES is to be installed
shall be in excess of fifteen (15) acres.
      3.   Setbacks: The front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum
of fifty feet (50') from the property lines which form the outside perimeter of
a SFES project area and solar panels will be kept at least five hundred feet
(500') from the property line of a residential parcel that is not part of the
parcel on which the facility is located.
      4.   Fencing: A fence of at least six feet (6') in height but no greater
than eight feet (8') shall enclose the SFES.
      5.   Lighting: If lighting is provided at the project, lighting shall be
shielded and downcast such that the light does not spill onto the adjacent
parcel. Provisions of chapter 10 of this title in regards to lighting would
need to be followed.
      6.   Noise: Provisions of chapter 11 of this title in regards to noise
would need to be followed.
      7.   Installation And Design: The SFES shall be designed and located in
order to prevent glare toward any inhabited buildings on adjacent properties as
well as adjacent highways.
      8.   Outdoor Storage: Only the outdoor storage of materials, vehicles,
and equipment that directly support the operation and maintenance of the solar
farm shall be allowed.
      9.   Agreements: Proof an Agriculture Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA)
has been executed with the Illinois Department of Agriculture, or a similar
agreement has been executed with the Village.
      10.   Consultation: In all undeveloped areas, the SFES project owner/
operator will be required to complete a consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) through the department's online EcoCat
program. The cost of this consultation shall be at the owner/operator's
expense. The final certificate from the EcoCat shall be provided to the Village
of Germantown Hills before a permit will be issued.
      11.   Variance: If any of the specifications described in subsections C1,
C2, and C3 of this section cannot be met, a variance must be applied for and
obtained prior to installation.
   D.   Certification:
      1.   Applicable Industry Standards: SFESs shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those from the UL and Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
      2.   Applicable Codes: All applicable Village, State, and national
Construction and Electric Codes and regulations shall be followed.
      3.   Stormwater And NPDES: Solar farms are subject to the Village's
stormwater management, erosion, and sediment control provisions and NPDES
permit requirements.
   E.   Safety: All SFESs shall provide the following at all locked entrances:
      1.   A visible "High Voltage" warning sign;
      2.   Name(s) and phone number(s) for the electric utility provider;
      3.   Name(s) and phone number(s) for the site operator;
      4.   The facility's 911 address, GPS coordinates;
      5.   A knox box with keys; and,
      6.   Company shall become a member of the Illinois State-Wide One- Call
Notice System (otherwise known as the Joint Utility Locating Information for
Excavators or (JULIE)) and provide JULIE with all of the information necessary
to update its records as soon as JULIE allows such membership and provide the
Village with proof of membership.
   F.   Petition: The petition for a special use permit for a Solar Farm Energy
System shall include:
      1.   A written summary of the project including a general description of
the project, including its approximate generating capacity.
      2.   The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of the owner and/or
SFES operator.
      3.   The site plans required to be submitted with the building permit
application, as described in subsection M of this section.
      4.   All other information contained in this chapter as may be required
to file a petition.
   G.   Decommissioning Plan: Prior to applying for a building permit, the SFES
project owner/operator shall submit a decommissioning plan to the Village of
Germantown Hills Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall review the plan for
completeness and refer it to the Germantown Hills Zoning Board of Appeals, or
any successor committee(s) designated to oversee zoning issues. The plan shall
include:
      1.   A description of the plan to remove the SFES equipment and restore
the land to its previous use upon the end of the project's life;
      2.   Provisions for the removal of structures, debris, and associated
equipment on the surface and to a level of not less than five feet (5') below
the surface, and the sequence in which removal is expected to occur;
      3.   Provisions for the restoration of the soil and vegetation;
      4.   An estimate of the decommissioning costs certified by an independent
professional engineer, approved by the Village, in current dollars. The
engineer providing this estimate shall be engaged under contract by the Village
of Germantown Hills and all costs associated with this engagement shall be
borne by the applicant;
      5.   No consideration of the scrap value shall be included in the
decommissioning costs;
      6.   A written financial plan approved to ensure that funds will be
available for decommissioning and land restoration;
      7.   A provision that the terms of the decommissioning plan shall be
binding upon the owner or operator and any of their successors, assigns, or
heirs;
      8.   Upon review of the decommissioning plan, the Village of Germantown
Hills Board shall set an amount to be held in surety bond in the amount of one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost. The plan shall state that the
Village of Germantown Hills shall have access to the project and to the funds
to effect or complete decommissioning one year after cessation of operations.
   H.   Reimbursement For Village Expenses: If during the term of the special
use and decommissioning period for the project, the Village, in its reasonable
discretion retains outside engineers, consultants, contractors, attorneys or
other parties, in order for the Village to enforce, determine compliance or
obtain compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and these
conditions, SFES project owner/operator shall promptly reimburse the Village
for all such expenses.
   I.   Litigation: Any legal action shall be brought only in the Circuit Court
of the State of Illinois in Woodford County and the owner/operator further
accepts for itself, himself or herself and in respect of its, his or her
property, generally and unconditionally, the exclusive jurisdiction of that
court with respect to any such legal action and irrevocably waives any
objection, including, without limitation, any objection to the laying of venue
or based on the grounds of forum non conveniens, which it, he or she may now or
hereafter have to the bringing of any such legal action in that jurisdiction
and venue.
   J.   Road Agreements: The SFES project owner/operator shall comply with all
the provisions of the road usage agreement entered into between the SFES
project owner/operator and the Village of Germantown Hills. The SFES project
owner/operator shall also comply with any road usage agreement entered into
between the SFES project owner/operator and any other governmental entity. Any
material breach of any such road usage agreements by the SFES project owner/
operator shall constitute a material breach of these conditions.
   K.   Maintenance: SFES project owner/operator shall operate the project in a
safe, well maintained, attractive, and continuous manner, making all necessary
repairs in a timely fashion, including, without limitation, the vegetation on
the entire project site.
   L.   Signage: In addition to the safety signs required, only one sign, not
to exceed thirty two (32) square feet, identifying the SFES project owner/
operator may be erected on the perimeter fence.
   M.   Building Permit: Before a building permit is issued, the following
shall be submitted to the Village of Germantown Hills Zoning Officer for
review:
      1.   Existing Conditions: A site plan with existing conditions showing
the following:
         a.   Existing property lines and property lines extending one hundred
feet (100') from the exterior boundaries including the names of adjacent
property owners and the current use of those properties.
         b.   The front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of
fifty feet (50') from the property lines which form the outside perimeter of a
SFES project area and solar panels will be kept at least five hundred feet
(500') from the property line of a residential parcel that is not part of the
parcel on which the facility is located.
         c.   All routes that will be used for the construction and maintenance
purposes shall be identified on the site plan. All routes for either egress or
ingress shall be shown.
         d.   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatment
systems.
         e.   Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
         f.   A contour map showing topography at two foot (2') intervals. A
contour map of surrounding properties may also be required.
         g.   Existing vegetation (list type and percent of coverage: i.e.,
cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas, etc.).
         h.   Any delineated wetland boundaries.
         i.   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM maps that shows the subject
property including the 100-year flood elevation and any regulated flood
protection elevation, if available.
         j.   Surface water drainage patterns.
         k.   The location of any subsurface drainage tiles.
         l.   Location and spacing of the solar collector.
         m.   Location of underground and overhead electric lines connecting
the solar farm to a building, substation or other electric load.
         n.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substations that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      2.   Proposed Conditions: A site plan with proposed conditions showing
the following:
         a.   Location, height, and spacing of the solar panels.
         b.   Location of access roads.
         c.   Location of underground or overhead electric lines connecting the
solar farm to a building, substation, or other electric load.
         d.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
         e.   Compliance with all of the requirements herein for SFES.
      3.   Emergency Plan: The site emergency plan shall be submitted to the
local fire protection district(s) and/or department(s) whose jurisdiction is
included in whole or in part within the SFES project area. Specialized training
shall be provided at the operator's expense for all Village, County, Fire
Protection District, and other applicable jurisdictions first responders'
biennially. All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be
submitted to the Village.
      4.   Decommissioning Plan: The Decommissioning Plan required herein.
      5.   Surety Bond: The surety bond approved by the Village Board. (Ord.
814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-5: INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY:
   A.   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of the SFES project shall defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Village of Germantown Hills and its officials
from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, suits, causes of action,
damages, injuries, costs, expenses, and liabilities whatsoever, including
attorney's fees, without limitation, arising out of acts or omissions of the
applicant, owner, and/or operator associated with the construction and/or
operation of the SFES project.
   B.   The applicant, owner, and/or operator of the SFES project shall
maintain a current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property
damage with limits of at least two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per
occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate. Evidence
of liability coverage must be reported to the Village of Germantown Hills on an
annual basis, and any loss of coverage must be reported within three (3)
working days of loss. Failure to maintain coverage shall be considered a
cessation of operations. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-6: CESSATION OF OPERATIONS:
If any SFES provided for in this chapter has not been in operation and
producing electricity for at least one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days,
it shall be removed. The Village of Germantown Hills Zoning Officer shall
notify the owner to remove the system. Within thirty (30) days, the owner shall
either submit evidence showing that the system has been operating and producing
electricity or remove it. If the owner fails to or refuses to remove the solar
energy system, the Village may pursue all applicable remedies, including
without limitation those described in section
9-16-7 of this chapter and exercising its rights in the Decommissioning Plan,
including using the surety bond proceeds. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-7: PENALTIES:
A failure to obtain applicable building permit(s) for the construction of a
solar energy system or failure to comply with the requirements of a building
permit or the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. The Village may bring an action to enforce compliance of the
requirements of this chapter by filing an action in the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or seek such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
In addition, any person who violates this chapter shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from seeking such other legal remedies
available to prevent or remedy any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 814, 2-21-
2019)
9-16-8: BUILDING PERMITS:
All solar energy systems shall require a permit from the Village Zoning
Administrator and shall comply with any other applicable provisions of this
Code, State law, or Federal law. In addition to all required documents, a
twenty five dollar ($25.00) permit fee shall be paid to the Village at the time
of issuance. If additional inspections or costs are necessary, there will be a
fee assessed to reimburse the Village. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-9: NON-CONFORMING SYSTEMS:
Any system existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter that does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be considered a nonconforming
structure, and shall be subject to the regulations pertaining to nonconforming
structures in this title. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
9-16-10: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Village Zoning Administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter
through inspections on such schedule as he/she deems appropriate. The Village
Zoning Administrator has the authority to enter upon the premises where a solar
energy system is located at any time by coordinating a reasonable time with the
operator/owner of the facility. Any person, firm or cooperation who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
provisions in section
9-16-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 814, 2-21-2019)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Official Map
10-1-4: Modifications To Provisions
10-1-5: Amendments
10-1-6: Enforcement And Penalties
10-1-7: Severability
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as MAP, PLAT AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE
OF GERMANTOWN HILLS, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
The regulations herein adopted and established have been made for the purpose
of:
   A.   Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivision of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in
respect to public improvements as herein defined;
   B.   Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width,
course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage
collection and treatment;
   C.   Guiding and facilitating the orderly beneficial development of the
village and its environs and to implement the recommendation of the
comprehensive plan;
   D.   Establishing procedures for approving maps, plats, subdivisions and
resubdivisions of any block, lot or sublot, or any part thereof;
   E.   Establishing procedures for approving development plans for commercial
planned developments and residential planned unit developments; and
   F.   Affording the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the village and the one and one-half (11/2) mile area contiguous thereto and
providing for the harmonious development of the village and its environs. (Ord.
675, 2-24-2011)
10-1-3: OFFICIAL MAP:
   A.   Purpose: The official map is hereby made a part of this title and is
intended to designate public sites and streets that may be required by the
planning commission or subdivision plats. The designation of such public sites
on final subdivision plats may be required by the planning commission prior to
approval; provided, that such public site is indicated on the official map for
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of application for final approval of the
subdivision plat. Limits to which such areas designated for public use on the
official map may be restricted from development are as specified herein.
   B.   Designation And Acquisition Of Public Sites And Open Spaces: Whenever
the reasonable requirements provided by this title, including the official map,
shall indicate the necessity for providing for a school site, park site,
street, or other public lands within any proposed subdivision for which
approval has been requested, and no such provision has been made therefor, the
governing body may require that lands be designated for such public purpose
before approving such plat. Whenever a final plat of subdivision or part
thereof has been approved by the governing body as complying with the official
map, and there is designated therein a public site, the corporate authorities
having jurisdiction shall acquire such land by condemnation within one year
from date of approval of such plat, and if it does not do so within such period
of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners thereof in
any other manner consistent with this title, including the official map and
zoning ordinance so adopted.
   C.   Amendments To Official Map: Amendments to the official map shall be in
accordance with section
10-1-5 of this chapter. Any public or semipublic agency may request the
establishment of a future public site or easement on the official map. When
such proposed site is not included in the comprehensive plan, the requesting
agency shall indicate to the planning commission the need for the site in the
particular location specified. The planning commission shall study the request
and shall report to the governing body as to the consistency of the proposed
site with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-1-4: MODIFICATIONS TO PROVISIONS:
   A.   Modifications Permitted:
      1.   Generally: Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary
hardships may result from strict compliance with this title, it may recommend
to the governing body a modification of the regulations so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such
modification will not have the effect of nullifying the purpose of the
comprehensive plan or this title.
      2.   Large Scale Developments: The standards and requirements of this
title may be modified by the planning commission in the case of a plan or a
program for a planned development for a community, or a neighborhood unit,
which, in the judgment of the planning commission, shall exceed the minimum
requirements for adequate public space and improvements for circulation,
recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as
will assure conformity to the purposes of the comprehensive plan.
   B.   Applications Required: Applications for any such modification, except
those initiated by the planning commission, shall be submitted in writing by
the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed for the consideration
of the planning commission. The petitions shall state fully the grounds for the
application and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
   C.   Planning Commission Recommendation; Governing Body Approval: In
recommending modifications wherever provided in this title, the planning
commission may prescribe such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. The
recommendation of a modification by the planning commission shall be
conditional and subject to the final approval of the governing body. (Ord. 675,
2-24-2011)
10-1-5: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   This title may be amended, in whole or in part, by the governing body;
provided, that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing
having been held by the planning commission. Not less than fifteen (15) days'
notice of the proposed hearing, and the time and place thereof, shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The
provisions of the proposed amendment need not be advertised in full. A brief
summary of the amendment, setting forth the principal provisions of the
proposed changes and a reference to the place or places where copies of the
proposed amendment may be examined, shall be incorporated in the official
notice.
   B.   The hearing shall be informal, but all persons desiring to be heard in
support or opposition shall be afforded such opportunity, and may submit their
statements orally, in writing, or both. The hearing may be recessed to another
date if not concluded, if notice of the time and place thereof is publicly
announced at the hearing or is given by newspaper publication not less than
five (5) days prior to the recessed hearing.
   C.   Within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing, the
planning commission shall make a report to the village board of trustees on the
amendments to this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-1-6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Enforcement:
      1.   The governing body shall appoint the administrative official
responsible for the administration of this title. His title shall be plat
officer. No officer designated by the governing body as the plat officer under
the provisions of this title shall engage, either directly or indirectly, in
the business of surveying, and no map, plat or subdivision shall be received
for record, or have any validity which has been prepared by, or under the
direction of, any such plat officer in violation of the provisions of this
subsection. The plat officer shall have the power to make such orders,
requirements, decisions and determinations as are necessary to enforce this
title.
      2.   No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell such parcel before a plat of said
subdivision has been approved by the planning commission and filed with the
county recorder of deeds.
      3.   The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of a
metes and bounds description or by any other method with the intent of evading
this title, for the purpose of sale, transfer or lease, is unlawful.
      4.   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building located on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of the regulations of
this title.
      5.   No final plat of any subdivision shall be valid nor entitled to be
recorded unless and until the same has been approved by the planning commission
or governing body in accordance with the procedure herein provided, and no
final plat of any subdivision shall be approved without compliance with the
provisions of this title.
   B.   Violations; Penalties:
      1.   The county recorder of deeds shall not record maps, plats,
subdivisions, deeds or leases to convey property contrary to the provisions of
this title.
      2.   In case any map, plat, or subdivision is recorded or attempted to be
recorded, or any deed or deeds recorded conveying property according to such
map, plat, or subdivision, the proper authorities of the village, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful conveyance of said property or to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of any buildings or structures
erected on said premises or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or
use in or upon such premises.
      3.   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the plat officer that any
provisions of this title have been violated, it shall be his duty to notify the
governing body of this fact, and the governing body shall immediately take
appropriate action, and prosecute the same to final judgment, against the
person offending.
      4.   In case of violation of this title, the proper authorities of the
village, or any person, the value or use of whose property is or may be
affected by such violation, may, in addition to other remedies, institute any
appropriate action or proceedings in equity to prevent the unlawful conveyance
of the property which is the subject of such violation and to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation.
      5.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this title
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each
day such violation is permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-1-7: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this title are hereby declared to be severable, and if any of
its provisions shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional or otherwise
void for any reason, such decision shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions hereof, and it is hereby declared to be the intent of the
village that this title would have been adopted if such invalid,
unconstitutional or otherwise void provision had not been included herein.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction And Definitions
10-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose
of this title, have the meanings herein indicated. Any pertinent word or term
not a part of this listing but vital to the interpretation of this title shall
be construed to have its usual legal definition. The present tense includes the
future tense, and vice versa. The masculine gender includes the feminine and
neuter. The singular includes the plural, and vice versa. The word "shall" is
always mandatory; the word "may" is always permissive. The word "person"
includes a partnership, association, firm, trust, club, institution, company,
or corporation as well as the individual.
   A.   Governmental units, boards and officials:
      COUNTY: The county of Woodford, Illinois.
      GOVERNING BODY: The village board of Germantown Hills, Illinois.
      PLANNING COMMISSION: The municipal planning commission of the village of
Germantown Hills.
      PLAT OFFICER: The person designated by the village as administrator of
this title.
      VILLAGE: The village of Germantown Hills, Illinois.
   B.   General terms:
      ACCESS: The way over which traffic moves to and/or from the property
abutting a street or alley and the way over which traffic moves to and/or from
a street to a street or from a street to an alley.
      ALLEY: A permanent service right of way which affords only a secondary
means of access from such right of way to abutting property and is not intended
for general traffic circulation.
      AREA, LOT: The total area within the lot lines.
      BIKE PATH AND/OR WALKWAY: A paved or dedicated path designed and intended
to safely integrate and allow for bicycle and pedestrian traffic between
neighborhoods as well as other local destinations, including schools, parks,
and shopping centers.
      BLOCK: Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the
two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right of way, waterway,
unsubdivided area, or other definite boundary.
      BUILDING: An enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns,
walls, arches, or other devices and used for the housing, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, or chattels.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The complete plan or any of its parts for the
development of the village of Germantown Hills and the one and one-half (11/2)
mile area contiguous thereto as prepared by the planning commission and adopted
by the governing body as the official plan.
      CONSTRUCTION: The excavation of earth to provide for a basement or
cellar; and/or the addition to or removal from a lot or tract of land of earth
or water so as to prepare said lot or tract of land for the construction of a
structure and/or the placing of construction materials in a permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner; and/or the demolition, elimination, or
removal of an existing structure in connection with such construction.
      DWELLING: A building designed for residential living purposes and
containing one or more dwelling units.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling
units.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
      DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling
which are used exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than
two (2) roomers or boarders, and which contain a stove, sink, and other kitchen
facilities.
      EASEMENT: A temporary or permanent grant by the property owner of the use
of land by the public, a corporation, or persons for specified purposes.
      FAMILY:
      1.   An individual; or
      2.   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
      3.   Not more than five (5) persons not so related, together with his or
their domestic servants and gratuitous guests, maintaining common household in
a dwelling unit.
      GRADE: The ascending or descending inclination with the horizontal of a
street, measured along the centerline of the right of way, expressed by stating
the vertical rise or fall as a percentage of the horizontal distance.
      LOT: The tract of land within a subdivision marked by the subdivider on
the plat as a numbered, lettered, or other identified tract of land to be
offered for sale, dedication, or development.
      LOT, CORNER: A lot located:
      1.   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more intersecting
streets; or
      2.   At the junction of and abutting a street and the nearest shoreline
or high water line of a stormwater or floodwater runoff channel or basin; or
      3.   At the junction of and abutting two (2) or more stormwater or
floodwater runoff channels or basins; or
      4.   At the abutting point of abrupt change of a single street where the
interior angle is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°), and the
radius of the street centerline is less than one hundred feet (100').
      LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot.
      MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN: A part of the comprehensive plan which sets
forth the general location, alignment, dimensions, and the identification and
classification of existing and proposed streets.
      OWNER, OWNERSHIP: An individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, company, organization, trust, or other legal entity
having a proprietary interest in a use, structure, lot, or tract of land.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land, which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or control, which includes two (2) or more main or principal
structures.
      PLAT: A map, plan, or layout showing the subdivision of land into lots.
      PLAT OFFICER: The administrative official charged with enforcing this
title, as further described in subsection
10-1-6A1 of this title.
      PROPERTY: The general term denoting, either singularly or in combination,
an area, lot, parcel, tract, plot, or otherwise designated portion of land.
      PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A constructed system for the acquisition,
purification and transmission of potable water to individual users and which is
approved by the Illinois department of public health.
      RIGHT OF WAY: The entire dedicated tract or strip of land that is to be
used by the public for circulation or service.
      SANITARY SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of
liquid and solid sewage wastes, other than stormwaters, to a sewage treatment
plant, and which is approved by the Illinois department of public health.
      SCHOOL: A building or group of buildings and all associated structures,
facilities, and grounds in or on which instruction is given in subjects that
are fundamental and essential in general education, and are under the
supervision of the state of Illinois superintendent of schools.
      SIDEWALK: That paved portion of the right of way designed and intended
for the movement and use of pedestrian traffic.
      STORM SEWER: A constructed conduit for the collection and carrying of
surface waters to a drainage course.
      STREET: A thoroughfare within the right of way which affords the
principal means of access to abutting property. A street may be designated as:
an avenue, a boulevard, a drive, a highway, an arterial, a lane, a parkway, a
place, a road, a thoroughfare, or by other appropriate name. Streets are
identified according to type of use, by the major thoroughfare plan as follows:
         Collector: A street generally meant to serve secondary traffic
generators and provide access to private property. Collector streets collect
traffic in residential areas and provide a connection between minor arterial,
other collector, and local streets.
         Local: A street primarily designed to provide access to abutting
property. Local streets provide direct access between private property and
collector streets.
         Minor Arterial: Streets that interconnect or augment traffic flow from
and between principal arterial streets. Such streets accommodate trips of
moderate length and provide access between smaller streets. Sante Fe Trail and
Lourdes Road are examples of minor arterial streets.
         Principal Arterial: Generally refers to Illinois Route 116. The term
represents a street that connects urban cities and rural areas, carries high
volumes of traffic, and provides a continuous route over a long distance. Such
streets provide little, if any, access to private property.
      STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
surface of the ground or underground, or affixed to something having a fixed
location on the surface of the ground.
      SUBDIVIDE, SUBDIVISION: Any division or development of any part, lot,
area, or tract of land by the subdivider into lots two (2) or more in number
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer,
improvement, or sale, with the appurtenant streets, alleys and easements,
dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of the
purchasers or owners within the part, lot, area or tract divided. The division
of land into lots two (2) or more in number, each lot with area greater than
five (5) acres, and not involving any new street, alley, easement, or other
means of access, shall not be deemed a subdivision for the purpose of this
title.
      SUBDIVIDER: Any person or entity who subdivides.
      USE: Specific purposes as permitted by the zoning ordinance of the
village of Germantown Hills for which land, a structure or premises is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Preliminary Considerations
10-3-2: Preapplication
10-3-3: Preliminary Plat Approval
10-3-4: Final Plat Approval
10-3-5: Boundary Map
10-3-6: Commercial Pad Sites Exempt
10-3-7: Abbreviated Procedure For Small Subdivisions
10-3-8: Commercial Planned Developments And Residential Planned Unit
Developments
10-3-9: Donation Of Land Or Contribution Of Cash For School Purposes
10-3-10: Contribution Of Cash For Park And Recreation Purposes
10-3-1: PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   No land which is located within the village or which is located
entirely or in part within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village shall,
after the effective date hereof, be subdivided and filed for record, nor any
street laid out, nor any improvements made to the land until the plat or plats
of the subdivision or development plan for a commercial planned development or
for a residential planned unit development shall have been certified to and
approved by action as specified herein.
      2.   No land shall be subdivided or a plan developed for any use unless
access to the land over streets exists or will be provided by the subdivider or
developer.
   B.   Application For Approval:
      1.   Subdivision Plat: A subdivider desiring approval of a plat of any
land lying within the jurisdiction of this title shall submit a written
application therefor to the planning commission. Such application shall be in
accordance with the procedures of section
10-3-3 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the information set forth in
section
10-6-2 of this title.
      2.   Commercial Planned Development Or Residential Planned Unit
Development: A developer desiring approval of a development plan for land
within the jurisdiction of this title shall submit a written application
therefor to the planning commission. Such application shall be in accordance
with the procedures of subsection
10-3-8A of this chapter and shall be accompanied by the information set forth
in subsection
10-6-4A or 10-6-5A of this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-3-2: PREAPPLICATION:
In order to conserve time, effort, and expense, the subdivider or developer
shall consult with the planning commission before submitting an application as
described in subsection
10-3-1B1 or B2 of this chapter. The subdivider or developer shall have
available at this consultation the plans and data specified in section
10-6-1 of this title. The planning commission and the subdivider or developer
shall discuss the application requirements of section
10-6-2 or subsection
10-6-4A or 10-6-5A of this title, as the case may be. The planning commission
and the subdivider or developer shall also discuss requirements for streets;
school and recreational sites; shopping centers; community facilities;
sanitation, water supply and drainage; bike/walkways; and relationship to other
developments, existing and proposed, in the vicinity, as applicable. (Ord. 675,
2-24-2011)
10-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   Preparation Of Plat: The subdivider shall, after the preapplication
procedure of section
10-3-2 of this chapter, cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in section
10-6-2 of this title.
   B.   Submission Of Plat: Nine (9) copies of the preliminary plat and
supplementary material shall be submitted to the planning commission with
written application for the approval of the preliminary plat at least ten (10)
days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. The application
shall be accompanied by a check or money order, payable to the village, in the
amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus six dollars ($6.00) for each lot
over thirty three (33) lots. Such amount shall be paid into the general
corporate fund of the village to offset the cost of professional review of the
plat.
   C.   Planning Commission Action:
      1.   Review Of Preliminary Plat: The planning commission shall review the
preliminary plat and supplementary material for conformity with village
ordinances, including the official map. The planning commission may negotiate
with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
improvements to be made by the subdivider.
      2.   Notification To School Board: Within three (3) business days after a
preliminary plat is submitted for approval, the governing body, through the
planning commission, shall notify the president of the school board of each
school district in which any of the subdivided land is located that the
preliminary plat has been submitted for approval and that it is available for
inspection. The notice shall also give the date, time, and place of the hearing
on approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. The notice shall be served
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery. Failure
to notify the school board as required by this subsection C2 does not
invalidate any plat 1 .
      3.   Public Hearing: The planning commission shall conduct a public
hearing on the preliminary plat. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village not less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.
      4.   Planning Commission Approve: The planning commission shall approve
or disapprove the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of
application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required
supplementary material, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended
by mutual consent. If the preliminary plat is approved, the planning commission
shall furnish to the applicant a written statement of approval. Because a
preliminary plat approved by the planning commission must still be approved by
the governing body, the planning commission shall forward to the governing body
the preliminary plat and supplementary material submitted by the applicant, and
also a copy of the written statement of approval.
      5.   Planning Commission Disapprove: If the preliminary plat is
disapproved, the planning commission shall furnish to the applicant a written
statement setting forth the reasons for disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed preliminary plat fails to
comply with village ordinances, including the official map. Upon disapproval,
the applicant may either appeal the decision to the governing body, or may
submit a revised preliminary plat to the planning commission, attempting to
cure the deficiencies which resulted in disapproval. Submission of a revised
preliminary plat triggers a new ninety (90) day review period as specified in
subsection C4 of this section. If the applicant elects to appeal, written
notice of the appeal shall be directed to the village clerk within thirty (30)
days after the date of the written disapproval of the planning commission, and
the applicant shall attach a copy of the written disapproval to the notice of
appeal. The applicant shall also deliver a copy of the notice of appeal to the
planning commission with a request that the planning commission forward the
governing body the preliminary plat and supplementary material submitted by the
applicant.
   D.   Governing Body Action:
      1.   If the preliminary plat is approved by the planning commission, the
governing body shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within thirty
(30) days after its next regular stated meeting following the action of the
planning commission.
      2.   If the preliminary plat is disapproved by the planning commission
and the applicant files a notice of appeal in proper form, the governing body
shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within sixty five (65) days
after its next regular stated meeting following the receipt of the notice of
appeal.
      3.   The governing body shall review the preliminary plat and
supplementary material for conformity with village ordinances, including the
official map. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      4.   If the governing body approves a preliminary plat, it shall direct
the plat officer to sign the preliminary plat and certificate as set forth in
chapter 7 of this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
      5.   If the governing body disapproves a preliminary plat, its order or
resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed preliminary plat fails to
comply with village ordinances, including the official map.
   E.   Interpretation Of Plat Approval: Approval of the preliminary plat by
the governing body shall not qualify the plat for recording. Approval of the
preliminary plat by the governing body shall be construed to be an expression
of approval of the general layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of
the final plat and to be assurance to the subdivider that the final plat will
be approved if it conforms to the terms of the approved preliminary plat and
all village ordinances. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
10-3-4: FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   Application For Approval: Application for approval of a final plat
shall be made in writing to the village clerk not later than one year after
approval of the preliminary plat by the governing body. The application must be
supported by such drawings, specifications and bond as may be necessary to
demonstrate compliance with all requirements of Illinois law and village
ordinances, including conformity with the preliminary plat and compliance with
appropriate sections of chapters 5 and 6 of this title.
   B.   Stages Of Approval: The applicant may elect to have final approval of a
geographic part or parts of the approved preliminary plat, and may delay
application for approval of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one
year with the approval of the governing body, provided all facilities required
to serve the part or parts for which final approval is sought have been
provided. In such case, only such part or parts of the preliminary plat as have
received final approval shall be recorded.
   C.   Governing Body Action:
      1.   When an applicant for approval of a final plat has supplied all
drawings, maps and other documents required by this title to be furnished in
support thereof, and if all such material meets all village requirements, the
governing body shall approve the proposed final plat within sixty (60) days
from the date of filing the last required document or other paper or within
sixty (60) days from the date of filing the application for approval of the
final plat, whichever date is later. The applicant and the governing body may
mutually agree to extend the sixty (60) day period.
      2.   If the governing body disapproves the final plat, its order or
resolution shall state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with
particularity the aspects in which the proposed final plat fails to comply with
village ordinances, including the official map. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
   D.   Plat Officer Signature; Filing Plat: If the governing body approves the
final plat, it shall direct the plat officer to sign the final plat and
certificate as set forth in chapter 7 of this title. Within sixty (60) days
after the plat officer has signed the final plat, the applicant shall file the
plat with the county recorder, and if not so filed, the plat shall have no
validity and shall not be recorded without recertification by the plat officer.
One reproducible copy of the final plat shall be filed with the plat officer.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
10-3-5: BOUNDARY MAP:
   A.   A parcel may be subdivided by use of a boundary map in the following
instances:
      1.   Any parcel of land may be divided into two (2) parts, either of
which part is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose of ownership transfer
or building development. After one such boundary map dividing a tract of land
in one ownership as of June 15, 1978, has been signed by the plat officer, he
shall not sign another boundary map dividing said land. Further division of
said land shall be recorded only by means of a map or plat of subdivision as
provided in this title, which map or plat of subdivision shall include the
parcel previously divided off by a boundary map.
      2.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land that does not create an additional lot.
      3.   The conveyance or dedication of land for highway or other public
purposes or the vacation of land dedicated for a public use.
   B.   A subdivision described herein may be subdivided by recording with the
county recorder an adequate boundary map made thereof by a registered Illinois
land surveyor. Such boundary map shall include all of the following:
      1.   All permanent structures within thirty feet (30') of an existing or
proposed lot line.
      2.   A certification of the county clerk that there are no delinquent or
unpaid general taxes and/or special assessments against the lands described on
this boundary map.
      3.   A signature of the plat officer.
      4.   Shall be drawn with waterproof, nonfading, black ink on tracing
cloth or good quality tracing paper, eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18"
x 24") or larger in six inch (6") multiples.
No such boundary map shall be entitled to be recorded or have validity until it
has been signed by the plat officer. The plat officer shall keep a record and
copy of such boundary maps.
   C.   A parcel subdivided by use of a boundary map shall not be subject to
the platting requirements of this code. However, such subdivision shall be
subject to and comply with all other provisions of this code. The application
for approval of the boundary map shall be accompanied by a check or money
order, payable to the village, in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Such amount shall be paid into the general corporate fund of the village to
offset the cost of professional review of the plat. Should the village deem it
necessary or desirable to engage legal counsel to review the boundary map, the
applicant shall submit an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) to offset
the cost of such additional review. (Ord. 735, 7-24-2014)
10-3-6: COMMERCIAL PAD SITES EXEMPT:
The following division of land shall not be considered a subdivision for
purposes of this title, so long as all the following requirements are met:
   A.   The division of land relates to a larger parcel of land that is zoned C
commercial under the village zoning ordinance.
   B.   The larger parcel of land that is zoned C commercial:
      1.   Is a shopping center development, or part of a shopping center
development, that qualifies for a pylon sign under subsection
8-3-10V of this code; or
      2.   Is at least one acre in size, prior to the conveyance of any
commercial pads as provided in this section.
   C.   The division of land is for the purpose of a conveyance by the shopping
center developer or commercial property owner of a pad site to a commercial
user, which pad site either:
      1.   Has the same dimensions as the "footprint" of a proposed commercial
building; or
      2.   Has no more than an additional twenty five percent (25%) of the
square footage of a proposed commercial building, and the additional square
footage is planted and maintained in grass or other landscaping materials and
contains no use other than a commercial trash receptacle or HVAC components.
   D.   The proposed commercial building to be constructed on the pad site will
either:
      1.   Directly adjoin, or be located no more than one foot (1') distant
from, an existing commercial building on the larger parcel of land, which
existing commercial building is owned by the shopping center developer,
commercial property owner, or other commercial pad owner. If the proposed
commercial building will not directly adjoin an existing commercial building,
the gap of no more than one foot (1') must be closed off by the proposed owner
of the pad site in a manner that is aesthetically compatible with the facades
of the two (2) buildings so as to restrict access of any description through
the gap; or
      2.   If the proposed commercial building does not directly adjoin an
existing building and is not located within one foot (1') distance from an
existing commercial building, the buildings may be set apart as long as the two
(2) buildings are at least five feet (5') apart and the facades of the two (2)
buildings are aesthetically compatible.
   E.   The shopping center developer or commercial property owner must certify
to the village that he/she/it will continue to be fully responsible for
ensuring compliance with the following requirements as they pertain to the pad
site, as though the developer or owner continued to own the pad site as part of
the development: public and private access, utility easement access, and site
drainage.
   F.   The shopping center developer or commercial property owner must certify
to the village that he/she/it will continue to be fully responsible for
ensuring compliance with the following requirements of the village zoning
ordinance as they pertain to the pad site, as though the developer or owner
continued to own the pad site as part of the development: public and private
access, off street parking space, and off street loading space.
   G.   The proposed owner of the pad site must certify to the village that he/
she/it will comply with all provisions of the village zoning ordinance that are
not rendered inapplicable by virtue of the proposed construction of a building
so as to occupy all or nearly all of the pad site. (Examples of provisions
rendered inapplicable are maximum building coverage, yard requirements, off
street parking space, and off street loading space.) Building setback
requirements from streets or other rights of way continue to apply to the
siting of the proposed commercial building upon the pad site as though the
shopping center developer or commercial property owner continued to own the pad
site as part of the development.
   H.   If the requirements of this section are met, the village board will
authorize the plat officer to give written approval, in an appropriate form, to
a conveyance of the pad site by metes and bounds description from the shopping
center developer or commercial property owner to the commercial user. (Ord.
746, 4-23-2015)
10-3-7: ABBREVIATED PROCEDURE FOR SMALL SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The subdivider of any proposed subdivision having four (4) or fewer
lots fronting on an existing street complying with the standards imposed by
this title may, at the discretion of the planning commission, submit a final
plat, together with any construction plans deemed necessary, for direct
consideration and approval by the plat officer without following the steps
which ordinarily precede the submission of a final plat.
   B.   The subdivider of any proposed subdivision having four (4) or fewer
developed lots fronting on an existing street may, at the discretion of the
planning commission, submit a final plat, together with any necessary
construction plans and specifications, for direct consideration and approval by
the governing body without following the steps which ordinarily precede the
submission of a final plat; provided, that the following criteria are met:
      1.   All lots in the proposed subdivision meet at least a minimum lot
dimension as prescribed in section
10-4-7 of this title and as governed by the zoning ordinance.
      2.   All lots in the proposed subdivision will, upon completion of the
subdivision, have access to utilities constructed in accordance with the terms
and conditions of this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-3-8: COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS AND RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Preliminary Plan Approval:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the procedures and
requirements for approval of preliminary development plans for commercial
planned developments and residential planned unit developments shall be those
procedures and requirements specified in section
10-3-3 of this chapter for approval of preliminary plats. References in section
10-3-3 of this chapter to subdividers and plats shall be construed to be
references to developers and development plans, respectively.
      2.   The required plans, maps and supporting documents are specified in
subsections
10-6-4A and
10-6-5A of this title for commercial planned developments and residential
planned unit developments, respectively. The application fee shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00), plus, in the case of a residential planned unit
development, six dollars ($6.00) for each dwelling unit over thirty three (33)
units.
   B.   Final Development Plan Approval:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the procedures and
requirements for approval of final development plans for commercial planned
developments and residential planned unit developments shall be those
procedures and requirements specified in section
10-3-4 of this chapter for approval of final plats. References in section
10-3-4 of this chapter to subdividers and plats shall be construed to be
references to developers and development plans, respectively.
      2.   The required maps, data and supporting documents are specified in
subsections
10-6-4B and
10-6-5B of this title for commercial planned developments and residential
planned unit developments, respectively. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-3-9: DONATION OF LAND OR CONTRIBUTION OF CASH FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES:
   A.   As a condition precedent to the approval of any plat or planned
development within the village or within one and one- half (11/2) miles of its
corporate limits, the owner of the property shall, under the following
circumstances, provide for donation of land or a contribution of cash in lieu
thereof to the elementary school district which serves the property:
      1.   Where the plat creates one or more lots intended to be used for
residential purposes; or
      2.   Where the owner seeks approval of a planned development which is
intended to include one or more dwelling units.
   B.   The land donation requirement shall be a function of the number of
dwelling units intended to be created by a subdivision or planned development.
Except as hereafter provided, for each subdivision or planned development
intended to contain one thousand two hundred (1,200) or more dwelling units,
the owner thereof shall provide an elementary school site and a middle school
site. The area of the elementary school site shall be the sum of 0.016 acre for
each single-family dwelling and 0.012 acre for each multi- family dwelling. The
area of the middle school site shall be the sum of 0.018 acre for each single-
family dwelling and 0.014 acre for each multi-family dwelling.
   C.   With respect to subdivisions or planned developments intended to
contain less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) dwelling units and with
respect to all subdivisions or planned developments under circumstances where
the school district having jurisdiction over the property advises the village
that there is no present need for additional school sites, the owner of the
property shall make a contribution of cash in lieu of land. The amount of the
contribution shall be dependent upon the nature of the dwelling unit
contemplated to be constructed and shall be assessed as follows:
      1.   For each single-family dwelling: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   For each multi-family dwelling: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   D.   The owner of the property proposed to be subdivided shall provide to
the planning commission specific information as to the number of single-family
dwellings and multi-family dwellings intended to be located on the property
upon completion of the development.
   E.   Contributions of cash in lieu of school sites shall be held in trust by
the elementary school district whose territory includes the property proposed
to be subdivided for use in the acquisition of land for a new or enlarged
school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or the construction of new school buildings or additions to
existing school buildings, or for the improvement of any existing school site
which already serves such needs. The word improvement, under this subsection,
shall be liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the development of parking lots, sidewalks, traffic signals, minor arterial
streets, collector streets, internal roadways, connections with sewer, water
and electrical lines, playgrounds, recreation grounds and athletic fields. The
term improvement shall further include the construction of buildings, additions
to existing school buildings, remodeled or renovated noninstrumental spaces in
classrooms and the purchase of prefabricated classroom units to be used at a
school site. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of school site is
not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years from the
date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the owners of record of all lots in
the subdivision or planned development for which such contribution was made.
The refund shall be paid to the person who is the owner of record on the day
which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount
of the refund due shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution
remaining unspent divided by the total number of lots in the subdivision.
   F.   In the event that the property proposed to be subdivided is located
partially in one elementary school district and partially in one or more other
elementary school districts, the donation of land or contribution of cash in
lieu thereof shall be apportioned among the school districts. (Ord. 675, 2-24-
2011)
10-3-10: CONTRIBUTION OF CASH FOR PARK AND RECREATION PURPOSES:
   A.   As a condition precedent to the approval of any plat or planned
development within the village or within one and one- half (11/2) miles of its
corporate limits, the owner of the property shall, under the following
circumstances, provide a contribution of cash for park and recreation purposes:
      1.   Where the plat creates one or more lots intended to be used for
residential purposes; or
      2.   Where the owner seeks approval of a planned development which is
intended to include one or more dwelling units.
   B.   The amount of the contribution shall be dependent upon the nature of
the dwelling unit contemplated to be constructed and shall be assessed as
follows:
      1.   For each single-family dwelling: Three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      2.   For each multi-family dwelling: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   C.   The owner of the property proposed to be subdivided shall provide to
the planning commission specific information as to the number of single-family
dwellings and multi-family dwellings intended to be located on the property
upon completion of the development.
   D.   Contributions of cash pursuant to this section shall be paid to the
village for use in the acquisition of land for new or enlarged park and
recreational facilities and/or the improvement or maintenance of existing
facilities. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
CHAPTER 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Streets
10-4-2: Pavement Design And Construction
10-4-3: Easements
10-4-4: Utilities
10-4-5: Traffic Control Signs And Devices
10-4-6: Blocks
10-4-7: Lots
10-4-8: Street Names
10-4-9: Existing Natural Features
10-4-10: Bike Paths And/Or Walkways
10-4-1: STREETS:
   A.   The course, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to
the comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing
and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to
be served by such streets, and shall conform to the following street design
standards and criteria:
      1.   Functional classification based on whether a street is used as a
principal arterial, minor arterial, collector, or local street;
      2.   Geometric design criteria specifying dimensions and arrangements of
a street's visible features;
      3.   Pavement design standards that provide required pavement material
types and street thickness requirements; and
      4.   Construction, inspection, and testing standards which provide the
minimum requirements and procedures for inspection, testing, and documentation
of the street design process from construction to completion.
   B.   Where not shown on the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets
in a subdivision shall be reviewed by the planning commission and shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to the major thoroughfare plan where applicable; or
      3.   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impractical.
   C.   Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged. Unless otherwise provided in this subsection or by the
planning commission, all new subdivisions shall conform their streets to
qualify as local streets under this subsection and in accord with the standards
laid out in section
10-5-3, table 5-1, "Minimum Requirements For Street Improvements", of this
title.
   D.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed minor
arterial or a railroad right of way or rail crossings, access thereto shall be
limited to a minimum number of intersections, and such access intersections
with minor arterials and/or rail crossings shall be determined with due regard
for sight distance between intersections, approach grades and requirements for
future grade separations. No street grade shall be less than one-half of one
percent (0.5%) or more than five percent (5%) on principal arterials, minor
arterials, and collectors and not more than nine percent (9%) on all other
streets.
   E.   1. The geometric design of village streets shall comply with the
American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials' (AASHTO's)
"A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets".
      2.   The basic street design shall conform to the criteria included in
the following table:
TABLE 4-1
 
Functional Classification      Minor Arterial Collector    Local
Traffic design forecast period 20 years       20 years     20 years
Level of service               C              C            C
Design speed                   35 to 45 mph   30 to 40 mph 20 to 30 mph
Design vehicle                 WB-50          S-BUS-40     S-BUS-40
 
      3.   Horizontal and vertical alignment of streets shall comply with
AASHTO policy for the appropriate design speed.
      4.   Intersection radii shall be large enough to accommodate the design
vehicle so that the path of travel does not encroach upon the opposing lane of
travel or require traveling on the shoulder, gutter, or drainage area of a
street. Radii shall not be larger than necessary.
      5.   Streets that dead end shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in
length and terminate in a cul-de-sac with a minimum pavement radius of ninety
feet (90') and a minimum right of way radius of not less than one hundred ten
feet (110').
      6.   Selection of rural cross section or urban cross section elements (as
defined in tables 4-2 and 4-3 of this section) shall be approved by the village
during approval of the preliminary plat.
TABLE 4-2
RURAL CROSS SECTION ELEMENTS
Functional Classification Minor Arterial Collector Local Street
Functional     Minor Arterial            Collector                 Local Street
Classification
Design year    <14,000      >14,000      <14,000      >14,000      <5,000
traffic volume AADT         AADT         AADT         AADT         AADT
Right of way   100'         120'         80'          100'         60'
width
Number of      2            4            2            4            2
travel lanes
Pavement width 24'          48'          22'          48'          24'
and slope      1.5% to 2.0% 1.5% to 2.0% 1.5% to 2.0% 1.5% to 2.0% 1.5% to 2.0%
Shoulder width 8' total     8' total     8' total     8' total     4' aggregate
               (4' paved)   (6' paved)   (4' paved)   (6' paved)
Shoulder slope 4%           4%           4%           4%           6%
               Low speed    Low speed    Low speed    Low speed
Superelevation urb.         urb.         urb.         urb.         None
               emax = 4%    emax = 4%    emax = 4%    emax = 4%
 
TABLE 4-3
URBAN CROSS SECTION ELEMENTS
Functional Classification Minor Arterial Collector Local Street
Functional     Minor Arterial      Collector                   Local Street
Classification
Design year    <14,000   >14,000   <14,000       >14,000       <5,000
traffic volume AADT      AADT      AADT          AADT          AADT
Right of way   100'      120'      80'           100'          60'
width
Number of      2         4         2             4             2
travel lanes
Pavement width 30'       48'       30'           48'           32'
and slope      2.0%      2.0%      2.0%          2.0%          2.0%
Curb and       B-6.24    B-6.24    B-6.24        B-6.18        B-6.12
gutter type
Sidewalk width 5' both   5' both   5' both sides 5' both sides 5' both sides
               sides     sides
Distance
between        5' min.   5' min.   5' min.       5' min.       5' min.
sidewalk and   10' max.  10' max.  10' max.      10' max.      10' max.
curb
               Low speed Low speed
Superelevation urb.      urb.      None          None          None
               emax = 4% emax = 4%
 
      7.   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be prohibited.
      8.   A tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long shall be introduced
between curves on minor arterial and collector streets where the curve radius
is less than five hundred feet (500').
      9.   Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more than ten
degrees (10°), they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate to
assure sight distance.
      10.   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than
seventy degrees (70°).
   F.   Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts.
   G.   Private streets and reserve strips shall be discouraged in platting
subdivisions. Every subdivision shall be served from a publicly dedicated
street. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be placed under the
control of the village or township and be under such conditions as approved by
the governing body. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
   H.   All new subdivisions along state and county highways shall be arranged
to provide access to such highways at intervals not less than one thousand
three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), except where impractical or impossible due
to existing property divisions or topography or due to undue traffic
concentration at points of access. Also, streets within such subdivision shall
be arranged to permit access to adjacent future subdivisions without
encroachment upon this section. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
10-4-2: PAVEMENT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Village streets shall be constructed of materials that meet the minimum
standards of the Illinois department of transportation ("IDOT"). Pavement
design for all village streets shall follow the procedure provided in chapter
37 of IDOT's "Bureau Of Local Roads And Streets Manual", 2006. The design
engineer shall specify the relevant criteria and material types to be used in
the construction plans and specifications. IDOT material nomenclature and
quality requirements shall be used for pavement design and construction.
Existing soil properties shall be identified, and a report of the relevant test
results shall be prepared by a qualified geotechnical engineer for use in the
pavement design. Pavement design calculations shall be prepared by a qualified
professional engineer and be submitted to the village along with the final plat
for acceptance before construction. The selection of hot mix asphalt or
portland cement for pavement design shall be approved by the village during
approval of the final plat.
   B.   Subgrade soils shall develop an immediate bearing value ("IBV") in
excess of 6.0. If the in situ soils do not attain this value, remedial
procedures shall be taken to increase the IBV value to 6.0. The in situ IBV,
prior to modification, shall be used for pavement design calculations. The
following minimum values shall be used for pavement materials in the pavement
design:
      1.   Subbase granular material: Six inches (6").
      2.   Aggregate base: Six inches (6").
      3.   Asphalt pavement: Six inches (6").
      4.   Asphalt surface course: 1.25 inches.
      5.   Portland cement concrete: Five inches (5").
   C.   The design engineer shall document that acceptable material types and
thickness are used and achieved during the construction process. The design
engineer shall also perform density testing on all subgrades, aggregate
materials, and asphalt materials. Testing of portland cement concrete shall
include air content, slump, and compression strength. Tests shall be performed
by or under the supervision of the design engineer. A proof roll of the
subgrade shall be completed using a loaded tandem axle dump truck before
pavement materials are placed. The proof roll shall be performed in the
presence of a village representative. Copies of the design engineer's test
results and construction observation records shall be submitted to the village.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-3: EASEMENTS:
Easements across lots, centered on rear or side lot lines, or where necessary
for utilities, watercourse, drainageway channel or stream shall not be less
than ten feet (10') wide and shall be centered on lot lines, or adjacent to lot
lines, where practicable. All easements shall be shown on the plat. (Ord. 675,
2-24-2011)
10-4-4: UTILITIES:
   A.   All utilities shall be located in a dedicated easement adjacent to the
public right of way or with a dedicated easement providing access to the
utility.
   B.   All crossings under proposed pavement shall be constructed prior to any
street construction. Flowable backfill (CLSM), as specified in the "Illinois
Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction" (latest edition) will be utilized under and within two feet (2')
of any proposed roadway.
   C.   Any utility crossing under an existing roadway shall be directional
drilled unless permission for open trench construction is granted by the
village.
   D.   All utility stubs to future lots shall be clearly marked above the
ground surface. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND DEVICES:
All traffic control signs and devices shall be in accordance with the laws of
the state of Illinois, the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
("MUTCD"), and IDOT's published supplement to the MUTCD. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-6: BLOCKS:
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
   A.   Provision of adequate building sites for the special type of use
contemplated.
   B.   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
   C.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
   D.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   E.   Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320').
   F.   In cases where the block length exceeds six hundred feet (600') and
where deemed essential by the planning commission to provide pedestrian
circulation to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community
facilities, an easement not less than ten feet (10') wide, dedicated to the
village or township for a crosswalk, shall be provided.
   G.   Block width shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of a
minimum depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-7: LOTS:
   A.   All provisions of the zoning ordinance regulations concerning lots
shall apply including lot area, width, and depth. The standards of the specific
zoning district of the area at the time of submission of the final plat shall
be followed in determining minimum lot requirements.
   B.   Zoning ordinance regulations for minimum lot size (see table 4-4 of
this section), except lots fronting on a cul-de- sac, shall have a minimum
frontage of thirty feet (30') at the right of way. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, for any proposed subdivision having five (5) or fewer lots, the
minimum lot frontage shall be no less than thirty feet (30'); provided, that
the average lot frontage for all lots in the subdivision shall meet the
requirements set forth in table 4-4 of this section.
TABLE 4-4
ZONING ORDINANCE REGULATIONS FOR MINIMUM LOT SIZE
 Minimum Area            Minimum Width          Minimum
 Interior    Corner Lot  Interior   Corner Lot  Depth   Public Public Water
 Lot (Square (Square     Lot (Feet) (Feet)      (Feet)  Sewer
 Feet)       Feet)
             Minimum Area         Minimum Width
             Interior Corner Lot                         Minimum Public Public
             Lot      (Square     Interior   Corner Lot  Depth   Sewer  Water
             (Square  Feet)       Lot (Feet) (Feet)      (Feet)
             Feet)
R-           30,000   30,000      120        150         100     No     No
1            15,000   15,000      100        115         100     (Either)
residential  10,000   10,000      100        100         100     Yes    Yes
R-
2                                                                  
residential:
One-family   30,000   30,000      120        150         100     No     No
Two-family   40,000   40,000      150        200         100     No     No
                                                                  
One-family   15,000   15,000      90         115         100     (Either)
Two-family   20,000   20,000      110        135         100     (Either)
Three-family 30,000   30,000      140        180         100     (Either)
                                                                  
One-family   6,000    7,500       60         75          100     Yes    Yes
Two-family   8,000    10,000      80         95          100     Yes    Yes
Three-family 10,000   12,000      90         105         100     Yes    Yes
Four-family  12,000   14,000      100        115         100     Yes    Yes
C commercial -        -           -          -           100     -      -
CPD
commercial   5 acres  5 acres     -          -           100     -      -
planned
development
I industrial -        -           -          -           100     -      -
A            2 acres  2 acres     220        220         100     -      -
agricultural
 
   C.   The lot shapes and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of
the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   D.   The minimum lot frontage shall be no less than one hundred feet (100'),
except lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of thirty
feet (30') at the right of way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for any proposed
subdivision having five (5) or fewer lots, the minimum lot frontage shall be no
less than thirty feet (30'); provided, that the average lot frontage for all
lots in the subdivision shall meet the requirements set forth in table 4-4 of
this section.
   E.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from minor arterial
streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   F.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   G.   No parcel, remainder, gore, outlot or remnant of land which is part of
the tract being subdivided shall be created which, by reason of lot width,
depth, area, frontage, topography or lack of access thereto, cannot be used as
a zoning lot, or be subject to further subdivision in accordance with the terms
of this title. Any remaining parcel or outlot which cannot be made to comply
with the foregoing shall be eliminated by combining the area thereof with one
or more adjoining lots which do comply, or by conveying the same for
appropriate public use to a public body, subject to its acceptance of same.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-8: STREET NAMES:
A proposed street which is in alignment with or joins an existing and named
street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the
proposed name of the street duplicate the name of an existing street within the
area. The use of the suffix "street", "avenue", "boulevard", "driveway",
"place" or "court", or similar description, shall not be distinction sufficient
to constitute compliance with this section. Names that sound similar to
existing names or that could be confused or difficult to understand in
emergency situations are not to be used. House numbers shall be assigned in
accordance with the provisions of the county or the village, depending upon the
location of the subdivision. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-9: EXISTING NATURAL FEATURES:
To the extent possible, the subdivider is encouraged to retain existing trees
and other interesting natural features in the development of the subdivision.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-4-10: BIKE PATHS AND/OR WALKWAYS:
The planning commission shall make recommendations to the governing body
concerning new or replacement bike paths and/or walkways. The governing body,
after consideration of the recommendation, may provide for the building of the
same by ordinance. A bike path and/or walkway ordinance shall:
   A.   Define the location of the proposed new or replacement bike path and/or
walkway;
   B.   Prescribe its width, which shall be no less than ten feet (10') unless
special circumstances preventing such width are enumerated in the ordinance;
   C.   Describe the materials to be used to construct the bike path and/or
walkway, which shall generally be asphalt or concrete;
   D.   Describe the manner of constructing the bike path and/or walkway; and
   E.   Describe the officer(s) who shall inspect, approve, and accept the bike
path and/or walkway upon its completion. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-5-1: General Requirements
10-5-2: Monuments
10-5-3: Streets
10-5-4: Sewer System
10-5-5: Water System
10-5-6: Stormwater Drainage And Detention
10-5-7: Sump Pumps
10-5-8: Curb And Gutter
10-5-9: Sidewalks
10-5-10: Street Lighting
10-5-11: House Services
10-5-12: Inspection And As Built Plans
10-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It is recommended that no grading, tree removal, site work or
installation of any required improvements be commenced until the preliminary
plat has been approved.
   B.   All grading, site work or installation of any required improvements
shall be done in such manner as to prevent flooding, washing, erosion, silting,
or other impairment of adjacent properties, storm drainage channels, bodies of
water or adjoining streets.
   C.   No trees, tree stumps, brush or similar material shall be buried or
used as fill in any area of a subdivision to be traversed by a road, or which
is likely to be in or adjacent to an individual sewage disposal system or
similar use. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-2: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be placed by an Illinois registered land surveyor at all block
corners, angle points, points of tangency of curves in streets, and at such
intermediate points as shall be required by the plat officer. The monuments
shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the plat
officer. Such monuments, as near as possible, shall be placed so as to be flush
with the established finished grade. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-3: STREETS:
   A.   Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be completed to grades shown
on plats, profiles and cross sections as needed and approved by the planning
commission.
   B.   Streets and alleys shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the
dimensions and standards of table 5-1 of this section.
   C.   Prior to placing the street surface, adequate subsurface drainage for
the streets and all utilities under the streets shall be provided or installed
by the subdivider. Upon the completion of the street and alley improvements,
plats and profiles as built shall be filed with the planning commission.
   D.   Streets shall have such right of way widths as are indicated on the
major thoroughfare plan, or as specified in chapter 4 of this title. When
existing streets are located within the subdivision or adjacent to the
subdivision, the subdivider shall provide for additional right of way width to
equal the minimum required by chapter 4 of this title; provided, however, that
when such existing streets abut the subdivision on one side only, only one-half
(1/2) of the difference between the existing right of way width and the width
indicated on the major thoroughfare plan or as specified in chapter 4 of this
title shall be provided by the subdivider.
   E.   The commission shall make such requirements as to type of pavement and
as to curbs, gutters, and sidewalks as it deems to be necessary for such
street, provided such requirements are consistent with this title and the
Illinois division of highways "Manual Of Street And Highway Improvements
Standards And Typical Cross-Sections". However, the subdivider shall be
required to improve the street only to the width required by the current and
immediate needs of his subdivision consistent with standards specified herein.
   F.   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street signs, the
type, height and design as approved by the planning commission, at the
intersections of all streets.
   G.   The construction materials and procedures shall meet the current
minimum standards and specifications as set by the Illinois department of
transportation unless specified otherwise in this title.
   H.   When all of the streets and other facilities required in this section
are completed within the platted area in accordance with the provisions of this
section and approved by the authorities having jurisdiction, they shall be
submitted for acceptance for maintenance by either the governing body or the
township highway commissioner; this acceptance to be evidenced by a stipulation
and certification of completion of work executed by the governing body or the
township highway commission which shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder of deeds by the subdivider of the platted area.
   I.   The following table sets out minimum requirements for street
improvements:
TABLE 5-1
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Official Map Roadway Zoning District ROW Width Pavement Width Base Surface
Classification
Official Map Roadway Zoning District ROW Width Pavement Width Base Surface
Classification
                     R-1 residential 80'       44'            9"   21/2" B5
                     R-2 residential 80'       44'            9"   21/2" B5
Collector            C commercial    80'       44'            9"   21/2" B5
                     CPD commercial  80'       44'            9"   21/2" B5
                     I industrial    80'       44'            No   8" PCC
                     A agricultural  80'       44'            9"   21/2" B5
                     R-1 residential 60"       34'            8"   21/2" B5
                     R-2 residential 60"       34'            8"   21/2" B5
                     C commercial    60"       34'            8"   21/2" B5
Local                CPD commercial  60"       34'            8"   21/2" B5
                     I industrial    60"       30'            No   8" PCC
                     A agricultural  60"       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
                     R-1 residential 60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
                     R-2 residential 60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
                     C commercial    60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
Unclassified                                   22' surface
                     CPD commercial  60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
                     I industrial    60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
                     A agricultural  60'       30' graded     8"   21/2" B5
                                               22' surface
 
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-4: SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   All sanitary sewers will be constructed in accordance with the most
current edition of "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois". The design of the sanitary sewer system shall be in
accordance with the Illinois administrative code, title 35: environmental
protection, subtitle C: water pollution, chapter II: environmental protection
agency, part 370: Illinois recommended standards for sewage works.
   B.   When the subdivision is reasonably accessible, as determined by the
planning commission prior to approval of the subdivision plat, to an existing
sanitary sewer system, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete sanitary sewer system to be connected to such sanitary sewer system.
   C.   1. The trunk sewer main shall be located within the public right of way
but outside of the roadway pavement whenever possible. All crossings under
proposed pavement shall be constructed prior to any street construction.
Flowable backfill (CLSM), as specified in the most current edition of the
"Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction" will be utilized under and within two feet (2') of any
proposed roadway.
      2.   Sanitary sewer pipe shall have a minimum diameter of eight inches
(8") for main line sewers and four inches (4") for lateral sewers, and shall be
of material, joints and fittings as approved by the village.
      3.   Sewer mains shall have tracer wire attached to the pipe. Tracer wire
will be connected to a ground rod with a clamp with brass screws next to each
manhole.
      4.   A tee and lateral shall be constructed for each individual lot or
parcel in the subdivision and shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in
diameter.
      5.   All service lateral connections shall have a tracer wire coming from
the sewer main. At service laterals, a two inch by four inch by eight foot (2"
x 4" x 8') wood stud, painted green, shall be placed at all service
connections. Four feet (4') of the two inches by four inches (2" x 4") shall be
above the ground surface. Next to the two inches by four inches (2" x 4"), a
steel rod (2 feet x 2 feet x 1/2 inch) shall be placed with a tracer wire
connected. Four inches (4") of the rod shall be above the ground surface.
      6.   Sewer mains will be tested with low pressure air method and mandrel
tested, as specified in the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Construction In Illinois". The village or designated agent will be present
during the test.
      7.   Prior to final acceptance of the sewer by the village, all sewer
mains shall be internally inspected with a color inspection camera. The camera
lens shall not have less than a sixty five degree (65°) viewing lens and auto
focus. Accurate and continuous footage and date readings shall be superimposed
on a DVD. The DVD will be labeled showing lines recorded and name of the
contractor who constructed the sewer mains. Copies of the DVD will be provided
to the village.
      8.   Manholes shall be built where sewers change in size, slope, or
direction, and at a maximum spacing of four hundred feet (400'). Manholes shall
be precast concrete and have a minimum drop of 0.1 foot across the flow line.
Where manholes are constructed in areas susceptible to surface runoff
infiltration, the frame and lid of such manholes will be of the bolt down and
watertight type. Manhole lids for sanitary sewers shall be completely closed
and self-sealing. All manholes shall be tested for watertightness as specified
in the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Construction In Illinois".
      9.   When the topography of the subdivision does not allow for connection
to the municipal sanitary sewer system with gravity sewer, the subdivider shall
provide the subdivision with a pumping station that pumps the sewage to the
nearest available gravity municipal sanitary sewer. The pumping station shall
be designed to accommodate the loading produced by the proposed subdivision.
The pumping station shall be designed in accordance with the Illinois
environmental protection agency regulations. Specific equipment, materials and
location of the pump station shall be approved by the village. The subdivider
shall provide a backup generator as a part of the pump station. The connection
of the proposed pump station to the existing supervisory control and data
acquisition ("SCADA") system shall be required by the village.
   D.   When no existing sanitary sewer system is available or is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, as determined by the planning
commission prior to approval of the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall
provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system which shall
connect with a sanitary sewer outlet approved by the Illinois environmental
protection agency or other appropriate regulatory agency; except, that when
such approved outlet is not available, one of the following methods of sewage
disposal shall be used:
      1.   A complete sanitary sewer system to convey the sewage to a treatment
plant to be provided by the subdivider in accordance with minimum requirements
of the Illinois environmental protection agency or other appropriate regulatory
agency, with adequate provision for the maintenance of such plant. To avoid
errors in building elevations, the sanitary sewer system shall be in place and
able to function as intended before a building permit will be issued for any
structure that will connect to the system.
      2.   Where lot size permits, private sewage disposal systems on
individual lots consisting of septic tanks and tile absorption fields or other
approved sewage disposal systems where laid out in accordance with minimum
standards approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency or other
appropriate regulatory agency.
   E.   Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system installation, a registered
professional engineer shall certify that the sanitary sewer system complies
with all the standards required by the village and the Illinois environmental
protection agency or other appropriate regulatory agency. One certified copy of
the plans for such sanitary sewer system as built shall be filed with the
planning commission, village and Illinois environmental protection agency or
other appropriate regulatory agency.
   F.   Storm sewers, footing drains and downspouts shall not be connected to
sanitary sewers. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
   G.   The phrase "the subdivider shall provide", as used in this section,
shall be interpreted to mean that the subdivider shall install the facility
referred to, or whenever a private sewage disposal system is to be provided,
that the subdivider shall require, as a condition of the sale of each lot in
the subdivision, that the facilities referred to in this section shall be
installed by the owner of the lot in accordance with this title. (Ord. 675, 2-
24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-5: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   All water main construction shall be in accordance with the most
current edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
   B.   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main
supply system which shall be connected to an existing public water system;
except, where lot size permits and such existing public water system is not
available, the subdivider shall provide an individual water supply on each lot
in the subdivision in accordance with minimum standards approved by the
Illinois environmental protection agency or other appropriate regulatory
agency.
   C.   Water mains shall be located in a dedicated easement adjacent to the
public right of way.
   D.   All crossings under proposed pavement shall be constructed prior to any
street construction. Flowable backfill (CLSM), as specified in the most current
edition of the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction", will be utilized under and within two feet
(2') of any proposed roadway.
   E.   All water mains, including water services, shall include tracer wire.
   F.   The plans for the installation of a water main supply system shall be
prepared by the subdivider with the cooperation of the applicable water utility
company. Upon the completion of the water supply installation, one copy of the
plans for such system as built shall be filed with the planning commission, the
village, and Illinois environmental protection agency or other appropriate
regulatory agency.
   G.   Fire hydrants shall be located in such a manner that no structure
within the setback lines on a lot would be more than three hundred feet (300')
from a fire hydrant. There shall be ready access between the fire hydrant and
the lot that does not require crossing of other private property. The minimum
distance shall be measured along the route of ready access.
   H.   The water system shall be under pressure and able to provide fire flow
before a building permit will be issued for any structure to be served by the
system. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
   I.   The phrase "the subdivider shall provide", as used in this section,
shall be interpreted to mean that the subdivider shall install the facility
referred to, or whenever an individual water supply is to be provided, that the
subdivider shall require, as a condition of the sale of each lot in the
subdivision, that the facilities referred to in this section shall be installed
by the owner of the lot in accordance with this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011;
amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-6: STORMWATER DRAINAGE AND DETENTION:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   The subdivider, through the subdivision's engineer, shall submit
drainage calculations supporting the storm drainage and detention system signed
and sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the state of Illinois.
Drainage calculations shall include a narrative and summary of the existing and
proposed drainage patterns, surface cover types, times of concentration, flow
rates, rainfall intensities, pipe sizing calculations, and storage capacities.
The subdivider is strongly encouraged to utilize recognized best management
practices (BMPs), such as conserving open space, reducing imperviousness,
utilizing bioswales, etc., for reducing the quantity of stormwater runoff and
improving the quality of stormwater runoff to mimic the natural watershed
hydrology.
      2.   All drainage calculations shall conform to the methods outlined in
the village ordinance pertaining to sediment control, runoff control, and soil
stabilization during certain construction projects commenced after April 24,
2008, and the most current edition of the "Illinois Department Of
Transportation Drainage Manual".
      3.   All drainage improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
the most current edition of the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" and supplemental and recurring
special provisions. As built plans shall be submitted to the village at the
acceptance of any public improvements.
      4.   The storm drainage system shall be adequate to properly drain the
subdivision and all other upstream areas that are tributary to the subdivision.
   B.   Storm Sewer System:
      1.   The storm sewer system shall be designed for the 10-year frequency
storm event.
      2.   The minimum storm sewer size shall be twelve inches (12").
      3.   The minimum velocity allowed in storm sewers shall be three feet
(3') per second. The maximum velocity allowed in a storm sewer shall be ten
feet (10') per second. All velocities shall be based on the pipe flowing full.
      4.   The type of material permitted for storm sewers shall be as
specified in the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction".
      5.   All stormwater drainage structures shall conform to IDOT standards
as detailed in the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Drawings
Section 600 - Drainage". All castings for stormwater drainage structures shall
be stenciled with "Dump No Waste! Drains To Waterways".
      6.   The location and spacing of inlets shall be designed to allow a
maximum stormwater encroachment of one-half (1/2) of the traffic lane on the
outside lane for the 10-year frequency storm event. A minimum of two (2) inlets
shall be provided in all roadway sag locations.
      7.   A flared end section or head wall is required at the outlet of all
storm sewer systems. Riprap or other preapproved energy dissipation measures
shall be utilized at the outlet of all storm sewer systems to control erosion
and scour to prevent damage to downstream properties. All flared end sections
shall include grating meeting IDOT standard 542311.
      8.   All field tiles encountered during construction shall be repaired as
directed by the village, with the size, pipe material, location, and depth
indicated on the record drawings. Where field tiles are damaged and it is
determined by the village that they cannot be repaired, provisions shall be
made to reroute the field tiles to the nearest available storm sewer.
   C.   Permanent Stormwater Control Measures:
      1.   Permanent detention ponds shall be designed so that the peak
discharge rate from the permitted area resulting from the 2-year, 10-year, 25-
year, 50-year and 100-year critical duration storm events for the postproject
condition do not exceed the corresponding storm event peak discharges for the
preproject condition as described in the village ordinance pertaining to
sediment control, runoff control, and soil stabilization during certain
construction projects commenced after April 24, 2008.
      2.   Stormwater control calculations shall be performed per section
8-2-14-1, attachment A of this code pertaining to sediment control, runoff
control, and soil stabilization during certain construction projects commenced
after April 24, 2008.
      3.   Wet bottom detention pond design standards:
         a.   Maximum side slopes of four to one (4:1).
         b.   A minimum permanent pool depth of eight feet (8') to discourage
the growth of weeds.
         c.   A safety ledge ten feet (10') wide and approximately one and one-
half feet (1.5') under the normal water surface elevation shall be provided
around the perimeter of the detention pond.
         d.   Riprap or other approved energy dissipation methods shall be
utilized at the water surface elevation around the perimeter of the detention
pond to limit wave action erosion.
      4.   Dry bottom detention pond design standards:
         a.   Maximum side slopes of four to one (4:1).
         b.   The minimum longitudinal slope in the bottom of the detention
pond shall be one percent (1.0%).
      5.   A flared end section or head wall is required at the outlet of all
stormwater controls. Riprap or other preapproved energy dissipation measures
shall be utilized at the outlet of all stormwater controls to limit erosion and
scour to prevent damage to downstream properties. All flared end sections shall
include grating meeting IDOT standard 542311.
   D.   Roadway Ditches: Roadway ditches shall be designed to accommodate 25-
year frequency storm events and have:
      1.   Maximum side slopes of three to one (3:1).
      2.   Minimum depth of two feet (2').
      3.   Minimum bottom width of two feet (2').
      4.   Minimum longitudinal slope of one percent (1%).
      5.   Maximum design velocity of five feet (5') per second. Design
velocities that cannot be reduced to at least five feet (5') per second should
be minimized as much as possible and require ditch lining to protect against
erosion.
   E.   Crossroad Culverts:
      1.   All crossroad culverts shall be designed for the 25-year frequency
storm event with a minimum of one foot (1') of freeboard to the edge of
pavement elevation.
      2.   Minimum crossroad culvert size shall be eighteen inches (18").
Larger diameter culverts shall be used if necessary to pass the 25-year storm
event. Crossroad culverts shall be reinforced concrete material of the
appropriate class based on the installation conditions.
      3.   Driveway culverts shall be not less than fifteen inches (15").
Larger diameter culverts shall be used if necessary to pass the 25-year storm
event. Driveway culverts shall be reinforced concrete material.
      4.   A flared end section or head wall is required at the outlet and
inlet of all crossroad culverts. Riprap or other approved energy dissipation
measures shall be utilized at the outlet and inlet of all crossroad culverts to
limit erosion and scour. All flared end sections shall include grating meeting
IDOT standard 542311.
   F.   100-Year Frequency Storm Events:
      1.   The subdivider shall preserve an overland flood route capable of
conveying the 100-year frequency storm event through the subdivision without
causing property damage. Drainage calculations shall be submitted to the
village which demonstrate the capacity of the overland flood route. (Ord. 675,
2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 841, 6-17-2021)
10-5-7: SUMP PUMPS:
Sump pumps will not be connected to the sanitary sewer system. A separate line
shall be constructed for sump pumps to discharge into the storm sewer. This
pipe will be identified with tracer wire and identified as sump pumps only.
Each lot will have an individual connection provided. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-8: CURB AND GUTTER:
Curb and gutter shall be constructed along the frontage of all lots. The curb
and gutter shall be constructed of portland cement concrete and shall meet
current Illinois department of transportation design standards. (Ord. 675, 2-
24-2011)
10-5-9: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Sidewalks shall be constructed along the frontage of all lots. The
planning commission may recommend that sidewalks be provided along any road or
street as necessary for schoolchildren or other pedestrian movements.
   B.   Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') in width. Sidewalks shall be
located within the dedicated right of way and at least five feet (5') from the
curb line unless the planning commission recommends that another location is
warranted due to topography or other considerations. Sidewalk alignment on lots
abutting other subdivisions or lots having existing sidewalks shall be so
constructed to provide continuous and contiguous pavement. Sidewalks shall be
constructed of portland cement concrete having a minimum thickness of four
inches (4"). (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-10: STREET LIGHTING:
   A.   In residential subdivisions, the subdivider shall either:
      1.   Install streetlights at each intersection and along straightaways at
a maximum spacing of one every five hundred feet (500'). Streetlights must be
mounted on aluminum poles, and both poles and luminaries must be of a type
acceptable to both the electricity provider and the public works department; or
      2.   Impose and enforce a restrictive covenant requiring a yard light on
each lot switched only by a photocell which will cause the light to operate
from sunset to sunrise. Such restrictive covenant shall require all yard lights
to be located in the yard ten feet (10') from the front lot line and within
three feet (3') of the driveway.
   B.   All lighting referenced in this section must be approved by the
planning commission during the preliminary plat approval. See subsections
10-6-2B and
10-6-4A of this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-11: HOUSE SERVICES:
   A.   House services shall be constructed to connect with the utility service
mains constructed within any public street or easement to serve each adjoining
lot, tract or building site. Such house services shall extend from the main to
not less than two feet (2') inside the curb line or easement line.
   B.   All such house services connected with utility mains constructed within
any street or easement shall be located at the approximate centerline of each
lot, and no deviation shall be made from this requirement, except upon prior
approval of the planning commission.
   C.   Upon completion of the construction in place of all such house service
connections, an accurate map or maps showing the exact location of all such
mains, together with manholes, shutoff valves, house service connections and
other similar facilities being a part thereof, shall be filed by the subdivider
with the planning commission. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-5-12: INSPECTION AND AS BUILT PLANS:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to retain the services
of a professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois or approved
testing laboratory, or combination thereof, to supervise the construction of
the public improvements which are required under this chapter.
   B.   The plat officer shall be advised two (2) working days in advance of
any connection to the existing sewer or water system and also prior to the
commencement of testing of new improvements. A certified copy of the final test
results for the water and sanitary sewer shall be filed with the plat officer
before commencement of any street improvements.
   C.   The plat officer shall be notified two (2) working days in advance of
the commencement of construction of curb and gutter and asphalt surfacing. Upon
completion of the subgrade, the plat officer or his representative shall
witness the test rolling of the subgrade with a fully loaded gravel truck
furnished by the contractor or developer, and the areas that fail the test
rolling shall be repaired in an approved manner.
   D.   If the developer, contractor, and/or developer's engineer disagree with
any decision or recommendation of the governing body officials, the developer
and his engineer may file a certificate guaranteeing work for an additional one
year period and proceed with construction unless the governing body
recommendation is in accordance with the EPA standards or the Illinois
department of transportation specifications, in which case, no variance shall
be allowed without the approval of the village board.
   E.   Upon completion of the construction of sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water mains, streets, curbs, gutters, street lighting, sidewalks or any other
public improvements, the developer's engineer shall certify to the governing
body that the installed improvements have been completed in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and recommends acceptance of the development.
An accurate map or maps showing the exact as built locations of all water and
sewer mains, together with manhole locations, shutoff valves, house service
connections and other similar facilities being a part thereof, shall be filed
by the developer with the plat officer. Maps and/or drawings showing all other
public improvements shall also be filed with the plat officer. (Ord. 675, 2-24-
2011)
CHAPTER 6
PLATS AND DATA
SECTION:
10-6-1: Preapplication Plans And Data
10-6-2: Plats And Data For Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Plat
10-6-3: Plats And Data For Approval Of Final Plat
10-6-4: Maps And Data For Approval Of Commercial Planned Developments
10-6-5: Maps And Data For Approval Of Residential Planned Unit Developments
10-6-6: Recording Final Plat
10-6-7: Public Improvements
10-6-1: PREAPPLICATION PLANS AND DATA:
Previous to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission the
following plans and data:
   A.   General information data and location map which shall describe or
outline existing covenants, zoning, land characteristics, community facilities
and utilities, streets, schools, parks, playgrounds, and commercial and
industrial developments.
   B.   A sketch plan showing in simple sketch form the proposed layout of
streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions and may be
freehand or a print of a topographic map. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-2: PLATS AND DATA FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be accurately drawn to a scale of
one hundred feet to one inch (1" = 100'). The preliminary plat shall be
eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in size or in six inch (6")
multiples thereof. The following information shall be shown on the preliminary
plat. The lack of any information shall be cause for disapproval of a
preliminary plat.
   A.   Required Existing Data:
      1.   Public land survey: The preliminary plat shall be tied to at least
one point of the public land survey system.
      2.   Boundary lines and lot lines: By bearings and distances.
      3.   Existing easements: Location, width and purpose.
      4.   Existing streets: On and adjacent to the tract by name, right of way
width, location, type, width and elevation of surfacing; curbs, gutters,
culverts, and sidewalks.
      5.   Existing utilities: On and adjacent to the tract; location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and, where existing,
location and size of water mains; location of gas lines; fire hydrants,
electric and telephone poles, and streetlights. If any of the items listed in
this subsection A5 is not available at the site, indicate the direction and
distance to the nearest ones and furnish statements of availability.
      6.   Other existing conditions: Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, dwellings, buildings, and other significant features.
      7.   Proposed public improvements: Streets or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
      8.   Ground elevations: On mean sea level datum plane, show contours at
vertical intervals as follows:
         a.   Slope of six percent (6%) or less: Two foot (2') intervals.
         b.   Slope of over six percent (6%): Five foot (5') intervals.
      9.   Title and certificates: Present tract designation; title under which
the subdivision is to be recorded, names and addresses of owners, acreage,
scale, north point, datum, bench marks, certification of a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and date of survey.
   B.   Required Proposed Data: The preliminary plat shall show all existing
conditions required in subsection A of this section in topographic data and
show all proposals, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
      1.   Streets: Names, right of way and street widths, approximate grades
and gradients.
      2.   Street lighting: Location and type.
      3.   Easements: Location, width and purpose.
      4.   Utilities: Location, type and approximate size. This information may
be shown on a separate exhibit.
      5.   Lots: Lot lines, numbers and block numbers.
      6.   Sites (nonpublic): If any, for shopping centers, churches, industry,
multi-family dwellings or any other nonpublic use exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
      7.   Sites (public): If any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks,
playgrounds or other public uses. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      8.   Bike paths and/or walkways: If required by the village board,
planning commission, or ordinance. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
      9.   Setback lines: Give dimensions of minimum setback lines.
      10.   Side data: Including number of residential lots, typical lot size,
and acres in other public and nonpublic land uses.
      11.   Title, scale, north arrow and plat date.
      12.   Other preliminary plans: When required by the planning commission,
the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades; typical cross sections of the streets and
sidewalks; a preliminary plan of proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers, and
water mains with grades and size indicated, if available.
      13.   Draft of protective covenants: Whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development.
      14.   Zoning: Show zoning classification of the subdivision and adjacent
area. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-3: PLATS AND DATA FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
   A.   The final plat may include all or only a part of the area of the
preliminary plat as proposed in the application.
   B.   The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision shall be
eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") or in six inch (6") multiples
thereof. It shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" =
100'). Four (4) black or blue line prints and one reproducible print shall be
submitted with the original final plat.
   C.   The following information shall be shown:
      1.   Primary control points or descriptions and "ties" to such control
points to the public land survey system, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the final plat shall be referred.
      2.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements and
other rights of way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites,
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and
central angle of all curves.
      3.   Name and right of way width of each street or other rights of way.
      4.   Location and right of way widths of existing and/or platted streets
adjacent to the tract.
      5.   Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
      6.   Consecutive numbers for each lot or site within all subdivisions
having the same name.
      7.   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
      8.   Minimum setback on all lots and other sites.
      9.   Location and description of monuments.
      10.   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
      11.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by book and page.
      12.   Certification by an Illinois registered land surveyor as to
accuracy of the survey and plat.
      13.   Statement of the owner certifying that he has title to the land
being subdivided.
      14.   Statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights of way,
easements, and any sites for public use.
      15.   Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
      16.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications
as may be required by applicable codes, ordinances and/or statutes pertaining
to zoning, dedicated streets, and drainage facilities. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
   D.   A certificate by the plat officer, as set forth in chapter 7 of this
title, certifying that the subdivider has complied with one of the following
alternatives: (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
      1.   A good and sufficient bond has been posted with the village clerk in
a penal sum sufficient to cover the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of
the estimate by a qualified engineer of the probable expenditures necessary to
enable the subdivider to conform with the standards of construction established
pursuant to the provision of this title. The bond shall be conditioned upon
faithful adherence to the rules and regulations contained in this title; or
      2.   All public improvements have been installed in accordance with the
requirements of this title.
      3.   The governing body will allow the deposit of cash or the filing of
an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the governing body in
lieu of the bond described in subsection D1 of this section.
   E.   Protective covenants in the form of recording.
   F.   Street and utility improvements plans shall be submitted and approved
before the final plat is approved.
   G.   Upon submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall deliver to the
planning commission three (3) copies of construction plans and specifications,
prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state
of Illinois, which shall include or be accompanied by at least the following:
      1.   Street profile plans for each new street in the proposed
subdivision. In cases where the grades of the streets involved are already
established, or in cases of small subdivisions or resubdivisions, the
submission of such street profile plans may be excused by the planning
commission. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      2.   All public improvements including, without limitation, public
sidewalks, bike paths and/or walkways, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers, streets, curbs and gutters, street lighting facilities and
appurtenances thereto. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Structures for the control of drainage, stormwater and erosion as
required by this title and by other provisions of this code.
      4.   An estimate of the cost of constructing all public improvements and
all drainage, stormwater and erosion control structures, which estimate shall
include the cost of engineering services and which shall be prepared and signed
by the registered professional engineer who prepared the construction plans and
specifications.
      5.   An acknowledgment signed by both the subdivider and the engineer who
prepared the construction plans and specifications that the subdivider and
engineer have entered into a contract for engineering services, which
acknowledgment shall be in a form prescribed by the planning commission.
      6.   Restrictive covenants (if any) in a form acceptable for recording,
and other data, such as other certificates, affidavits, etc., as may be
required in order to comply with this title. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-4: MAPS AND DATA FOR APPROVAL OF COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Plan:
      1.   The written application for conditional approval of the preliminary
development plan for a commercial planned development shall be accompanied by a
general development plan, including maps at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') and at a size of eighteen inches by twenty four inches
(18" x 24"), or larger in six inch (6") multiples, sketches, elevations, and
supporting documents to fully describe the following elements:
         a.   The general nature, location, and objectives of the proposed
development.
         b.   The areas of the project to be used for commercial, office or
other activities, indicating the total square footage of each use.
         c.   The boundaries of the project, including a legal description of
the metes and bounds of the parcel and the acreage therein.
         d.   An area map showing the adjacent property owners and existing
land uses within two hundred feet (200') of the parcel.
         e.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals for slopes of six
percent (6%) or less and at five foot (5') intervals for slopes greater than
six percent (6%), accompanied by an outline of grading plans.
         f.   The proposed street system for the project, designating collector
and local streets and describing their configuration in conformance with the
plans and standards of the village.
         g.   Descriptive data concerning the existing and proposed sewer,
water and storm drainage facilities within the project, indicating their size
and location.
         h.   Location of all main and accessory structures, indicating
intended heights, coverage and orientation.
         i.   Location, size, capacity, drainage and landscaping of the
proposed parking lots within the project, if any. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
         j.   Pedestrian circulation features, walks, paved areas, and bike
paths and/or walkways within the project. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
         k.   Location and type of street lighting.
         l.   Landscaping and forestry features, including planned buffer areas
between uses, if any.
         m.   Community facilities, including recreational and other
nonbuilding areas designated within the project, indicating areas to be in
common ownership.
         n.   Location of fire hydrants such that no point on the perimeter of
the building is farther than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a fire hydrant.
         o.   Market and feasibility studies for principal uses, indicating
proposed rental rates and expected service areas.
         p.   A document describing the proposed phasing program for the
project for all commercial or office structures, recreational and other common
facilities, landscaping and other open space improvements.
      2.   The material will be reviewed with the understanding that the
purpose of a commercial planned development is to create an area that can be
developed with maximum flexibility in design and to promote arrangement of
buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities while preserving the
existing landscape to the greatest extent possible.
   B.   Final Approval Of Plan:
      1.   No building permit shall be issued until the planning commission has
approved the final plans and reports for the development as a whole or in
stages or portions thereof deemed satisfactory in relation to total
development.
      2.   The following information shall be shown on the final development
plan:
         a.   Primary control points to the descriptions and "ties" to such
control points to the public land survey system, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings, and similar data on the final development plan shall be
referred.
         b.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements
and other rights of way, with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection
angles, and radii, arcs and central angle of all curves.
         c.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
         d.   Location and right of way widths of existing and/or platted
streets adjacent to the tract.
         e.   Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
         f.   Location of all main and accessory structures, indicating
heights, coverage and orientation.
         g.   Location, size, capacity, drainage and landscaping of the
proposed parking lots within the project.
         h.   Pedestrian circulation features, walks and paved areas within the
project.
         i.   Landscaping and forestry features, including planned buffer areas
between uses.
         j.   Community facilities, including recreational and other
nonbuilding areas designed within the project, indicating areas to be in common
ownership, if any.
         k.   Location and description of monuments.
         l.   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
         m.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by book and page.
         n.   Certification by an Illinois registered land surveyor as to the
accuracy of the survey.
         o.   Statement of the owner certifying that he has title to the land
of the planned development.
         p.   Statement of the owner dedicating streets, rights of way,
easements, and any sites for public use.
         q.   Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
         r.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications
as may be required by applicable codes, ordinances and/or statutes pertaining
to zoning, dedicated streets, and drainage facilities. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      3.   A certificate, as set forth in chapter 7 of this title, shall be
provided by the plat officer certifying that the owner has complied with one of
the following alternatives: (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
         a.   A good and sufficient bond has been posted with the village clerk
in a penal sum sufficient to cover the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%)
of the estimate by a qualified engineer of the probable expenditures necessary
to enable the planned development to conform with the standards of construction
established pursuant to the provision of this title. The bond shall be
conditioned upon faithful adherence to the rules and regulations contained in
this title; or
         b.   All public improvements have been installed in accordance with
the requirements of this title.
         c.   The governing body will allow the deposit of cash or the filing
of an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the governing body
in lieu of the bond described in subsection B3a of this section.
      4.   Financial requirements before release of the final plat are as
follows:
         a.   After approval of the final plat by the governing body, but
before execution and delivery of the final plat to the subdivider, the
subdivider shall pay or make arrangements for payment of, if any, fees or
charges due the village with respect to the property and shall also provide
security for the completion of all required improvements to the planning
commission in accordance with the following conditions:
            (1)   Total estimated construction costs and engineering fees for
all required improvements. The estimated cost of such construction shall first
be reviewed and approved by the planning commission; or
            (2)   Total contracted construction costs and engineering fees for
all required improvements. Under this circumstance, all construction contracts
shall first be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.
         b.   Options for providing security for completion of improvements are
as follows:
            (1)   Cash Escrow: A cash deposit or certified check placed with
the village clerk and administered in accordance with the provisions of a
mutually acceptable escrow agreement.
            (2)   Letter Of Credit: An irrevocable, straight, commercial letter
of credit in the form prescribed by the village attorney with a commercial bank
or other financial institution authorized to do business in the state of
Illinois which is acceptable to the village. Deviations from the standard
letter of credit shall not be permitted except with the consent of the
governing body upon the written advice of the village attorney.
            (3)   Surety Bond: A surety bond to insure the construction of the
improvements in accordance with the approved construction plans and
specifications. Said surety bond shall be written by a competent surety company
licensed to do business in the state of Illinois. If a bond is filed, it shall
be in the form and with surety and conditions approved by the governing body
upon the written advice of the village attorney.
         c.   Such security, in whatever form, shall, by its terms, provide
that it shall not expire until released in writing by the village. The
subdivider shall complete the public improvements in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications and shall meet all other conditions precedent
to the acceptance of those public improvements within a two (2) year period
following the approval of the final plat by the village board of trustees. If
the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications within two (2) years following the
approval of the final plat by the governing body, the village may, at its
option, complete or contract for the completion of the public improvements in
accordance with such plans and specifications and pay the cost with the
security provided by the subdivider.
         d.   After the subdivider has paid or made arrangements for payment of
all water or wastewater facilities assessments or other fees and after the
subdivider has provided security for the completion of required improvements as
provided in this subsection B4, the subdivider is authorized to commence
construction of the improvements.
      5.   Street and utility improvement plans shall be submitted and approved
before the final development plan is approved.
      6.   Minor changes in the location, siting, or character of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the plat officer if required by engineering or
other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was
approved. No change authorized by the plat officer under this subsection B6 may
increase the size of any building or structure nor change the location of any
building or structure by more than ten feet (10') in any direction; provided,
the plat officer may not permit changes beyond the minimum or maximum
requirements set forth in this title. All other changes in the development
plan, including changes in the site plan and the development schedule, must be
made under the procedures that are applicable to the conditional approval of a
preliminary development plan. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-5: MAPS AND DATA FOR APPROVAL OF RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Plan:
      1.   The written application for conditional approval of the preliminary
development plan for a residential planned unit development shall be
accompanied by a general development plan, including maps at a scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and at a size of eighteen inches by
twenty four inches (18" x 24"), or larger in six inch (6") multiples, sketches,
elevations, and supporting documents to fully describe the following elements:
         a.   The general nature, location, and objectives of the proposed
development.
         b.   The location of residential buildings and the number of dwelling
units in each building.
         c.   The boundaries of the project, including a legal description of
the metes and bounds of the parcel and the acreage therein.
         d.   An area map showing the adjacent property owners and existing
land uses within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the parcel.
         e.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals for slopes of six
percent (6%) or less and at five foot (5') intervals for slopes greater than
six percent (6%), accompanied by an outline of grading plans.
         f.   The proposed street system for the project, designating collector
and local streets and describing their configuration in conformance with the
plans and standards of the village.
         g.   Descriptive data concerning the existing and proposed sewer,
water and storm drainage facilities within the project, indicating their size
and location.
         h.   Location of all main and accessory structures, indicating
intended heights, coverage and orientation.
         i.   Location, size, capacity, drainage and landscaping of proposed
parking lots within the project, if any. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
         j.   Pedestrian circulation features, walks, paved areas, and bike
paths and/or walkways within the project. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
         k.   Landscaping and forestry features, including planned buffer areas
within the project.
         l.   Community facilities, including recreational and other
nonbuilding areas designated within the project, indicating areas to be in
common ownership.
         m.   Location of fire hydrants such that no dwelling is farther than
three hundred feet (300') from a fire hydrant.
         n.   A document describing the proposed phasing program for the
project for all recreational and other common facilities, landscaping and other
open space improvements.
      2.   The material will be reviewed with the understanding that the
purpose of a residential planned unit development is to create an area that can
be developed with maximum flexibility in design and to promote the efficient
use of land and facilitate an economic arrangement of buildings, circulation
systems, land use and utilities while preserving the existing landscape to the
greatest extent possible.
      3.   Yard, setback, lot size, height, and frontage requirements may be
waived for the residential planned unit development; provided, that there is
compliance with the spirit and intent of this subsection in the total
development plan, as determined by the planning commission. The planning
commission may determine that certain setbacks be required within all or a
portion of the perimeter of the site and shall exercise ultimate discretion as
to whether the total development plan does comply with the spirit and intent of
this subsection.
   B.   Final Approval Of Plan:
      1.   No building permit shall be issued until the planning commission has
approved the final plans and reports for the development as the whole or in
stages or portions thereof deemed satisfactory in relation to total
development.
      2.   The following information shall be shown on the final development
plan:
         a.   Primary control points or descriptions and "ties" to such control
points to the public land survey system, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the final development plan shall be referred.
         b.   Tract boundary lines, right of way lines of streets, easements
and other rights of way with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection
angles, and radii, arcs and central angle of all curves.
         c.   Name and right of way width of each street or other right of way.
         d.   Location and right of way widths of existing and/or platted
streets adjacent to the tract.
         e.   Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
         f.   Location of all main and accessory structures, indicating
heights, coverage and orientation.
         g.   Location, size, capacity, drainage and landscaping of the
proposed parking lots within the project.
         h.   Pedestrian circulation features, walks and paved areas within the
project.
         i.   Landscaping and forestry features, including planned buffer areas
between uses.
         j.   Community facilities, including recreational and other
nonbuilding areas designed within the project, indicating areas to be in common
ownership, if any.
         k.   Location and description of monuments.
         l.   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
         m.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land
by book and page.
         n.   Certification by an Illinois registered land surveyor as to the
accuracy of the survey.
         o.   Statement of the owner certifying that he has title to the land
of the planned development.
         p.   Statement of the owner dedicating streets, rights of way,
easements, and any sites for public use.
         q.   Title, scale, north arrow, and date.
         r.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications
as may be required by applicable codes, ordinances and/or statutes pertaining
to zoning, dedicated streets, and drainage facilities. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      3.   A certificate, as set forth in chapter 7 of this title, shall be
provided by the plat officer certifying that the owner has complied with one of
the following alternatives: (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
         a.   A good and sufficient bond has been posted with the village clerk
in a penal sum sufficient to cover the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%)
of the estimate by a qualified engineer of the probable expenditures necessary
to enable the planned development to conform with the standards of construction
established pursuant to the provisions of this title. The bond shall be
conditioned upon faithful adherence to the rules and regulations contained in
this title; or
         b.   All public improvements have been installed in accordance with
the requirements of this title.
         c.   The governing body will allow the deposit of cash or the filing
of an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the governing body
in lieu of the bond described in subsection B3a of this section.
      4.   Street and utility improvement plans shall be submitted and approved
before the final development plan is approved.
      5.   Minor changes in the location, siting, or character of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the plat officer, if required by engineering or
other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was
approved. No change authorized by the plat officer under this subsection B5 may
increase the size of any building or structure, nor change the location of any
building or structure by more than ten feet (10') in any direction; provided,
the plat officer may not permit changes beyond the minimum or maximum
requirements set forth in this title. All other changes in the development
plan, including changes in the site plan and the development schedule, must be
made under the procedures that are applicable to the conditional approval of
the preliminary development plan. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-6: RECORDING FINAL PLAT:
Within ninety (90) days after delivery of an approved final plat to the
subdivider by the planning commission, the subdivider shall record the final
plat with the county recorder of deeds. If the plat is not so recorded, it
shall have no validity and shall not be recorded without subsequent approval of
the governing body. The governing body may extend the filing date an additional
ninety (90) days if the subdivider demonstrates unique circumstances or
conditions whereby the recording of the final plat could not be accomplished as
herein required. (Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
10-6-7: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Preliminary Approval Of Certain Components Of Public Improvements: Upon
the completion of satisfactory testing, the department of public works may give
preliminary approval to water mains, sanitary sewers and streets after
installation of curbs and base but before installation of pavement. Upon
receipt of such preliminary approval from the public works department, the
planning commission may issue building permits for the construction of
improvements to the lots within the subdivision. In any event, however, no
occupancy permit shall be issued until public improvements which serve the lots
in the subdivision have been accepted by the village as provided in this title.
Notwithstanding the receipt of preliminary approval, the village shall not
provide village services within the subdivision including, without limitation,
maintenance, snowplowing or garbage pick up until final acceptance of all
improvements.
   B.   Inspection Of, Acceptance Of And Warranty For Public Improvements:
      1.   If any plat of a subdivision dedicates public streets, easements or
other improvements to the public use, the approval of the final plat by the
governing body shall not constitute acceptance by the village of any such
public improvements, irrespective of any act or acts by any officer, agent or
employee of the village with respect to such public improvements.
      2.   Upon completion of the public improvements, the subdivider and the
subdivider's engineer shall submit to the village a signed certificate of
compliance which indicates that all public improvements constructed in
connection with the subdivision comply with all applicable requirements of this
title, and that such public improvements were installed substantially in
accordance with the approved construction plans and specifications. The
certification shall be in a form developed and approved by the planning
commission and the public works department and shall, in general, address each
requirement imposed by this title. The public works department shall review the
certificate of compliance and shall conduct such investigation and inspections
as it deems appropriate and recommend to the governing body such action as the
public works department deems appropriate based upon its review and inspection.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011)
      3.   Upon completion of the public improvements, the subdivider shall
submit as built plans for all such public improvements which accurately reflect
the location of the public improvements as constructed. Such plans shall be
marked by the engineer as "as built" construction plans. The subdivider or the
subdivider's engineer shall submit to the village a copy of the as built
construction plans on a CD in a format acceptable to the public works
department. If the governing body concludes that the representations made in
the certificate of compliance are accurate, then the governing body shall
accept the dedication of the public improvements on behalf of the village.
However, such acceptance shall not become effective until the subdivider
provides security against structural failure of the public improvements in the
form of a surety bond, cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount
equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of constructing the improvements.
Such security shall have the same characteristics as the security for the
completion of the public improvements and shall allow the village to draw upon
the security to pay costs incurred by the village to repair any structural
failure of the public improvements which occurs after the effective date of
acceptance of the public improvements by the village. The security, less any
amount used to repair defective public improvements, shall be released to the
subdivider after the second anniversary of the effective date of acceptance of
the public improvements by the governing body. Security for the completion of
the public improvements provided at the time of final plat approval shall not
be released until such time as the security against structural failure of the
public improvements, as herein provided, has been submitted by the subdivider.
(Ord. 675, 2-24-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 7
FORM OF CERTIFICATES OF PLAT OFFICER
SECTION:
10-7-1: Form Of Certificate For Preliminary Plat
10-7-2: Form Of Certificate Of Approval Of A Final Plat With Public
Improvements
10-7-3: Form Of Certificate Of Approval Of A Final Plat Without Public
Improvements
10-7-4: Form Of Certificate Of Plat Officer Where The Plat Or Survey Is Exempt
10-7-5: Form Of Certificate For Boundary Map
10-7-1: FORM OF CERTIFICATE FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The form of certificate of plat officer for approval of a preliminary plat, as
set forth in subsection
10-3-3D4 of this title, shall be as follows:
I,                     , Plat Approving Officer for the Village of Germantown
Hills, In the County of Woodford and State of Illinois, Do Hereby Certify that
the above Preliminary Subdivision Plat conforms to the Requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations for Germantown Hills, as amended.
(Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
10-7-2: FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF A FINAL PLAT WITH PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS:
The form of certificate of plat officer for approval of a final plat where
public improvements are to be installed pursuant to subsection
10-6-3D, 10-6-4B3 or 10-6-5B3 of this title shall be as follows:
I,                     , Plat Approving Officer for the Village of Germantown
Hills, In the County of Woodford and State of Illinois, Do Hereby Certify that
the above Final Subdivision Plat conforms to the Requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations for Germantown Hills, as amended, and that the above
owners and proprietor have posted good and sufficient bond, letter of credit or
escrow with the Village Clerk of said Germantown Hills, in a penal sum
sufficient to cover the estimate by a qualified engineer of the probable
expenditure necessary to enable the subdivider to conform with the standards of
the construction established pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
10-7-3: FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF A FINAL PLAT WITHOUT PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS:
The form of certificate of plat officer for approval of a final plat where no
public improvements are to be installed or have been installed and accepted
pursuant to subsection
10-6-3D, 10-6-4B3 or 10-6-5B3 of this title shall be as follows:
I,                     , Plat Approving Officer for the Village of Germantown
Hills, In the County of Woodford and State of Illinois, Do Hereby Certify that
the above Final Subdivision Plat conforms to the Requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations for Germantown Hills, as amended.
(Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
10-7-4: FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF PLAT OFFICER WHERE THE PLAT OR SURVEY IS EXEMPT:
The form of certificate of plat officer where the plat or survey is exempt
under these regulations shall be as follows:
I,                     , Plat Approving Officer for the Village of Germantown
Hills, In the County of Woodford and State of Illinois, Do Hereby Accept the
Above Survey as Exempt from the Requirements of the Subdivision Regulations for
Germantown Hills.
(Ord. 711, 10-25-2012)
10-7-5: FORM OF CERTIFICATE FOR BOUNDARY MAP:
The form of certificate of plat officer for approval of a boundary map, as set
forth in section
10-3-5 of this title, shall be as follows:
I,                     , Plat Approving Officer for the Village of Germantown
Hills, In the County of Woodford and State of Illinois, Do Hereby Certify that
the above Boundary Map conforms to the Boundary Map Requirements of the
Subdivision Regulations for Germantown Hills.
(Ord. 735, 7-24-2014)
