THE CODE
OF THE
VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
ILLINOIS
THE CHARTER AND
THE GENERAL ORDINANCES
OF THE VILLAGE
 
Published by Order of the President and Board of Trustees
 
Originally Published by
Michie City Publications Company
Charlottesville, Virginia in 1965;
Revised, Updated and Republished by
Village Staff in 1985;
Updated by American Legal Publishing
beginning in 2011
 
 
2025 S-20 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 8-20-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This volume constitutes the first revision and codification of the general
ordinances of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois, since 1929. It contains the
Charter and ordinances of a general and permanent nature passed on or before
May 1, 1965, as were found desirable for retention, except those expressly
saved from repeal by the Adopting Ordinance.
   A feature to which the attention of the user is directed is the arrangement
of the chapters in alphabetical order. Attention is also directed to the
analysis preceding each chapter which, in many instances, will serve as an
index within itself. The general index, carried at the beginning of the Code,
has been carefully prepared and will serve as an accurate medium for locating
the individual sections of law within the Code. References to the Charter and
the applicable state law will be found in the references appearing throughout
the Code. These notes also contain cross-references to other and related
provisions in the Village Code itself. By reference to the historical
citations, appearing at the end of each section, the user will be able to
ascertain the ordinance or the section of the 1929 Code from which the present
section has been derived. The absence of a citation indicates new material
becoming effective on the effective date of the Code.
   It is a recognized fact that if any Code is to accomplish its intended
purpose it must be kept up to date by means of an adequate supplemental
service.
                                 Howard J. Roin
                                 Village President
                                 Philip A.Kiraly
                                 Village Manager
                                 Steven Elrod
                                 Village Attorney
                                 Wayne B. Addis
                                 Village Prosecutor
Adoption of Code
Ordinance No. 65-6-1431
   An ordinance adopting a revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Village of Glencoe, Cook County, Illinois, providing for the repeal of
ordinances not included therein, with certain exceptions, and for other
purposes hereinafter set out.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
GLENCOE, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS:
Section 1:   That the ordinances of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois of a
general and permanent nature as revised and codified in the following chapters,
namely, Chapters 1 to 37, both inclusive, are hereby ordained as general
ordinances of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois, as authorized by Illinois
Revised Statutes 1963, Chapter 24, paragraph 1-2-3, and are adopted as, and
shall constitute "The code of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois, 1965."
Section 2:   That the provisions of such Code shall be in force on and after
the 13th day of September, 1965, and all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature in force on the first day of July, 1965, and not contained in such Code
are hereby repealed, effective on the 13th day of September, 1965, except as
hereinafter provided.
Section 3:   That the repeal provided for in the preceding section of this
ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty
or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or occurring before
the 13th day of September, 1965; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or
resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village or
authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Village or any evidence of the
Village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Village;
nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of
the Village Board of Trustees not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of such Code; nor shall it affect the annual appropriation
ordinance; nor shall it affect any ordinances levying or imposing taxes; nor
shall it affect any ordinances relative to the salaries and wages of the
Village officers and employees; nor shall it affect any right or franchise
conferred by ordinance or resolution of the Village on any person or
corporation; nor shall it affect the Zoning Ordinance of the Village or any
amendment thereto; nor shall it affect any ordinances vacating any streets or
alleys; nor shall it affect any ordinance creating a Board of Local
Improvements nor any ordinance relating to special assessments, local
improvements or other improvements; nor shall it affect any ordinances
designating depositories for money or securities belonging to the Village; nor
shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment
rendered on or prior to September 12, 1965; nor shall it affect any ordinance
passed on or after July 1, 1965.
Section 4:   That this ordinance shall take affect and be in full force and
effect ten days after its passage, approval, posting, and publication in book
form according to law.
Passed August 25, 1965                     /s/ D.C. Duranso
                              Clerk
Approved August 26, 1965                     /s/ Austin L. Wyman
                              President
Posted August 28, 1965                     /s/ D.C. Duranso
                              Clerk
Published September 3, 1965                     /s/ D.C. Duranso
                              Clerk
Approved as to Form:                      E. Douglas Schwantes
                              Village Attorney
THE CHARTER
Editor's note:
   This Part consists of the Village Charter, passed by the General Assembly of
the State of Illinois and approved by the Governor on March 29, 1869. A uniform
system of capitalization has been employed and the editors have supplied
catchlines to the individual sections. A frontal analysis has been provided for
the convenience of the user.
   This Charter has been modified in certain respects by general law and should
be read with this in view. Particular attention should be directed to the
provisions of the "Illinois Municipal Code," codified as sections 1-1-1 to 11-
149-2, chapter 24, Illinois Revised Statutes, 1963.
Article I.
Of Boundaries and General Powers.
   §
1.   Incorporation; seal.
   §
2.   Boundaries.
   §
3.   General powers.
Article II.
Of the Council and President.
   §
1.   Generally.
   §
2.   Qualifications of members.
   §
3.   Oath of members.
   §
4.   Council to judge qualifications, etc., of members and determine contested
elections.
   §
5.   Quorum.
   §
6.   Rules of proceedings; punishment and expulsion of members.
   §
7.   Journal.
   §
8.   Member not to hold other office or make, etc., contracts with council,
etc.
   §
9.   Annual statement of receipts and expenditures.
   §
10.   Tied elections generally.
   §
11.   Meetings–generally.
   §
12.   Same–President to preside, etc.
   §
13.   Powers, etc., of president generally.
   §
14.   Additional powers and duties of president.
Article III.
Of Elections and Officers.
   §
1.   When elections held; officers to be elected; vacancies.
   §
2.   Hours polls to be open; notices of elections; election judges and clerks;
conduct, etc., of elections; certificates of election, etc.
   §
3.   Qualifications of voters and officers; elections to be by ballot, manner
of deciding tie votes.
   §
4.   Certain officers to take oath and give bond.
   §
5.   Collector and assessor generally.
   §
6.   Street commissioner generally.
   §
7.   Marshal and policemen generally; resisting arrest, etc.
   §
8.   Police magistrate.
   §
9.   Police, etc., constables.
Article IV.
Powers of Council.
   §
1.   Taxes and assessments.
   §
2.   Issuance of bonds.
   §
3.   Appropriation of money, etc.
   §
4.   Appointment, etc., of officers and agents.
   §
5.   Prevention of contagious diseases, etc.; prevention, abatement, etc., of
nuisances, etc.
   §
6.   Opening, extending, improving, vacating, etc., streets, alleys, etc.
   §
7.   Construction and repair of bridges, sidewalks, drains, sewers, etc.;
street lighting, etc.
   §
8.   Protection, improvement, etc., of parks, etc.; planting, etc., trees along
streets, etc.
   §
9.   Erection of public buildings.
   §
10.   Platting, numbering, etc., lots, etc.
   §
11.   Provide for, etc., village cemetery, etc.
   §
12.   Provide village with water, etc.
   §
13.   Fire prevention, etc.
   §
14.   Inspection of hay, grain, coal, lumber, butter, etc.; measurement of wood
and fuel.
   §
15.   Establishment, etc., of markets, etc.
   §
16.   Regulation of storage of gunpowder, etc.; prevention of firing of guns,
etc.
   §
17.   Regulations, etc., of animals generally.
   §
18.   Establishment, etc., of pound; appointment, etc., of poundmaster.
   §
19.   Compulsion of persons to fasten horses, etc., standing in street, etc;
prevention of abuse of animals, horse racing, etc.
   §
20.   Regulation of chimneys, flues, partition walls and fences.
   §
21.   Prohibiting, etc., indecent exposure, etc.
   §
22.   Prevention, etc., of riots, disturbances of the peace, disorderly
conduct, assaults, cockfighting, etc.; restraint and punishment of vagrants,
beggars, prostitutes, etc.
   §
23.   Prevention, etc., of injury to property, trespass, petty pilfering, etc.
   §
24.   Licensing, regulation, etc., of theatrical, etc., exhibitions, shows,
billiard tables, etc.
   §
25.   Licensing, regulation, etc., of certain enumerated businesses,
occupations, etc.
   §
26.   Prohibiting, etc., dram shops, gambling houses, lotteries, bawdyhouses,
etc.
   §
27.   Suppression, etc., of gambling, swindling, etc.
   §
28.   Establishment and regulation of village police, etc.
   §
29.   Establishment of rules and regulations for bathing, etc.
   §
30.   Establishment, etc., of railroad crossings; regulations of railroads,
etc.
   §
31.   Taking village census; division of village into wards, etc.
   §
32.   Providing for prison, punishment for violation of ordinances, etc.
   §
33.   Passing and enforcing ordinances, etc.
Article V.
Taxes, General and Special. 
   §
1.   Estimate of annual taxes required; procedure when estimate exceeds two per
cent of assessed valuation of taxable property.
   §
2.   General assessment of taxable property.
   §
3.   Collection of taxes generally.
   §
4.   Judgment and sale of lands for delinquent taxes.
   §
5.   Redemption, etc., of lands sold for taxes.
   §
6.   Special assessments for streets, etc. - Generally.
   §
7.   Same-Proceedings after assessment roll filed, etc.
   §
8.   Procedure when general assessment not made.
Article VI.
Schools.
   §
1.   Village designated a school district; powers of council with regard to
schools generally.
   §
2.   Additional powers of council in connection with schools; sale, etc., of
intoxicating liquors, etc., within village, etc.
   §
3.   Duties of superintendent.
   §
4.   School treasurer; school funds generally.
Article VII.
Miscellaneous Provisions.
   §
1.   Style of ordinances.
   §
2.   Ordinance, etc., book.
   §
3.   Ordinances to be posted; effective date of ordinances.
   §
4.   Proof of ordinances, etc.
   §
5.   Commencement of suits, action, etc.; arrest warrants.
   §
6.   Payment of fines, fees, etc.
   §
7.   Payments from village treasury generally.
   §
8.   Separate account of monies collected and paid out to be kept, etc.
   §
9.   Act declared public act; effective date.
 
AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
ARTICLE I. OF BOUNDARIES AND GENERAL POWERS.
§ 1. INCORPORATION; SEAL.
   Be it enacted by the people of the State of Illinois, represented in the
general assembly. That the inhabitants of the Town of Glencoe in Cook County be
and are hereby constituted a body politic and corporate by the name and style
of "The Village of Glencoe" and by that name shall have perpetual succession
and may have and use a common seal, and change and alter the same at pleasure.
§ 2. BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of said village shall be as follows: Commencing at a point in
Lake Michigan one-half mile east of the point where the one-eight section line
in the north half of section six, in township forty-two north of range thirteen
east of third principal meridian meets the shore of said lake, thence west to
last named point and upon said one-eight section line to the township line,
thence south on said township line to the one-eighth section line in the north
half of section eighteen in said township and range, thence east on the last
named one-eighth section line continued to the quarter section line of section
seventeen, thence north on the quarter section line of said section seventeen
and section eight, in said township and range to the shore of said lake, thence
east one-half mile and thence northwesterly to the point of beginning. Provided
the limits of said village may be extended so as to include therein any
addition that may be made thereto and any tract of land the owner or owners of
which, or a majority of them, may desire to have included in said village.
§ 3. GENERAL POWERS.
   The inhabitants of said village by the name and style aforesaid, shall have
power to sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, defend and be defended in
all courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever; to purchase,
receive and hold property, both real and personal, within the limits of the
corporation, to purchase, receive and hold real property beyond and limits of
the corporation, for burial grounds or other corporate purposes, for the use of
said inhabitants; to improve and protect such property and lease, sell, convey
and dispose of same, and do all other acts and things in relation thereto that
natural persons may do.
ARTICLE II. OF THE COUNCIL AND PRESIDENT.
§ 1. GENERALLY.
   The municipal government of said village shall be vested in a council
consisting of a president and five councilmen, who shall be elected annually by
the legal voters of said village, and continue in office until their successors
are elected and qualified.
§ 2. QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   No person shall be a member of the village council unless he is a legal
voter and shall have been an actual resident of said village one-year
immediately preceding his election.
§ 3. OATH OF MEMBERS.
   Every member of the council before entering upon the duties of his office
shall take and subscribe an oath that he will support the Constitution and laws
of the United States and of this state, and that he will well and truly perform
the duties of his office, to the best of his skill and abilities.
§ 4. COUNCIL TO JUDGE QUALIFICATIONS, ETC., OF MEMBERS AND DETERMINE CONTESTED
ELECTIONS.
   The council shall be judges of the qualifications, elections, and returns of
its own members, and shall determine all contested elections.
§ 5. QUORUM.
   A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, and a
smaller number shall adjourn from time to time, and compel the attendance of
absent members, under such fines and penalties as may be prescribed by
ordinance.
§ 6. RULES OF PROCEEDINGS; PUNISHMENT AND EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   The council shall have power to determine the rule of its proceedings,
punish its members and other persons for disorderly conduct and with the
consent of two-thirds of the members elected expel a member.
§ 7. JOURNAL.
   The council shall cause to be kept a journal of its proceedings and such
journal or a certified copy thereof, under the hand of the clerk and the seal
of the corporation shall be received in all courts and other places, without
further proof, as evidence of all the matters therein contained.
§ 8. MEMBER NOT TO HOLD OTHER OFFICE OR MAKE, ETC., CONTRACTS WITH COUNCIL,
ETC.
   No member of the council, during the term of his office, shall be appointed
to any office under the authority of the council, except temporary clerk, nor
make any contracts with the council or corporation, nor be in any manner
interested in such contract.
§ 9. ANNUAL STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES.
   The council shall cause to be published a full and complete statement of all
monies received and expended by the corporation, during the preceding year, and
on what account received and expended.
§ 10. TIED ELECTIONS GENERALLY.
   Whenever there shall be a tie in the election for members of the council,
the judges of election shall certify the same to the police magistrate, who
shall determine the same by lot, in the presence of the judges, who shall enter
the result thereof on their returns of said election.
§ 11. MEETINGS-GENERALLY.
   There shall be a stated meeting of the council in each month, and such other
meetings at such times and places as may be prescribed by ordinance. The
president and any two councilmen may call a special meeting of the council.
§ 12. SAME-PRESIDENT TO PRESIDE, ETC.
   The president shall preside at all meetings of the council, preserve order,
and have the casting vote and no other. In case of his absence at any meeting,
the council shall appoint one of their number to preside.
§ 13. POWERS, ETC., OF PRESIDENT GENERALLY.
   The president shall be the chief executive officer of the corporation and as
such shall be a conservator of the peace and have power to arrest, without
warrant, and bring to trial any person guilty of a violation of any ordinance
or provision of this act, and he is hereby authorized to call upon any male
resident of said village over the age of eighteen to aid in the enforcement of
the ordinances of said village and to preserve the peace and any person failing
or refusing to obey such call shall forfeit and pay to the said corporation a
fine not exceeding ten dollars.
§ 14. ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRESIDENT.
   The president shall inspect the conduct of all subordinate officers of said
village and cause negligence and positive violation of duty to be prosecuted
and punished. He shall have power, whenever he may deem it necessary, to
require of any of the officers of said corporation, an exhibit of his books and
papers, and he shall perform such other additional acts and duties as may be
required of him by ordinance.
ARTICLE III. OF ELECTIONS AND OFFICERS.
§ 1. WHEN ELECTIONS HELD; OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED; VACANCIES.
   There shall be elected by the qualified voters of said village, annually, on
the first Tuesday of April, a president and five councilmen, an assessor,
collector, street commissioner, marshal and police constable, and quadrennially
a police magistrate, who shall hold their respective offices until their
successors are elected and qualified; provided when the inhabitants of said
village number three thousand an additional police magistrate and constable may
be elected. All vacancies, except of police magistrate, shall be filled by
appointment, to be nominated by the president and confirmed by the council.
Removal from the corporate limits, refusal to serve or neglect to serve for one
month, shall constitute a vacancy.
§ 2. HOURS POLLS TO BE OPEN; NOTICES OF ELECTIONS; ELECTION JUDGES AND CLERKS;
CONDUCT, ETC., OF ELECTIONS; CERTIFICATES OF ELECTION, ETC.
   At all elections the polls shall open at 9 o'clock in the morning and close
at 5 o'clock in the evening. Ten days' notice of the time and place of each
election shall be given by posting three or more written or printed notices
thereof in as many public places within the corporate limits; such notices to
specify what officers and what taxes, if any, are to be voted for. Notices of
the first election to be signed by three or more legal voters, and of
subsequent elections by the corporation clerk. At the first election under this
act, the electors present at the time of opening the polls, shall elect two of
their number to act as judges and one as clerk, who shall give certificates to
the persons elected and make returns of the poll book and certificates
attached, to the clerk, when he shall be appointed and enters upon the duties
of his office. All other elections shall be held by two competent persons
appointed by the council, to act as judges and the corporation clerk provided
in the absence of any of these parties, the electors present at the opening of
the polls may elect any of their number to fill the place of such absentees,
and all judges and clerks of elections shall be duly sworn, and shall conduct
such elections as is required by the general election laws of this state, shall
canvass the votes and make returns thereof to the corporation clerk. The
corporation clerk shall make duplicate certificates of the election of police
magistrate and forward the same to the clerk of the Cook County Court, whose
duty it shall be to file one certificate in his office and forward one to the
governor of the State of Illinois for a commission for the person elected. A
failure to elect officers on the day herein named, shall not operate as a
dissolution of the corporation, but such election may be held on any subsequent
day, by giving the required notice.
§ 3. QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS AND OFFICERS; ELECTIONS TO BE BY BALLOT, MANNER
OF DECIDING TIE VOTES.
   No person shall vote at any election of officers of said corporation, unless
he be qualified to vote for representatives to the general assembly and shall
have resided within the limits of said village for sixty days next preceding
such election. No person shall be elected or appointed to any office under this
act, unless he is a qualified voter. All elections shall be by ballot and tie
votes except for members of the council, shall be decided by lot by the
president in the presence of the council.
§ 4. CERTAIN OFFICERS TO TAKE OATH AND GIVE BOND.
   The assessor, collector, street commissioner, marshal and police constable,
before entering upon the duties of their office, shall take and subscribe an
oath, to be filed with the clerk and give bonds to the corporation by its
corporate name for the faithful performance of their duties, and under such
penalties and conditions as may be required by law and the council, to be
approved by the council.
§ 5. COLLECTOR AND ASSESSOR GENERALLY.
   The assessor and collector shall perform such duties as may be required of
them by law and ordinance and shall receive such fees for their services as the
council may fix, provided that their fees shall not exceed the fees fixed by
the laws of this state for like services.
§ 6. STREET COMMISSIONER GENERALLY.
   The street commissioner, under the direction of the council, shall have
supervision of roads, streets, bridges, sidewalks, crossings, alleys, lanes,
public grounds, parks, commons, drains, ditches, sewers, corporate buildings
and corporate property and all improvements made by the corporation, and
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance and receive such
fees as may be fixed by the council.
§ 7. MARSHAL AND POLICEMEN GENERALLY; RESISTING ARREST, ETC.
   The marshal shall be chief of the police, chief of the fire department,
conservator of the peace and health officer, and perform such duties as the
council may, from time to time direct, by ordinance or otherwise, and receive
such fees for his services as the council may fix. The marshal, policemen or
police constables, or any or either of them, shall have authority to arrest,
with or without warrant, any person committing crime or found engaged in
violating any provision of this act or any ordinance of said corporation, or
any person liable to escape before warrant can be procured, and for such
purpose may follow any such person into any part of Cook and Lake counties, and
there arrest such person and confine such person in a safe place, or hold him
in custody until he may be brought to trial, and any person who shall forcibly
resist the marshal or any policeman or police constable in the discharge of his
duties, shall upon conviction thereof forfeit and pay a fine of not less than
ten dollars and not exceeding one hundred dollars.
§ 8. POLICE MAGISTRATE.
   The police magistrate shall be commissioned and qualified in the same manner
as justices of the peace, and shall have the same jurisdiction, powers,
emoluments and fees, and shall do and perform all acts and things authorized by
law, as other justices of the peace in Cook County. He shall be conservator of
the peace, and have jurisdiction in all cases arising under this act, and the
ordinances of the corporation in preference to any other justice of the peace,
though now exclusive jurisdiction thereof, and shall be entitled to the same
fees for his services as are now or may be allowed by the laws of this state
for similar services, and to be collected in the same manner. Appeals and
changes of venue may be taken from him in the same manner as from other
justices of the peace, and in case of malfeasance or misfeasance in office he
shall be subject to the same fine and penalties as are imposed by law upon
justices of the peace. It shall be the duty of any justice of the peace of Cook
County when an appeal is taken to him from such police magistrate, to hear and
determine the case, also upon complaint being made to him for any violation of
this act or any ordinance to issue his warrant, process or summons, and
exercise the same jurisdiction as such police magistrate and be entitled to the
same fees to be collected in the same manner. No person shall be eligible to
the office of police magistrate, unless he shall have resided in said village,
one year next preceding his election, and in case of a vacancy, the council
shall order a special election to fill such vacancy.
§ 9. POLICE, ETC., CONSTABLES.
   The police constables of said village and all other constables are hereby
authorized and directed to execute any process or order issued or made by such
police magistrate in the same manner as process is executed from other justices
of the peace and shall receive such fees therefor as are allowed by the laws of
this state for similar services, and to be collected in the same manner. The
police constables shall have the same power and authority in all cases arising
under the laws of this state as other constables and be entitled to the same
fees, for services rendered. The police constables and other constables,
serving any process or writ issued or made, by such police magistrate, for the
violation of any of the provisions of this act, or of any ordinance of said
corporation, or for any criminal offense, shall have authority to serve the
same anywhere in Cook or Lake counties. And for any negligence or violation of
duty, the police constable shall be subject to the same fine and penalties, as
other constables under the laws of this state.
ARTICLE IV. POWERS OF COUNCIL.
§ 1. TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   The council shall have power to levy and collect taxes on all taxable
property, real and personal, within the limits of said corporation, not
exceeding two per cent per annum upon the assessed valuation thereof, for
general purposes, unless a greater amount of tax is authorized at an annual or
special election, and to levy, assess and collect special taxes or assessments
according to law, for local purposes or improvements; and to enforce the
payment of such taxes and assessments in any manner to be prescribed by
ordinance, not repugnant to the Constitution and laws of the United States or
of this state.
§ 2. ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   To borrow money on the credit of said corporation by issuing bonds, at a
rate of interest not exceeding ten per cent per annum; provided that the
outstanding bonded indebtedness shall not exceed ten per cent of the assessed
valuation of the property within the limits of said village, and that any tax
levied in any one year for the payment of the principal of such bonded
indebtedness shall not exceed one per cent of such assessed valuation.
§ 3. APPROPRIATION OF MONEY, ETC.
   To appropriate money and provide for the payment of all debts and expenses
of the corporation.
§ 4. APPOINTMENT, ETC., OF OFFICERS AND AGENTS.
   To appoint a clerk, who shall be clerk of the council and of the
corporation, treasurer, policemen, and such other officers and agents, as the
council may deem necessary, to carry this act and the ordinances made pursuant
thereof into full effect; to prescribe their duties; to fix their compensation
and to remove any appointee from office; to require all officers and agents so
appointed to take an oath of office and file the same with the clerk and to
give bonds for the faithful performance of their duties to be approved by the
council and in such penalty as the council may direct; all such bonds to be
given to the corporation by its corporate name; to examine at any time the
official bonds of the officers and agents of this corporation and if found
insufficient, to require new bonds, and upon such officer or agent failing to
furnish such new bond satisfactory to the council, the council shall declare
his place vacant.
§ 5. PREVENTION OF CONTAGIOUS DISEASES, ETC.; PREVENTION, ABATEMENT, ETC., OF
NUISANCES, ETC.
   To make regulations to prevent the introduction of contagious diseases into
the village, and to secure the general health of the inhabitants, to declare
what shall be a nuisance and to prevent, abate and remove the same when located
in the corporate limits or within one mile thereof and not within the village
of Winnetka and to punish the author thereof.
§ 6. OPENING, EXTENDING, IMPROVING, VACATING, ETC., STREETS, ALLEYS, ETC.
   To lay out, open, alter, widen, extend, establish, vacate, abolish, grade,
pave, or otherwise improve and keep in good repair all roads, streets, lanes,
avenues, alleys, squares, commons, parks, or other public grounds or places in
said village and to have exclusive control of the same; and in order to keep
the same in good repair, may require every able bodied male inhabitant, over
the age of twenty-one and under fifty, to labor on the same, not exceeding
three days in every year, or pay commutation in lieu thereof at the rate of one
dollar for each day they may be required so to labor, and the inhabitants of
said village are hereby exempted from working on any road beyond the limits of
said corporation, and from paying any tax, on property within the corporate
limits to procure labor to be done thereon and to cause any road, street, lane,
avenue, alley, public square, common, or park laid out or to be laid out,
widened or extended to be surveyed and platted and the plat thereof to be filed
with the corporate clerk together with a minute of the survey.
§ 7. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF BRIDGES, SIDEWALKS, DRAINS, SEWERS, ETC.;
STREET LIGHTING, ETC.
   To build and keep in repair bridges, culverts, street crossings, sidewalks,
drains, ditches and sewers, and to provide for lighting the streets and
erecting lamp posts.
§ 8. PROTECTION, IMPROVEMENT, ETC., OF PARKS, ETC.; PLANTING, ETC., TREES ALONG
STREETS, ETC.
   To provide for protecting, inclosing, adorning, or otherwise improving any
squares, commons, parks, or other public grounds within the said village, or
any other grounds or places, belonging to said corporation, and for setting
out, or planting trees, and protecting the same along the roads, streets and
avenues in said village.
§ 9. ERECTION OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   To provide for the erection of all needful buildings for the use of the
inhabitants of said village.
§ 10. PLATTING, NUMBERING, ETC., LOTS, ETC.
   To provide for surveying, platting, numbering and recording the plat of any
and all out lots or lands, within the limits of said corporation, and the
additions thereto, and to cause such out lots and lands to be designated by
such numbers in the assessment lists and to sell the same for the nonpayment of
taxes by such designation.
§ 11. PROVIDE FOR, ETC., VILLAGE CEMETERY, ETC.
   To provide for surveying, platting and recording the plat of a cemetery for
the use of the inhabitants of said village, and for protecting, ornamenting and
keeping the same in repair, and such cemetery shall be forever exempt from
taxation; and to determine the location and boundaries of cemeteries and
prevent the interment of the dead in such places as may be injurious to the
health of the inhabitants.
§ 12. PROVIDE VILLAGE WITH WATER, ETC.
   To provide the village with water, to dig wells and cisterns, and to erect
hydrants and pumps for the use of the inhabitants.
§ 13. FIRE PREVENTION, ETC.
   To provide for the prevention and extinguishment of fires, and to organize
and regulate fire companies and determine fire limits.
§ 14. INSPECTION OF HAY, GRAIN, COAL, LUMBER, BUTTER, ETC.; MEASUREMENT OF WOOD
AND FUEL.
   To provide for the inspection of hay, grain, coal, lumber, butter, lard and
other provisions and for the measurement of wood and fuel.
§ 15. ESTABLISHMENT, ETC., OF MARKETS, ETC.
   To erect market houses, to establish markets and market places and provide
for the government and regulation thereof.
§ 16. REGULATION OF STORAGE OF GUNPOWDER, ETC.; PREVENTION OF FIRING OF GUNS,
ETC.
   To regulate the storage of gun powder, tar, pitch, turpentine, rosin and
other combustible materials; and to prevent the firing of guns and other
firearms or combustibles, within the limits of said corporation.
§ 17. REGULATION, ETC., OF ANIMALS GENERALLY.
   To prevent the running at large of mischievous or diseased animals, to
prevent the indecent exhibition of horses and other animals, and to regulate or
prohibit the running at large of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, swine, goats,
dogs and other animals and to provide for the destruction of dogs running at
large contrary to ordinance.
§ 18. ESTABLISHMENT, ETC., OF POUND; APPOINTMENT, ETC., OF POUNDMASTER.
   To establish and maintain a public pound, appoint a poundmaster, prescribe
his duties and fix his fees.
§ 19. COMPULSION OF PERSONS TO FASTEN HORSES, ETC., STANDING IN STREET, ETC.;
PREVENTION OF ABUSE OF ANIMALS, HORSE RACING, ETC. 
   To compel persons to fasten horses, mules and other animals attached to
vehicles, while standing upon any road, street, lane, alley or public place or
unenclosed lot in said village, and to prevent animals from standing upon the
crossings and sidewalks, to prevent the abuse of animals and to prevent horse
racing or any immoderate riding or driving, within the limits of said
corporation, of horses or other animals.
§ 20. REGULATION OF CHIMNEYS, FLUES, PARTITION WALLS AND FENCES.
   To regulate the fixing of chimneys and flues, and partition walls and
fences.
§ 21. PROHIBITING, ETC., INDECENT EXPOSURE, ETC.
   To prohibit and prevent any indecent exposure of the person, or other lewd
or shameful practice, and punish persons guilty thereof.
§ 22. PREVENTION, ETC., OF RIOTS, DISTURBANCES OF THE PEACE, DISORDERLY
CONDUCT, ASSAULTS, COCKFIGHTING, ETC.; RESTRAINT AND PUNISHMENT OF VAGRANTS,
BEGGARS, PROSTITUTES, ETC. 
   To prevent, suppress and prohibit any riot, affray, tumult or disturbance of
the peace, by loud or unusual cries, noises or any other disorderly conduct,
disorderly assemblages, assault, assaults and batteries, battles by agreement,
fighting matches, shooting matches, horse racing and cockfighting within the
limits of said corporation; and to restrain and punish vagrants, mendicants,
beggars and prostitutes.
§ 23. PREVENTION, ETC., OF INJURY TO PROPERTY, TRESPASS, PETTY PILFERING, ETC.
   To prohibit, prevent and punish any wanton injury to private property,
disorderly intrusion upon any private premises, petty pilfering, destruction or
injury of shade trees or any other disorderly proceedings, endangering or
trespassing upon the rights of private persons or property.
§ 24. LICENSING, REGULATION, ETC., OF THEATRICAL, ETC., EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS,
BILLIARD TABLES, ETC.
   To license, tax and regulate or suppress theatrical and other exhibitions,
shows and amusements, ball alleys and billiard tables when the same are carried
on as a business and for a pecuniary benefit.
§ 25. LICENSING, REGULATION, ETC., OF CERTAIN ENUMERATED BUSINESSES,
OCCUPATIONS, ETC. 
   To license, tax and regulate, auctioneers, peddlers, hawkers, ordinaries,
retailers, taverns, brokers, pawn brokers, money changers, hackney, carriages,
coaches, omnibusses, wagons, carts and drays and fix the rates to be charged
for the carriage of persons and for the wagonage, cartage and drayage of
property.
§ 26. PROHIBITING, ETC., DRAM SHOPS, GAMBLING HOUSES, LOTTERIES, BAWDYHOUSES,
ETC.
   To restrain, prohibit and suppress tippling houses, dram shops, gambling
houses, faro boards, lotteries, gift enterprises, bawdyhouses and other
disorderly establishments.
§ 27. SUPPRESSION, ETC., OF GAMBLING, SWINDLING, ETC.
   To restrain, prohibit and suppress all descriptions of gambling, swindling
and fraudulent abuses and to punish all persons in any manner engaged therein.
§ 28. ESTABLISHMENT AND REGULATION OF VILLAGE POLICE, ETC.
   To establish and regulate the police of said village and provide for the
protection of property and the inhabitants thereof.
§ 29. ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR BATHING, ETC.
   To establish rules and regulations for bathing and bathing houses.
§ 30. ESTABLISHMENT, ETC., OF RAILROAD CROSSINGS; REGULATIONS OF RAILROADS,
ETC.
   To establish crossings on railroads within the corporate limits and make
necessary rules and regulations for keeping the same unobstructed; to regulate
the speed that railroad engines and trains may run within the corporate limits
and to prevent the obstruction of streets and alleys by the standing of cars
upon the same and to require railroad companies to keep their ditches, bridges
and crossings within the corporate limits in good condition.
§ 31. TAKING VILLAGE CENSUS; DIVISION OF VILLAGE INTO WARDS, ETC.
   To provide for taking enumerations of the inhabitants of said village and at
any time to divide the said village into wards, alter the boundaries thereof,
and erect additional wards as occasion may require; and where the council so
divide the village into wards, the same shall consist of one president and two
councilmen for each ward, and the council may at any time divide the village
into two or more election districts and establish polling places therein.
§ 32. PROVIDING FOR PRISON, PUNISHMENT FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCES, ETC.
   To provide a prison or other secure place, in which any person arrested for
violating any criminal law of this state, or any ordinance or provisions of
this act, may be confined until he may be examined and tried, and to provide
for the punishment of offenders against any ordinance or provision of this act
by imprisonment not to exceed twenty days in such prison or other secure place
and to defray the expenses of the same.
§ 33. PASSING AND ENFORCING ORDINANCES, ETC.
   To pass all ordinances, which the council may deem necessary and proper for
carrying into full effect the provisions of this act and for the regulation of
the municipal government of said village and to execute the same, and to impose
fines, forfeitures and penalties for the violation of any ordinance or any
provision of this act and to provide for the enforcement of such ordinances and
the recovery of such fines, forfeitures and penalties in any manner not
repugnant of the Constitution of the United States and of this state; provided
that any person charged with a breach of any provisions of this act, or any
ordinance shall be entitled to trial by jury in the manner provided by statute
for persons charged with assaults and assault and battery, and provided that in
no case shall any such fine or forfeiture exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
for any one offense, and any such fine or forfeiture may be recovered before
the police magistrate, or any justice of the peace in Cook County, in the
corporate name, and the police magistrate or justice of the peace may, unless
the amount of such judgment be paid forthwith or satisfactory security be
given, issue execution against the goods and chattels of the defendant so
fined, immediately, upon the rendition of judgment, or he may commit such
defendant to the prison or other secure place provided by the council, or to
the Cook County jail, until such judgment and costs are paid, or there to
remain 48 hours, and if the fine exceed ten dollars then to remain in such
confinement twenty-four hours for every five dollars over and above the said
ten dollars and so on in proportion to the amount of said fine.
ARTICLE V. TAXES, GENERAL AND SPECIAL.
§ 1. ESTIMATE OF ANNUAL TAXES REQUIRED; PROCEDURE WHEN ESTIMATE EXCEEDS TWO PER
CENT OF ASSESSED VALUATION OF TAXABLE PROPERTY.
   Before the annual election, the council shall make an estimate of the taxes
required for the ensuing year, and if the amount estimated exceeds two per cent
of the assessed valuation of the taxable property within the corporate limits,
the council shall cause to be specified in the election notices, what taxes
over and above the said two per cent are required, and for what purpose; and on
the day of election at 2 o'clock P.M. the judges of election shall call the
voters present to order, and the clerk shall state what taxes are required as
per election notice, and the voters shall declare by vote, what taxes over and
above the said two per cent shall be levied and collected, and for what
purpose; and all such taxes thus ordered shall be levied and collected by the
council. Provided the council may call a special election to vote for taxes,
upon giving similar notice thereof.
§ 2. GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF TAXABLE PROPERTY.
   The assessor, governed by the laws of the state directing the assessing of
property for state and county purposes, shall make an assessment of all taxable
property in said village, and on or before the first day of June deposit his
assessment roll, duly certified, with the clerk; and the clerk shall within ten
days thereafter post up notices, in four public places in said village, that
the assessment roll is filed in his office and open to the inspection of all
parties interested, and that at the regular meeting of the council in July, the
council will consider any objections made to said roll. When the council has
considered all such objections, and amended or corrected said roll as to it
shall seem proper, the council shall confirm the same, and from and after such
confirmation, all taxes levied upon real estate are declared a lien thereon,
until paid.
§ 3. COLLECTION OF TAXES GENERALLY.
   The clerk shall make a copy of said assessment roll, and extend thereon the
taxes levied, and on or before the first day of September, issue a warrant
under the seal of said corporation, signed by the president and clerk, with
such copy attached, to the collector of said village, commanding him to proceed
and collect the same, and make due return thereof, within ninety days after
date. In making such collection, the said collector is vested with the same
powers given to town collectors. He shall proceed in the same manner to
collect, and make return to delinquent taxes to the clerk. He shall pay over to
the treasurer all money collected, less his percentage, at fast as collected,
and to be liable, with his sureties, for all taxes, that by the use of due
diligence, he might have collected and shall fail so to do.
§ 4. JUDGMENT AND SALE OF LANDS FOR DELINQUENT TAXES.
   At any term of the county court of Cook County, after the return of the
collector is make, the clerk may proceed to obtain judgments against the lands
specified in said return and on which the taxes many remain unpaid, for the
taxes and costs thereon, and sell the same under the order of said court, and
in so doing he shall be governed by the laws of this state, prescribing the
duties of county treasurer in like cases and be entitled to the same fees; and
the county court of Cook county shall exercise the same jurisdiction; and the
clerk of said court shall perform the same duties with like fees, as in other
cases of judgment and sale of lands for delinquent taxes.
§ 5. REDEMPTION, ETC., OF LANDS SOLD FOR TAXES.
   Lands sold for taxes under this act, may be redeemed in the same manner, as
lands sold for the non-payment of state and county taxes, and if not redeemed,
deeds thereof may be given in like manner.
§ 6. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR STREETS, ETC. - GENERALLY.
   When the council shall determine to open, lay out, alter, widen or extend
any public highway, street, avenue, lane or alley, or shall determine to make
any improvements, the cost of which or part thereof is to be paid by a special
assessment, the council shall appoint two competent persons, who with the
assessor shall constitute commissioners to make such assessments. The clerk
shall issue to them his warrant commanding them to make the assessment ordered,
within thirty days from the date thereof. The commissioners before entering
upon the duties of their office shall be sworn by the clerk or some person
authorized to administer oaths, faithfully and impartially to make such
assessment to the best of their ability; and in making such assessment, shall
determine the damages, if any, accruing to the owner or owners of any land in
opening, laying out, altering, widening, or extending any such public highway,
street, avenue, lane or alley, or in making any such improvements; and
determine the benefits, if any, accruing to the owner or owners of land
thereby, and also determine the benefits accruing thereby to the public, and in
all things make such assessments according to law; and shall file their
assessment roll with the warrant, and their certificate attached, with the
clerk, within the time prescribed by the warrant. Provided no public highway,
street, avenue, lane or alley shall be opened, laid out, altered, widened or
extended, only upon the petition of two-thirds of the owners of lands through
which the same may pass or upon the petition of the owners of one-half of the
property fronting on the same, or upon the petition of one-half of the legal
voters, or the petition of fifty resident freeholders, of said village.
§ 7. SAME – PROCEEDINGS AFTER ASSESSMENT ROLL FILED, ETC.
   After the filing of such assessment roll, the same proceedings shall be had
for the inspection, correction and confirmation thereof; for the collection of
the special taxes or assessments thereon; for judgment and sale of
delinquencies; for redemption from such sale and for giving of deeds in case of
non-redemption, as described in preceding sections concerning taxes for general
corporate purposes; and from and after the confirmation of such assessment
roll, the special taxes or assessments levied, shall be a lien upon the laws
(lands) therein named, until paid; provided, the council may for good cause set
aside such assessment, and cause another to be made by the same or other
commissioners; and the council may suspend for a time the collection of any
such assessment; and provided, the council shall have power to sue for and
recover such special taxes or assessments, in the corporate name before any
court of competent jurisdiction in any action of debt.
§ 8. PROCEDURE WHEN GENERAL ASSESSMENT NOT MADE.
   Instead of a general assessment, the council may adopt the then last
assessment, made under the general laws of this state; and the council may
direct the clerk to certify general and special assessments to the clerk of the
county court of Cook County who shall extend the same upon the town collector's
books, and for the collection thereof, the same proceedings shall be had and
the same fees allowed, as in the case of state and county taxes; and the town
collector and county treasurer shall pay over all money collected thereon to
the treasurer of the village.
ARTICLE VI. SCHOOLS
§ 1. VILLAGE DESIGNATED A SCHOOL DISTRICT; POWERS OF COUNCIL WITH REGARD TO
SCHOOLS GENERALLY.
   The territory included within the corporate limits and all additions to said
village is hereby made a school district for school purposes, and the council
shall be ex-officio school directors thereof, and shall have the supervision
and control of public schools therein; and shall have power to appoint a
superintendent of schools; to purchase and hold real estate for school
purposes; to build and keep in repair school houses; to establish and maintain
schools; to levy and collect all taxes for school purposes voted for by the
legal voters of the village upon the taxable property within the corporate
limits and to do and perform all things that school directors may do under the
general school laws of this state, not inconsistent with this act.
§ 2. ADDITIONAL POWERS OF COUNCIL IN CONNECTION WITH SCHOOLS; SALE, ETC., OF
INTOXICATING LIQUORS, ETC., WITHIN THE VILLAGE, ETC. 
   The council shall have power to establish and maintain a high school and
schools of such grade and character as may meet the wants of the inhabitants,
to fix the terms, and conditions upon which scholars residing beyond the
corporate limits may attend the schools located in said corporate limits; to
fix the salaries of teachers; to make all needful rules and regulations for the
government of said schools, for the advancement of the students and for the
preservation of their morals; and the selling, bartering, exchanging,
trafficking in, or in any manner disposing of any spirituous, vinous, malt,
fermented, mixed or intoxicating poration and within one mile thereof, not to
interfere in any manner with the village of Winnetka, is hereby expressly
prohibited and any person who shall violate this provision, either directly or
indirectly, by giving away or in any other manner, shall forfeit and pay the
sum of twenty-five dollars for the first offense, and any amount not less than
fifty, nor more than one hundred dollars, for each subsequent offense, to be
recovered in the corporate name before the policy magistrate or any justice of
the peace in the county where the offense may have been committed, or where the
offender may be found and such party may be committed, until the fine and costs
are paid, and this forfeiture may be enforced from and after the passage of
this act and all fines recovered and collected under this provision shall be
applied to the support of schools.
§ 3. DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   The superintendent, under the direction of the council, shall have the
custody of all school property, and the general supervision of the schools; he
shall examine applicants for teaching; employ teachers, prescribe the course of
studies and perform all such duties as may be required of him by the council.
§ 4. SCHOOL TREASURER; SCHOOL FUNDS GENERALLY.
   The treasurer of the corporation shall be school treasurer, and all monies
collected by tax or otherwise in the corporate limits, for school purposes,
shall be paid over to him; and all public officers, required by law to pay
money for school purposes to the school treasurer of township forty-two north
of range thirteen east, of third principal meridian, shall pay the ratable
proportion thereof direct to the treasurer of said corporation; and it is
hereby made the duty of the school treasurer of said township, to pay over to
the treasurer of said corporation, out of the township school fund of said
township, an amount bearing the same proportion to the whole amount of said
fund, as the lands in said corporate limits bear to all the lands in said
township, and upon his failure so to do, the council may institute suit, in the
corporate name, before any court of competent jurisdiction, and recover such
proportionable amount; and the treasurer shall hold and manage such school
funds under the direction of the council in the same manner, as township
treasurers.
ARTICLE VII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 1. STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The style of the ordinances of said village shall be: Be it ordained by the
Council of the Village of Glencoe.
§ 2. ORDINANCE, ETC., BOOK.
   All orders, ordinances, by-laws, and resolutions passed by the council,
shall be recorded in a book to be kept for that purpose, which book, purporting
to be a record of the ordinances of said village, shall be received in
evidence, in all courts and places, without further authentication or proof.
§ 3. ORDINANCES TO BE POSTED; EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   Printed or written copies of all ordinances passed by the council, shall be
posted up in at least three of the most public places in said village, within
thirty days after their passage, and all ordinances shall take effect at the
expiration of ten days after such posting.
§ 4. PROOF OF ORDINANCES, ETC.
   All ordinances, orders, by-laws, and resolutions and proceedings of the
council, may be proven by the seal of the corporation and the signature of the
clerk, and when printed or published in book or pamphlet form, and purporting
to be printed or published by authority of the council, shall be received in
evidence in all courts and places without further authentication or proof.
§ 5. COMMENCEMENT OF SUITS, ACTIONS, ETC; ARREST WARRANTS.
   All suits, actions and prosecutions, instituted, commended or brought by the
corporation hereby created, for any violation of ordinance or of this act, for
the recovery of any fine, forfeiture or penalty shall be commenced by ordinary
summons, and in the name of the "Village of Glencoe," or in case of complaint
upon oath before the police magistrate or any justice of the peace, that any
person has violated any provision of this act or any ordinance of said
corporation and that there is danger of the offender escaping or absconding,
the police magistrate or justice shall issue his warrant for the arrest of such
offender, and may commit or hold him to bail until tried.
§ 6. PAYMENT OF FINES, FEES, ETC.
   All fines, forfeitures and penalties received or collected for the breach of
any ordinance or this act, and all license fees and other monies collected by
virtue of this act, or any ordinance passed in pursuance of this act shall be
paid by the officer or person receiving the same to the treasurer of said
village, who shall give proper vouchers therefor.
§ 7. PAYMENTS FROM VILLAGE TREASURY GENERALLY.
   No money shall be paid out of the treasury of the said corporation, save
upon resolution of the council, specifying to whom and upon what account the
same is paid, and on order signed by the president and countersigned by the
clerk, drawn in pursuance of such resolution, and the clerk shall keep a record
of all such orders made, and the treasurer of all orders paid giving date, name
of payee, amount and upon what account paid.
§ 8. SEPARATE ACCOUNT OF MONIES COLLECTED AND PAID OUT TO BE KEPT, ETC.
   The treasurer shall keep a separate account of all monies collected and paid
out for different purposes, and money collected for a certain purpose shall not
be paid out for any other purpose, unless not actually needed for the purpose
for which it was collected and only upon the special order of the council.
§ 9. ACT DECLARED PUBLIC ACT; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This act is hereby declared to be a public act and shall take effect and be
in full force from and after its passage.
F. CORWIN,
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
J. DAUGHERTY,
Speaker of the Senate.
Approved March 29, 1869.
JOHN M. PALMER, Governor
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1   How code designated and cited
   
1-2   Definitions and rules of construction
   
1-3   Catchlines of sections
   
1-4   Severability of parts of code
   
1-5   Provisions construed as continuations of existing ordinances
   
1-6   Effect of repeal of repealing ordinance
   
1-7   Additions and amendment to code - generally
   
1-8   Same - amendment of penalty section
   
1-9   Same - record
   
1-10   Corporate seal - description
   
1-11   Same - custody
   
1-12   Fiscal year
   
1-13   Official time
   
1-14   Village datum
§ 1-1 HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The code of the Village of Glencoe,
Illinois, 2011," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the
"Glencoe village code, 2011."
§ 1-2 DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   In the interpretation and construction of this code, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees or the context
clearly requires otherwise:
      ACTION. Includes suits, prosecution and all judicial proceedings.
      BOARD. The words BOARD or THE BOARD mean the president and board of
trustees of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME.1 The time within which any act provided by law is to
be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a
Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be excluded.
      COUNTY. The words COUNTY or THE COUNTY shall mean Cook County in the
State of Illinois.
      COURT.2 Includes justices of the peace and police magistrates as well as
all courts of record.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine GENDER include the feminine and
neuter.
      IN THE VILLAGE. The words IN THE VILLAGE or WITHIN THE VILLAGE mean and
include all territory over which the village now has or shall hereafter acquire
jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
      MONTH.3 A calendar month.
      NUMBER.4 Words importing the singular NUMBER may extend and be applied to
several persons or things and words importing the plural may include the
singular.
      OATH.5 Shall be deemed to include an affirmation and the word SWORN shall
be construed to include the word AFFIRMED.
      OCCUPANT or TENANT. When applied to a building or land, means any person
who holds a written or an oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
      OFFICERS or EMPLOYEE. Whenever the title of any village officer or
employee is used, it shall be construed as if the words "of the Village of
Glencoe" followed it.
      OR, AND.  OR may be read AND, and AND may be read OR, if the sense
requires it.
      OWNER. When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the
whole or a part of such building or land.
      PERSON.6 Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock
association or any city or state or any subdivision thereof; and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
      PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Means the next before and next after, respectively.
      PRESIDENT. The president of the village.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY.7 Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and embraces
all chattels real.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property as defined by this section.
      SEAL. The seal of the village.
      SIDEWALK.8 The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
      STATE. The words STATE or THE STATE means the State of Illinois.
      STREET. The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
      TENSE.9 Words in the present tense include the future.
      VILLAGE. The words VILLAGE or THE VILLAGE mean the Village of Glencoe in
Cook County, State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided.
      WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically
defined, shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise and articles or things in quantities to persons who purchase for
the purpose of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in
smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
      WRITTEN, IN WRITING.10 May include printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, by his or her proper mark.
      YEAR.11 A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
   (b)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the president and board of trustees may be fully carried out.
Statutory reference:
   1 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.11
   2 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.19
   3 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.11
   4 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.13
   5 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.12
   6 For state law definition see III. Rev. Stat. ch. 131, § 1.05
   7 For similar state law definition, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 30, § 37
   8 For similar state law definition, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 1/2, §
109
   9 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 102
   10 For similar state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.15
   11 For state law, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 131, § 1.10
§ 1-3 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any
of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
§ 1-4 SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.
   Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this code
be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this code, since
the same would have been enacted by the board of trustees without the
incorporation in this code of any such invalid or unconstitutional words,
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 1-5 PROVISIONS CONSTRUED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are substantially the
same as those of the code of the Village of Glencoe, 1929, and those of all
other ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this code shall be
construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law applicable to statutes, see III. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch.
131, § 2
§ 1-6 EFFECT OF REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE.
   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein expressly so
provided.
(1929 Code, § 816)
§ 1-7 ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE - GENERALLY.
   Any additions or amendments to this code, when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the president and board of trustees to make same a
part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so that a
reference to the code of the Village of Glencoe of 2011 shall be understood to
include them.
(1929 Code, § 819)
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to ordinances, etc., generally, see char.,
art. VII, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 1-8 SAME - AMENDMENT OF PENALTY SECTION.
   In case of amendment of any section of this code containing provisions for
which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in such
other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, whether re-
enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.
(1929 Code, § 820)
Cross-reference:
   As to general penalty for violations of code, etc., see §
16-1
§ 1-9 SAME - RECORD.
   The village clerk shall keep a separate book containing every amendment or
addition passed to this code, with a reference on copy of such amendment or
addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where this may be found.
The above mentioned records shall be kept in addition to the record of
ordinances which the village clerk is required to keep by statute.
(1929 Code, § 821)
§ 1-10 CORPORATE SEAL - DESCRIPTION.
   The corporate seal of the village is hereby established, and shall consist
of the following:
"A Lymphad or antique ship upon an eagle displayed surrounded by the words,
‘Village of Glencoe, Cook County, Illinois. Incorporated Mar. 29, 1869.'"
(1929 Code, § 177)
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to city seal, see char.,
art. I, § 1
§ 1-11 SAME - CUSTODY.
   The village seal shall remain in the custody of the village clerk.
(1929 Code, § 178)
§ 1-12 FISCAL YEAR.
   Beginning January 1, 2021, the fiscal year of the Village of Glencoe will
commence on the first day of January and end on the last day of December of
each calendar year. The 2019 fiscal year will end on February 28, 2020. The
2020 fiscal year, designated as “Stub Year 2020" will commence on March 1, 2020
and end on December 31, 2020.
(1929 Code, § 179; Ord. No. 2020-03-3469)
§ 1-13 OFFICIAL TIME.
   (a)   Central standard time shall be the official time within the village
for the transaction of all village business; except, that from 2:00 a.m. on the
last Sunday in April of each year until 2:00 a.m. on the last Sunday in October
of each year the official time for the village shall be advanced one hour; and
on the last Sunday in October of each year such official time shall, by the
retarding of one hour, be returned to central standard time. All legal and
official proceedings of the president and board of trustees, and all official
business of the village shall be regulated thereby. When by ordinance,
resolution or action of any municipal officer or body, an act must be performed
at the within prescribed time, it shall be so performed according to such
official time.
   (b)   All clocks or other time pieces in or upon public buildings or other
premises maintained at the expense of the village shall be set and run
according to the official time as provided herein, and it is hereby made the
duty of the officer or other person having control and charge of such buildings
and premises to see that such clocks or other time pieces are set and run in
accordance with the official time as provided by this section.
   (c)   All persons residing within the village and all persons doing business
within the village are hereby requested to set and run all clocks or other time
pieces under their control within the village in accordance with the official
time as provided in this section.
(1929 Code, § 176)
§ 1-14 VILLAGE DATUM.
   The village datum is hereby established as a plane ninety-five and thirty-
five one-hundredths feet below the bench mark cut on the top of the
northeasterly corner of the retaining wall easterly of the easterly wall of the
municipal building at the northeasterly corner of Village Court and Hazel
Avenue.
(Ord. No. 1365, § 1)
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
Section
Article I. In General
   
2-1   Contracts - signatures required
   
2-2   Same - interest of village officers and employees
   
2-2A   Officers and official indemnification and defense
   
2-2B   Employee indemnification and defense
   
2-2C   Gift ban (DELETED IN ITS ENTIRETY - Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
   
2-2D   Civil emergencies
   
2-2E   Paid leave policies
Article II. Board of Trustees
   
2-3   Regular meetings
   
2-4   Special meetings; emergency meetings
   
2-5   Committees
   
2-6   Annual budget
   
2-7   Disturbing meetings
   
2-8   Clerk
   
2-9   Order of business
   
2-10   Quorum
   
2-11   Members required to vote; vote necessary for passage of ordinances,
resolutions and motions; abstentions
   
2-12   When vote reconsidered
   
2-13   Resolution to be in writing
   
2-14   Decorum
   
2-15   Robert's Rules of Order
Article III. Officers and Employees Generally
Division 1. Village President
   
2-16   Chief executive of village, etc.
   
2-17   Powers and duties generally
   
2-18   Bond
   
2-19   To attend meetings of board, etc.
Division 2. Village Manager
   
2-20   Office created
   
2-21   Appointment, term, qualifications, etc.
   
2-22   Bond
   
2-23   Compensation
   
2-24   Removal from office
   
2-25   Powers and duties generally
   
2-26   Absence from village, etc.
   
2-27   Board not to interfere with appointments or removals, etc.
Division 3. Village Treasurer
   
2-28   Office created
   
2-29   Appointment
   
2-30   Compensation; bond
   
2-31   Duties generally
   
2-32   Village warrants
   
2-33   Receipt of interest and money
   
2-34   Maintenance of books and accounts; reports
Division 4. Village Clerk
   
2-35   Appointment; term
   
2-36   Compensation; bond
   
2-37   Powers and duties generally
   
2-38   Posting, etc., of ordinances
   
2-39   Docketing and filing documents
   
2-40   Notification of persons of election or appointment
Division 5. Village Attorney
   
2-41   Office created; appointment
   
2-42   Compensation
   
2-43   Term of office
   
2-44   Duties
   
2-45   Vacancy
   
2-46   Special counsel
Division 6. Village Collector
   
2-47   Appointment; term
   
2-48   Bond
   
2-49   Duties
   
2-50   Reports and records
   
2-51   Vacancy
Division 7. Village Prosecutor
   
2-52   Office created
   
2-53   Appointment
   
2-54   Duties
   
2-55   Compensation
   
2-56   Vacancy
Division 8. Street Commissioner
   
2-57   Appointment; term
   
2-58   Bond
   
2-59   Duties
   
2-60   Reports and records
   
2-61   Vacancy
Division 9. Village Marshal
   
2-62   Appointment; term
   
2-63   Bond
   
2-64   Duties
   
2-65   Reports and records
   
2-66   Vacancy
Division 10. Police Constable
   
2-67   Election
   
2-68   Bond
   
2-69   Powers and duties
   
2-70   Reports and records
   
2-71   Vacancy
   
2-72   Negligence or violation of duty
Division 11. Budget Officer
   
2-72.1   Position created, appointment, etc.
   
2-72.2   Powers and duties
Article IV. Village Departments
Division 1. Department of Public Works
   
2-73   Creation; composition
   
2-74   Director of public works - office created; appointment
   
2-75   Same - compensation
   
2-76   Same - powers and duties
Division 2. Department of Finance
   
2-77   Creation; composition
   
2-78   Director of finance - office created; appointment
   
2-79   Same - compensation
   
2-80   Same - duties generally; supervision by village manager
   
2-81   Same - purchasing coordinator
   
2-82   Purchasing policy
Division 3. Police Department
   
2-84   Creation; composition
   
2-85   Director of public safety - office created
   
2-86   Same - compensation
   
2-87   Same - powers and duties
   
2-88   Deputy chiefs - powers and duties
   
2-89 - 2-90   Repealed (Ord. 90-5-1814)
   
2-91   Powers and duties of members generally
   
2-92   Appointment and discipline of members
   
2-93   Acceptance of gifts
   
2-94   Duty to report delivery of seized property, etc.
   
2-95   Badge to be worn, etc.
   
2-96   Duty of members to return property issued by the village upon
resignation, etc.
Division 4. Fire Department
   
2-97   Duties of citizens
   
2-98   Creation; composition
   
2-99 - 2-101   Repealed (Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
   
2-102   Powers and duties of members
Division 5. Health Department
   
2-103   Creation; composition
   
2-104   Health office - officer created
   
2-105   Same - appointment; qualifications
   
2-106   Same - general nature of office
   
2-107   Same - compensation
   
2-108   Same - powers and duties
   
2-109   Same - notice of violations and procedure for prosecution of violators
   
2-110   Contractual services
Article V. Boards and Commissions
Division 1. Board of Health
   
2-111   Creation; composition
   
2-112   Meetings
   
2-113   Attendance of health officer
   
2-114   Rules and regulations
   
2-115   Enforcement of orders
Division 2. Board of Local Improvements
   
2-116   Creation; composition
   
2-117   Powers and duties
   
2-118   Records
Division 3. Plan Commission
   
2-119   Creation; membership
   
2-120   Voting
   
2-121   Meetings; hearings; procedures
   
2-122   Decisions and reports
   
2-123   Comprehensive plan
   
2-124   Maps and plats of subdivisions
   
2-125   Records
   
2-126   Power and duties
Division 4. Glencoe Sustainability Task Force
   
2-127   Established; purpose; duties
   
2-128   Organization and membership
   
2-129   Rules and procedures
Division 5. Electrical Commission
   
2-130   Creation; compensation; appointment and term of members
   
2-131   Functions
Division 6. Playground Commission
   
2-132   Established; powers and duties generally
   
2-133   Composition
   
2-134   Repealed
   
2-135   Officers
   
2-136   Rule making powers; other powers enumerated
   
2-137   Contracts, etc.
   
2-138   Reports; repeal of division
Division 7. Public Safety Commission
   
2-139   Creation; composition
   
2-140   Appointment; term
   
2-141   Qualifications; oaths; bond; removal
   
2-142   Powers and duties
   
2-143   Secretary; duties; compensation
   
2-144   Members to serve without compensation
Division 8. Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
(Ord. No. 2017-2-3410)
   
2-145   Authorization
   
2-146   Reserved for future use
Division 9. Glencoe Council for Inclusion and Community
   
2-146.1   Creation
   
2-146.2   Purposes of Council
   
2-146.3   Organization and membership
   
2-146.4   Rules and procedures
Article VI. Code of Ethics
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
Division 1. General Provisions
   
2-147   Policy and purpose
   
2-148   Impartiality; special treatment of others
   
2-149   Private use of public property
   
2-150   Disclosure of confidential information
Division 2. Conflicts of Interest
   
2-151   Definitions
   
2-152   Conflicts of interest
   
2-153   Disclosure of real estate
   
2-154   Advisory opinions; ethics board
   
2-155   Effect of conflict of interest on decision
Division 3. Gift Ban and Prohibited Political Activities
   
2-156   Gift ban and prohibited political activities
   Article VII. PSEBA Policy and Procedures
(Ord. No. 2020-08-3474)
   
2-157   Purpose
   
2-158   Application process and initial review
   
2-159   Administrative hearing process; determination of hearing officer
   
2-160   Designation of basic group health insurance plan; award of benefits
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to marshal and police officers generally, etc., see
char.,
art. III, § 7
   For charter provision as to police, etc., constables, see char.,
art. III, § 9
   For charter provision as to prevention of contagious diseases, etc., see
char.,
art. IV, § 5
   For charter provisions as to fire prevention, etc., generally, see char.,
art. IV, § 13
Cross-reference:
   As interfering with, etc., firefighters, see §
24-33
   As to authority of village manager in connection with parking, see §§
23-88,
23-89
   As to authority of village manager in connection with regulation of traffic,
etc., see §§
23-59 to
23-62
   As to civil defense, see
ch. 10
   As to duty to assist firefighters, see §
24-33
   As to electrical code, see
ch. 13
   As to electrical contractors, see
ch. 14
   As to false alarms, see §
24-22
   As to fines and imprisonment, see
ch. 16
   As to fire prevention generally see
ch. 17
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
   As to loitering, etc., in fire engine rooms, etc., see §
24-36
   As to retailer's occupation tax, see
ch. 28
   As to vehicle approaching fire department vehicle, see §
23-81
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 2-1 CONTRACTS - SIGNATURES REQUIRED.
   All contracts entered into by the village shall be signed by the village
president and attested by the village clerk, unless some other officer is
specifically authorized to enter into a contract on behalf of the village.
(1929 Code, § 180)
Cross-reference:
   As to purchases and expenditures in connection with civil defense, see §
10-9
   As to procurement of services, supplies, etc., in event of disaster, see §
10-10
§ 2-2 SAME - INTEREST OF VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No officer or employee of the village shall be directly or indirectly
financially interested in any contract, work or business of the village, or the
sale of any article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from
the treasury, or by any assessment levied by any act or ordinance, or in the
purchase of any real estate or other property.
§ 2-2A OFFICERS AND OFFICIAL INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE.
   (a)   The village shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless its current and
former non-compensated trustees, commissioners, board members and officers, as
well as representatives serving on other bodies who have been appointed by the
village board of trustees, against any civil, criminal or administrative
investigation, claims, actions or proceedings, and any judgments, fines,
liabilities and other costs thereof, including reasonable attorney's fees and
any amounts paid in any settlement concurred in by the village, based upon any
act, error or omission that could reasonably be construed to be within the
exercise of their lawful duties. This section shall not apply to provide
defense or indemnification to any such trustee, commissioner, board member,
officer or representative in any such investigation, claim action or proceeding
instituted by the village against such trustee, commissioner, board member,
officer or representative.
   (b)   The foregoing rights shall not be exclusive of any other rights which
any current or former non-compensated trustee, commissioner, board member,
officer or representatives on other bodies who have been appointed by the
village board of trustees, may have as a matter of law. The foregoing rights
shall, in the case of the death of such trustee, commissioner, board member,
officer or representative, inure to the benefit of his or her successors.
   (c)   The liability of the village for payments hereunder may be insured to
the extent permitted by law but to the extent not insured shall be payable out
of the funds and monies of that village.
(Ord. No. 86-6-1727; Ord. No. 91-11-1852)
§ 2-2B EMPLOYEE INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE.
   (a)   The village shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless its current and
former employees against any civil, criminal or administrative investigations,
claims, actions or proceedings, and any judgments, fines, liabilities and other
costs thereof, including reasonable attorney's fees and any amounts paid in any
settlement concurred in by the village, based upon any act, error or omission
occurring within their scope of employment; except that any willful, wanton,
grossly negligent or intentional act of an employee shall not be protected by
the terms of this subsection. Any such costs, whether incurred or anticipated,
shall require the approval of the board of trustees in order to qualify for
indemnity, except where the village incurs such costs directly. This section
shall not apply to provide defense or indemnification to any employee in any
such investigation, claim, action or proceeding instituted by the village
against such employee.
   (b)   The foregoing rights shall not be exclusive of any other rights that
any current or former employee may have as a matter of law. The foregoing
rights shall, in the case of the death of an employee, inure to the benefit of
his or her successors.
   (c)   The liability of the village for payments hereunder may be insured to
the extent permitted by law but to the extent not insured shall be payable out
of the funds and monies of the village.
(Ord. No. 86-7-1728)
§ 2-2C GIFT BAN.
   DELETED IN ITS ENTIRETY (Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
(Ord. No. 99-10-2075; Ord. No. 04-11-3100; Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
§ 2-2D CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   Definitions. Wherever the following words or phrases are used, they
shall, for purposes of this §
2-2D, have the meanings ascribed to them in this §
2-2D(a), except when the context otherwise indicates. All words or phrases not
defined in this §
2-2D(a) shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act, as amended (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.).
      CIVIL EMERGENCY. A “disaster” as defined in the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency Act, as amended. Specifically, and without limitation of the
foregoing, a CIVIL EMERGENCY includes the appearance of a novel or previously
controlled or eradicated infectious agent or biological toxin.
   (b)   Declaration of civil emergency.
      (1)   Pursuant to the authority granted by state law, including, without
limitation, § 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code, whenever the village
president determines that a civil emergency exists in the village, the village
president shall have the extraordinary power and authority to exercise by
executive order all such powers of the corporate authorities and other officers
of the village as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to eliminate or
minimize the dangers arising from such civil emergency and for the protection
of the health, safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however,
that prior to exercising any such extraordinary power and authority, the
village president shall have executed under oath a written declaration of civil
emergency containing the following:
         A.   An express declaration that a civil emergency exists; and
         B.   A statement of facts known to the village president, either
directly or upon information and belief, which describes the nature of the
civil emergency and substantiates the finding that a civil emergency exists.
      (2)   Unless expressly stated otherwise, a declaration issued pursuant to
this §
2-2D(b) shall be considered a local disaster declaration made pursuant to § 11
of the Emergency Management Agency Act.
   (c)   Orders by the village president. The village president may, upon the
issuance of a declaration of civil emergency in accordance with §
2-2D(b) of this Code, issue orders to implement any or all of the following:
      (1)   The imposition of a curfew applicable to such geographical areas of
the village or to the village as whole, as deemed advisable by the village
president, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed
necessary by the village president in the interest of the public safety and
welfare;
      (2)   The discontinuance of selling distributing, or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (3)   The closure of any business establishment anywhere within the
village for the period of civil emergency, including, without limitation,
businesses selling intoxicating liquors, gasoline, or firearms;
      (4)   The closure of any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking
areas to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic;
      (5)   The calling upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations without or within the village to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the village;
      (6)   The authorization of the village president or the village manager
to enter into contracts for the procurement of supplies and services necessary
to address the civil emergency that would normally require the approval of the
full village board of trustees;
      (7)   The incurrence of obligations, the appropriation of funds, and the
provision of emergency assistance reasonably necessary to respond to or
mitigate the civil emergency;
      (8)   The prohibition of increases in the prices of goods and services
sold within the village; and
      (9)   Any other actions reasonably necessary to address the civil
emergency and protect life and property.
   (d)   Notice. A declaration of civil emergency shall be: (i) filed with the
village clerk as soon as practicable: (ii) promptly disseminated to the news
media; and (iii) promptly posted at the village hall, the post office, and on
the village’s social media pages and website.
   (e)   Term; extension; termination.
      (1)   Term. A declaration of civil emergency shall expire and
automatically terminate, if not extended pursuant to this §
2-2D(e) of this Code, not later than: (i) the adjournment of the first regular
or special meeting of the village board of trustees; or (ii) seven days after
the declaration is issued, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Extension. The village board of trustees may by motion extend the
initial duration of a declaration of civil emergency and any orders issued by
the village president in connection therewith. The extension shall be for the
duration necessary and in the best interest of the village and the public to
address the continuing civil emergency as determined by the village board of
trustees.
      (3)   Termination by the village president. A declaration of civil
emergency may be otherwise terminated at any time in writing and executed by
the village president.
   (f)   Violations; penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this §
2-2D or of any order issued pursuant to this §
2-2D shall be subject to penalties as provided pursuant to §
16-1 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2020-13-3479)
§ 2-2E PAID LEAVE POLICIES.
   (a)   Incorporation of recitals. The foregoing recitals shall be and are
hereby incorporated as findings of fact as if said recitals were fully set
forth herein.
   (b)   Adoption of paid leave policies.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 15(p) of the Act, the village hereby adopts its
current paid leave policies for all city/village/town employees as set forth in
the employee handbook, any employment agreements to which the village is a
party, and any collective bargaining agreements to which the village is a party
and all other binding legislative actions governing paid leave amended from
time to time. However, in no event shall the village, as an employer, provide
less than eight hours of paid leave per year to any village employee.
      (2)   This section governs over and supersedes all provisions of the Act
impacting the employment relationship between the village and its employees.
      (3)   This section, once adopted, shall apply to all employees of the
village provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to
affect the validity or change the terms of currently-existing collective
bargaining agreements to which the village is a party.
(Ord. No. 2023-32-3577)
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 2-3 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the president and board of trustees shall be held on
the third Thursday of each month in the council chambers in the village hall at
7:00 p.m. or as soon thereafter as such meeting may be called together, and may
be adjourned to such other time or place as may be designated in such meeting
or adjournments thereof.
(Ord. No. 1324; Ord. No. 99-13-2078; Ord. No. 2000-3-2085)
§ 2-4 SPECIAL MEETINGS; EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   (a)   The president or any three members of the board of trustees may call a
special meeting of the board of trustees by informing the village clerk, by
letter, telephone call or any other means, of the time, place and agenda for
the meeting. At least 48 hours before the meeting, the village clerk shall post
a public notice of the meeting at the village hall stating the time, place and
agenda of the meeting, and shall, by letter, telephone call or any other means,
inform the members of the board of trustees who did not call the meeting and
all news media which have filed with the village an annual request for notice
of such meetings of the contents of the public notice of the meeting and shall
make a copy of such notice available to all such news media.
(Ord. No. 96-16-2012)
   (b)   The chairperson or any two members of any standing or special
committee of the board of trustees may call a special meeting of such committee
by informing the village clerk, by letter, telephone call or any other means,
of the time, place and agenda for the meeting. At least 48 hours before the
meeting, the village clerk shall post a public notice of the meeting at the
village hall stating the time, place and agenda of the meeting, and shall, by
letter, telephone call or any other means, inform the members of the committee
who did not call the meeting and all news media which have filed with the
village an annual request for notice of such meetings of the contents of the
public notice of the meeting and shall make a copy of such notice available to
all such news media.
(Ord. No. 96-16-2012)
   (c)   The president or any three members of the board of trustees may call
an emergency meeting of the board of trustees by informing the village clerk,
by letter telephone call or any other means, of the time, place and agenda for
the meeting. As soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the holding of
the meeting, the village clerk shall post a public notice of the meeting at the
village hall stating the time, place and agenda, and shall, by letter,
telephone call or any other means, inform the members of the board who did not
call the meeting and all news media which have filed with the village an annual
request for notice of such meetings of the contents of the public notice of the
meeting and shall make a copy of such notice available to all such news media.
§ 2-5 COMMITTEES.
   (a)   The village president shall appoint all standing committees and
special committees, unless provision to the contrary is made by majority vote
of the elected members of the board of trustees.
   (b)   The following shall be the standing committees:
(Ord. No. 87-21-1759)
      (1)   Finance;
      (2)   Law;
      (3)   Public Works;
      (4)   Social Services;
      (5)   Golf; and
      (6)   Affordable Housing.
(Ord. No. 06-12-3154)
§ 2-6 APPROPRIATION AND TAX LEVY ORDINANCES.
   The village’s budget officer shall compile an annual budget for the village
in advance of each fiscal year and shall present the budget to the board of
trustees for consideration and approval by ordinance in the manner provided in
Sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2025-24-3629)
Charter reference:
   For charter provisions prohibiting members of council from making, etc.,
contracts with council, etc., see char.,
art. II, § 8
   As to taxes generally, see char.,
art. V, §§ 1 to
8
§ 2-7 DISTURBING MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any regular
or special meeting of the board of trustees or any committee thereof; or to
behave in a disorderly manner at any such meeting.
(1929 Code, § 7)
§ 2-8 CLERK.
   The village clerk shall act as clerk of the board of trustees, and shall
attend all meetings, receive communications addressed to the board, serve
notices, keep the necessary records and perform such other duties as clerk as
may be required by the board.
(1929 Code, § 8)
§ 2-9 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   The order of business to be observed at meetings of the board of
trustees shall be as follows:
      (1)   Roll call;
      (2)   Approval of minutes of previous meeting;
      (3)   Approval of bills;
      (4)   Reports of standing committees;
      (5)   Reports of officers;
      (6)   Reports of special committees;
      (7)   Resolutions;
      (8)   Petitions and communications;
      (9)   Unfinished business; and
      (10)   New business.
   (b)   Provided, however, that the above order of business may be suspended
upon a majority vote of all trustees present.
§ 2-10 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the board of trustees shall constitute a
quorum.
Charter reference:
   For charter provisions as to quorum, see char.,
art. II, § 5
§ 2-11 MEMBERS REQUIRED TO VOTE; VOTE NECESSARY FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES,
RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS; ABSTENTIONS.
   (a)   Every member of the board of trustees who shall be present when a
question is stated from the chair shall vote thereon unless excused by the
board, or unless he or she is directly interested in the question. The number
of votes required to pass any ordinance, resolution or motion shall be as
required by state statute.
   (b)   Except as provided in subsection
2-11(c) of this section, where no state statute specifies the number of votes
required, the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting shall be
necessary. In determining the number of affirmative votes in favor of any
proposition, only a vote of "yea," "aye," or "yes" shall be counted as an
affirmative vote. Votes of "abstain," "pass," or "present" or a refusal to vote
shall not be counted as concurring in the vote or votes of any other members of
the board of trustees, but, rather, shall be ignored in determining both the
number of affirmative votes and the number of negative votes on a proposition.
   (c)   Unless otherwise provided by state statute, any ordinance, resolution
or motion relating to zoning petitions or other petitions where such petitions
relate to specific lots, parcels or tracts of land shall be approved upon a
concurrence of a majority of those voting on such proposition in accordance
with the common law of this state.
(Ord. No. 82-16-1657; Ord. No. 2000-13-2095)
§ 2-12 WHEN VOTE RECONSIDERED.
   No vote of the board of trustees shall be reconsidered or action of the
board rescinded at a special meeting, unless at such special meeting there be
present as many trustees as were present when such vote or action was taken.
§ 2-13 RESOLUTION TO BE IN WRITING.
   All resolutions and amendments thereof shall be reduced to writing before
being presented, on request of any member of the board of trustees.
§ 2-14 DECORUM.
   Members of the board of trustees desiring to discuss a question shall
address the president, and no member shall be deemed to have the floor until
recognized by the president. No person except the president or a trustee shall
be permitted to address the board unless by unanimous consent of the members
present.
§ 2-15 ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.
   The village president shall decide all questions of order and be governed in
his or her decisions by parliamentary law, as prescribed in Robert's Rules of
Order, as revised.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Division 1. Village President
§ 2-16 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF VILLAGE, ETC.
   (a)   The village president shall be chief executive of the village and
shall perform all such duties as may be required of him or her by statute, this
code or other village ordinance.
   (b)   He or she shall have the power to settle disputes as to the
jurisdiction of the various officers and employees of the village.
§ 2-17 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The village president shall have such powers and perform such duties as may
be provided by statute, the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the
village.
§ 2-18 BOND.
   The village president shall file such bond as may be required by the board
of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 17)
§ 2-19 TO ATTEND MEETINGS OF BOARD, ETC.
   The village president shall attend all regular and special meetings of the
board of trustees, and shall preside thereat. He or she shall have a vote only
in case of a tie.
(1929 Code, § 18)
Division 2. Village Manager
§ 2-20 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of village manager, an administrative
office of the village.
§ 2-21 APPOINTMENT, TERM, QUALIFICATIONS, ETC.
   (a)   The village manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the board
of trustees for an indefinite term.
   (b)   The board shall choose him or her solely on the basis of his or her
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or
her actual experience in or his or her knowledge of accepted practice in
respect to the duties of his or her office hereinafter set forth.
   (c)   At the time of his or her appointment, he or she need not be a
resident of the village or state, but during his or her tenure of office he or
she shall reside within the village unless the board of trustees of the village
expressly agrees otherwise.
(Ord. No. 97-3-2026)
   (d)   No village trustee shall receive such appointment during the term for
which he or she shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration
of his or her term.
§ 2-22 BOND.
   The village manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the board
of trustees, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his or
her duties. The village shall pay the premium of such bond.
§ 2-23 COMPENSATION.
   The village manager shall receive compensation in such amount and manner as
the board of trustees shall fix from time to time.
§ 2-24 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   (a)   At-will employment. The board of trustees may remove the village
manager at any time by a majority vote of its members. The term of the village
manager's employment by the village shall be at the will and desire of the
village board and shall not be for a fixed or stated term. Nothing in the terms
of this code or in any employment agreement with the village manager shall
prevent, limit or otherwise interfere with the right of the village board to
terminate the services of the village manager at any time. The village manager
shall have no property or any other right to a continuation of employment as
village manager.
   (b)   Severance provisions.
      (1)   In the event that the board of trustees removes the village manager
during such time as the village manager is willing and able to perform the
duties of village manager, and provided that the village manager has not
breached any provision of any employment agreement that may have been reached
with the village, and provided further that the village manager has not been
convicted of any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, the village
board shall exercise one of the following two severance options:
         A.   The board may deliver to the village manager a written notice of
termination that will allow the village manager to serve as a consultant of the
village for a period of six months with all the salary, health, dental, life
insurance and pension benefits provided at the same level as at the time of
such notice. In addition, within 15 days after delivery of such notice of
termination, the village manager shall be entitled to receive in a lump sum
payment the cash value of 100% of his or her accrued and unused sick days as of
the date of delivery of such notice of termination. In his or her role of
consultant as herein described, the village manager shall only perform those
duties as established by the board of trustees, notwithstanding any provision
to the contrary in this code or Illinois statutes; or
         B.   The board may deliver to the village manager a written notice of
termination that will entitle the village manager to receive within 15 days
after delivery of such notice a lump sum cash payment in an amount equal to the
value of six months of the salary, health, dental, life insurance and pension
benefits provided at the time of such notice, plus the cash value of 100% of
his or her accrued and unused vacation days and 50% of his or her accrued and
unused sick days as of the date of delivery of such notice of termination.
(Ord. No. 91-21-1863)
      (2)   The severance option chosen by the board shall constitute the full
extent of the village's liability to the village manager resulting from his or
her employment as village manager, unless expressly modified by an employment
agreement between the village and the village manager.
   (c)   Reduction in salary. In the event that the village at any time reduces
the village manager's salary by a greater percentage than an applicable across-
the-board reduction for village employees, the village manager may, at his or
her option, declare his or her removal as village manager and be entitled to
the severance provisions provided in subsection
2-24(b) above.
   (d)   Voluntary termination. In the event that the village manager desires
to resign, he or she shall deliver a written notice of termination to the board
not less than 90 days prior to the effective day of his or her resignation, and
he or she shall not be entitled to any of the severance provisions provided
herein.
   (e)   Termination by death. Notwithstanding anything in this §
2-24 to the contrary, in the event of the village manager's death, any
employment agreement in force between the village and the village manager shall
terminate automatically and without any resulting liability of the village to
the village manager or his or her estate, except as provided in subsection
2-24(f) below.
   (f)   Vacation and sick pay. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
subsections
2-24(d) and
2-24(e) above, in the event the village manager resigns, or in the event of the
village manager's death, the village manager or his or her estate shall be
entitled to the full cash value of 100% of any of his or her accrued and unused
vacation days and 50% of any of his or her accrued and unused sick days as of
the date of such resignation or death.
(Ord. No. 91-21-1863)
§ 2-25 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The village manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
village. He or she may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to
the board of trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the
village. To that end, he or she shall have power and shall be required to:
   (a)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or
remove all officers and employees of the village, except as he or she may
authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove
subordinates in such department or office;
   (b)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the board of trustees
together with a message describing the important features and be responsible
for its administration after adoption;
   (c)   Keep the board of trustees advised of the financial condition and
future needs of the village, and make such recommendations as he or she may
deem desirable;
   (d)   Recommend to the board of trustees a standard schedule of pay for each
appointive office and position in the village service;
   (e)   Recommend to the board of trustees from time to time adoption of such
measures as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services;
   (f)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under
his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the board of trustees;
   (g)   Attend all meetings of the board of trustees unless excused therefrom
and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the board of
trustees;
   (h)   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget in accordance with the village’s
purchasing policy, duly adopted pursuant to § 2-82 of this code; let contracts
necessary for operation or maintenance of village services for amounts up to
and including $25,000, authorize the procurement of goods, supplies, and
equipment in amounts up to and including $25,000, and advise the board of
trustees on the advantages or disadvantages of contract and bid proposals. No
purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation incurred for any item or
service which exceeds the current appropriation without a supplemental
appropriation by the board of trustees. No contract or procurement requiring an
aggregate expenditure in excess of $25,000 and no contract for new construction
shall be let except with the approval of the board of trustees as set forth in
the village’s purchasing policy;
   (i)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;
   (j)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the village, and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the village, and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed;
   (k)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official
duties; and
   (l)   Perform such other duties as may be required by the board of trustees,
not inconsistent with the charter, law or ordinances.
   (m)   Establish and administer policies and procedures for purposes of
determining whether an employee or former employee is eligible to receive
benefits pursuant to the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq.) (“PSEBA”).
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431; Ord. No. 2020-08-3474)
§ 2-26 ABSENCE FROM VILLAGE, ETC.
   In the event that the village manager shall be absent from the village or
incapacitated from performing the duties of his or her position, he or she
shall appoint a member of the staff to act as manager during his or her absence
or incapacity.
§ 2-27 BOARD NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS, ETC.
   (a)   Neither the board of trustees nor any of its members shall direct or
request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by
the village manager or any of his or her subordinates, or in any manner take
part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the
administrative services of the village.
   (b)   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the board of trustees and its
members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the village
manager and neither the board of trustees nor any member thereof shall give
orders to any subordinates of the village manager, either publicly or
privately.
Division 3. Village Treasurer
§ 2-28 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of village treasurer.
(1929 Code, § 64)
§ 2-29 APPOINTMENT.
   The president and board of trustees shall appoint the village treasurer.
(1929 Code, § 65)
§ 2-30 COMPENSATION; BOND.
   The village treasurer shall serve without compensation, but shall furnish a
surety bond to be approved by the board of trustees, with the premium for such
bond to be paid by the village.
§ 2-31 DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The village treasurer shall have custody of all village funds, shall deposit
such funds in such depositories as are specified from time to time by the board
of trustees and shall perform such other duties as may be required by statute,
this code or other village ordinance.
(1929 Code, § 67)
§ 2-32 VILLAGE WARRANTS.
   The village treasurer shall not recognize or pay any claim excepting upon a
warrant or voucher signed by the village president and the village clerk. All
such warrants shall specify the particular fund or appropriation to which they
are chargeable, and the person to whom payable.
(1929 Code, § 68) (Ord. No. 87-8-1746)
§ 2-33 RECEIPT OF INTEREST AND MONEY.
   The village treasurer shall receive all interest on village funds due from
depositories or from other sources and shall receive all monies belonging to
the village. All such monies shall be credited to the proper accounts of the
village.
§ 2-34 MAINTENANCE OF BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS; REPORTS.
   The village treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required
by the village manager or by the board of trustees, and shall render monthly
reports showing the state of the treasury at the termination of the month, and
such other reports as may be required by the board of trustees.
Division 4. Village Clerk
§ 2-35 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The village president and the board of trustees shall appoint a village
clerk, who shall hold his or her office for the term of two years from and
after the first regular meeting of the board of trustees in the month of May of
the year in which he or she shall be appointed and until his or her successor
shall be appointed and shall have qualified.
(1929 Code, art. I, § 21)
§ 2-36 COMPENSATION; BOND.
   The village clerk shall serve without compensation, but shall furnish a
surety bond to be approved by the board of trustees, with the premium for such
bond to be paid by the village.
§ 2-37 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (a)   The village clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the board of trustees
and in addition to the duties required to be performed by the clerk of the
board as set forth in the charter of the village, it shall be the duty of the
village clerk to keep his or her office at the village hall and to make copies
of all ordinances, resolutions and other papers duly filed in his or her office
and transcripts from the journals and other records and files of his or her
office, certified by him or her under the corporate seal, to be furnished to
any of the trustees or officers of the village without the payment of any fee
therefor, and to be furnished to all other persons upon the payment of the fee
therefor prescribed by ordinance.
   (b)   It shall also be the duty of the village clerk to perform such other
duties and functions as may be prescribed by the board of trustees.
§ 2-38 POSTING, ETC., OF ORDINANCES.
   The village clerk, in a book to be kept for that purpose, before the next
regular meeting after their passage shall record all ordinances passed by the
board of trustees of the village. The village clerk shall also post copies of
such ordinances in three of the most public places in the village, as
designated by ordinance, and not later than 30 days after the passage thereof,
and shall note at the foot of the record of each ordinance a memorandum showing
the date of the passage and approval of such ordinance and the date of posting
such ordinance after the passage thereof.
§ 2-39 DOCKETING AND FILING DOCUMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the village clerk to number, docket and file in
regular order all official documents coming into his or her custody and control
as such officer, indexing the same in such a manner that they can be readily
referred to at all times.
(1929 Code, § 25)
§ 2-40 NOTIFICATION OF PERSONS OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the village clerk within five days after the result
of any election is declared or appointment made, to notify all persons elected
or appointed to any village office of their election or appointment; and unless
such persons shall respectively qualify within ten days after such notice, the
respective offices shall thereby become vacant.
(1929 Code, § 26)
Division 5. Village Attorney
§ 2-41 OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of village attorney. The village
president and board of trustees shall appoint the village attorney.
§ 2-42 COMPENSATION.
   The village attorney shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the
village president and board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 51)
§ 2-43 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The village attorney shall hold office for the term of one year, and until
his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified. He or she shall be
appointed upon the first regular meeting of the board of trustees in the month
of May of each year or as soon thereafter as may be.
(1929 Code, § 49)
§ 2-44 DUTIES.
   The village attorney shall superintend and conduct all law business of the
village, excepting local improvements or condemnation proceedings, or either
prepare and draft ordinances and legal documents and render legal opinions when
requested by the village president or board of trustees on all questions
concerning the village interests; attend the meetings of the president and
board of trustees when required; make reports from time to time and otherwise
perform such other duties or special services within the county which the
president and board of trustees may require.
(1929 Code, § 50)
§ 2-45 VACANCY.
   Appointment of the president and board of trustees shall fill vacancies in
the office of village attorney.
(1929 Code, § 52)
§ 2-46 SPECIAL COUNSEL.
   The board of trustees may, by a majority vote of its members, employ
attorneys to conduct all legal matters pertaining to the making of local
improvements, the assessment and confirmation of special assessments and the
collection of the same and condemnation proceedings. It may also, by majority
vote, employ attorneys to assist the village attorney in any legal matter or
proceeding, or to conduct any particular legal matter or proceeding.
(1929 Code, § 52a)
Division 6. Village Collector
§ 2-47 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The president and the board of trustees shall appoint a village collector,
who shall hold his or her office for the term of one year from and after the
first regular meeting of the board of trustees in the month of May of the year
in which he or she shall be appointed and until his or her successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified.
(1929 Code, § 28)
§ 2-48 BOND.
   The village collector shall file such bond with the village clerk before
entering upon the duties of his or her office as may be required by the board
of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 29)
§ 2-49 DUTIES.
   The village collector shall perform such duties as may be required of him or
her by the village charter, or by any other statute or by this code or other
village ordinance.
(1929 Code, § 30)
§ 2-50 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The village collector shall make such reports and keep such records as may
be required from time to time by the board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 31)
§ 2-51 VACANCY.
   In case of the village collector's office becoming vacant, the president and
board of trustees shall appoint a successor to serve out the term, as is
provided by
§ 1 of article III of the village charter.
(1929 Code, § 32)
Division 7. Village Prosecutor
§ 2-52 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor, an administrative
office of the village.
(Ord. No. 1415)
§ 2-53 APPOINTMENT.
   The village manager shall appoint the village prosecutor.
(Ord. No. 1415)
§ 2-54 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the village prosecutor to prepare and prosecute all
suits or actions involving violations of this code or other village ordinances
and of the statutes of the state, which are authorized by law to be instituted
before the police magistrate of the village. The village prosecutor is
authorized to prosecute misdemeanor offenses if enumerated both under this code
and a statute of the state pursuant to the authority granted by § 1-21.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65ILCS 5/1-2-1.1) and the Village’s police powers. The
village prosecutor shall also furnish legal advice to the officers of the
police department of the village, to other members of the village organization
and to the general public interested in suits or actions within the
jurisdiction of the village. The village prosecutor shall file a written
monthly report with the village manager containing information concerning the
work of his or her office during the preceding month.
(Ord. No. 1415; Ord. 2024-14-3591)
§ 2-55 COMPENSATION.
   The village manager with the approval of the board of trustees shall fix the
salary of the village prosecutor.
(Ord. No. 1415)
§ 2-56 VACANCY.
   Vacancies in the office of village prosecutor shall be filled by appointment
of the village manager.
(Ord. No. 1415)
Division 8. Street Commissioner
§ 2-57 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   Pursuant to § 3-8-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code and notwithstanding any
provision of the village charter of the contrary, the village president and
board of trustees shall appoint a street commissioner, who shall hold his or
her office for the term of one year from and after the first regular meeting of
the board of trustees in the month of May of each year or as soon thereafter as
possible and until his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified.
(Ord. No. 85-16-1721)
§ 2-58 BOND.
   The street commissioner shall file bond with the village clerk before
entering upon the duties of his or her office as may be required by the board
of trustees.
§ 2-59 DUTIES.
   The street commissioner shall perform such duties as may be required of him
or her by the village charter or any other statute or by this code or other
village ordinance.
§ 2-60 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The street commissioner shall make such reports and keep such records as may
be required from time to time by the board of trustees.
§ 2-61 VACANCY.
   Vacancies in the office of street commissioner shall be filled by
appointment of the president and board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 85-16-1721)
Division 9. Village Marshal
§ 2-62 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The village president and board of trustees shall appoint a village marshal,
who shall hold his or her office for the term of one year from and after the
first regular meeting of the board of trustees in the month of May of the year
in which he or she shall be appointed and until his or her successor shall be
appointed and shall have qualified.
(Ord. No. 1278)
§ 2-63 BOND.
   The village marshal shall file such bond with the village clerk before
entering upon the duties of his or her office as may be required by the board
of trustees.
§ 2-64 DUTIES.
   The village marshal shall perform such duties as may be required of him or
her by the village charter, or by any other statute or by this code or other
village ordinance.
§ 2-65 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The village marshal shall make such reports and keep such records as may be
required from time to time by the board of trustees.
§ 2-66 VACANCY.
   In case of the village marshal's office becoming vacant, the president and
the board of trustees shall appoint a successor to serve out the term, as is
provided by
§ 1 of article III of the village charter.
Division 10. Police Constable
§ 2-67 ELECTION.
   There shall be elected a police constable, as is provided by
§ 1 of article III of the village charter.
§ 2-68 BOND.
   The police constable shall file such bond with the village clerk before
entering upon the duties of his or her office as may be required by the board
of trustees.
§ 2-69 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The police constable shall have such powers and perform such duties as may
be required of him or her by the village charter or by any other statute or by
this code or other village ordinance.
§ 2-70 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The police constable shall make such reports and keep such records as may be
required from time to time by the board of trustees.
§ 2-71 VACANCY.
   In case of the police constable's office becoming vacant, the president and
the board of trustees shall appoint a successor to serve out the term, as is
provided by
§ 1 of article III of the village charter.
§ 2-72 NEGLIGENCE OR VIOLATION OF DUTY.
   For negligence or violation of duty, the police constable shall be subject
to the penalties provided by
§ 9 of article III of the village charter.
DIVISION 11. BUDGET OFFICER
§ 2-72.1 POSITION CREATED, APPOINTMENT, ETC.
   There is hereby created the position of budget officer. The village
treasurer is designated as the village’s budget officer.
(Ord. No. 2025-24-3629)
§ 2-72.2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The budget officer shall perform the duties and responsibilities of
the budget officer as provided in Section 8-2-9.1 et seq. of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 et seq.), commencing with the preparation of
the budget for the calendar fiscal year beginning January 1, 2026.
   (b)   The budget officer may, with the approval of the village manager,
transfer funds within the approved annual budget upon submission of a proper
request from the head of any village department, board or commission and
subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   Transfer may not be made between or among funds;
      (2)   Transfers may not be made between or among departments, boards or
commissions;
      (3)   Transfers may be made:
         a.   Between or among subclasses within an object class; and
         b.   Between or among object classes;
      Provided, however, that each such transfer shall be within the same fund
and provided further that, where more than one department, commission or
division is within a fund, each such transfer shall be within that department,
commission or division;
      (4)   Transfers shall not exceed the village manager’s purchasing limit
as established in this code;
      (5)   Transfers to or from a particular account shall not exceed a
reasonable number in each fiscal year, as determined by the budget officer and
village manager; and
      (6)   Transfers may be made from one account to one or more other
accounts only if, at the time of the transfer, sufficient uncommitted and
unspent funds are in the account from which the funds are to be transferred.
(Ord. No. 2025-24-3629)
ARTICLE IV. VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
Division 1. Department of Public Works
§ 2-73 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the department of public works, an administrative
department of the village. This department shall consist of a director of
public works and such other officers and employees as may be provided from time
to time by the board of trustees.
§ 2-74 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS - OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the office of director of public works, an
administrative office of the village. The director of public works shall be
appointed by the village manager.
Cross-reference:
   As to approval of premises for public amusements by director of public
works, see §
5-11
§ 2-75 SAME - COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the director of public works shall be fixed by the village
manager with the approval of the board of trustees.
§ 2-76 SAME - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The director of public works shall have charge of the maintenance of
all public streets, alleys, roads, bridges, culverts, sidewalks and other
structures pertaining thereto in the village.
   (b)   He or she shall have charge of the operation and maintenance of all
public sewers and drains in the village.
   (c)   He or she shall have charge of the maintenance of trees located in the
public streets and upon other public property.
   (d)   He or she shall have charge of all buildings, grounds and equipment
belonging to the village, except that which is expressly delegated to the
supervision of other officers and departments.
   (e)   He or she shall have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage,
ashes, rubbish and other waste.
   (f)   He or she shall supervise the construction, erection, alteration,
maintenance, repair, removal and inspection of all buildings, walls, structures
or portions thereof, and all accessories thereto, within the village, and shall
enforce all provisions of this code and other ordinances relating thereto.
   (g)   He or she shall supervise the construction, installation, alteration,
repair and inspection of all plumbing installations and house connections to
sewers within the village, and shall enforce all provisions of this code and
other ordinances relating thereto.
   (h)   He or she shall supervise the construction, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, removal and inspection of all tanks or containers for the
storage or use of inflammable liquids and equipment for the use and sale of
inflammable liquids within the village, as regulated by this code.
   (i)   He or she shall issue all permits provided by the building, plumbing,
electrical and zoning regulations of the village and shall perform such other
specific duties as are provided therein.
   (j)   He or she shall appoint and remove such employees, inspectors and
assistants as he or she may require, and prescribe the duties thereof subject
to the approval of the village manager.
   (k)   He or she shall perform the duties of village engineer.
   (l)   He or she shall supervise the regulation of the installation,
alteration and use of all electrical equipment.
   (m)   He or she shall have charge of the village waterworks and water
distribution system and all property pertaining thereto. He or she shall manage
and operate the village waterworks and shall be responsible for the efficiency
thereof.
   (n)   He or she shall enforce all ordinances, rules and regulations relating
to the operation of the department of public works.
   (o)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the
village manager.
Division 2. Department of Finance
§ 2-77 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the Department of Finance, an administrative
department of the village. The Department of Finance shall consist of a
Director of Finance and such other officers and employees as may be provided
from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
§ 2-78 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE - OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the Office of Director of Finance, an Administrative
Office of the village. The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the
Village Manager.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
§ 2-79 SAME - COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Director of Finance shall be fixed by the Village Manager
with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
§ 2-80 SAME - DUTIES GENERALLY; SUPERVISION BY VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (a)   The Director of Finance shall be head of the Department of Finance,
and in addition to the duties required by state law he or she shall have the
following duties, functions and responsibilities:
      (1)    Preparation of proposed annual budgets, appropriation ordinances
and tax levy ordinances;
      (2)   Supervision of expenditures;
      (3)   Maintenance of all financial records of the village;
      (4)   Centralized purchasing covering all purchases by the village in
accordance with the village's purchasing policies;
      (5)   Preparation of financial reports and statements;
      (6)   Personnel administration, particularly as it relates to
recruitment, position classification and salary administration; and
      (7)   Billing and collection of bills for water utility use and other
services rendered by the village.
   (b)   The Director of Finance, in performance of his or her duties, shall be
subject to the control and direction of the Village Manager. He or she shall
perform such other services, within or without the Department of Finance, as
may be required by the Village Manager.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
§ 2-81 SAME - PURCHASING COORDINATOR.
   The Director of Finance shall be ex officio Purchasing Coordinator for the
village, and shall purchase all supplies, services and materials for use in all
departments of the village upon the requisition of the proper officer of the
department requiring same, and upon approval of the Village Manager and in
compliance with the village's purchasing policy. The Purchasing Coordinator
shall be responsible for the dissemination and enforcement of the purchasing
policy and shall from time to time recommend appropriate amendments and updates
to the purchasing policy.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
§ 2-82 PURCHASING POLICY.
   (a)   The purchasing and contracting for goods and services shall be
governing by a purchasing policy adopted by the Village Board of Trustees. The
purchasing policy shall govern the means of and standards for:
      (1)   The solicitation of quotes, bids, and proposals;
      (2)   The selection of responsible bidders and qualified proposers;
      (3)   The award of contracts to selected bidders and proposers.
   (b)   The purchasing policy shall conform to, and incorporate by reference,
all applicable state laws regarding the procurement of goods and services by
the village. The purchasing policy may be amended by resolution of the Village
Board of Trustees duly adopted.
(Ord. No. 2017-23-3431)
Division 3. Department of Public Safety
§ 2-84 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a department of public safety, an administrative
department of the village. The department of public safety shall consist of a
director of public safety, two deputy chiefs of public safety and such other
members and non-sworn employees as may be authorized by the board of trustees.
For the purpose of applying the provisions of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners Act, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., the department of public safety
shall be considered a regularly-constituted police department and a regularly
constituted fire department.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814; Ord. No. 2001-11-3028)
§ 2-85 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY - OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of director of public safety, an
administrative office of the village. The director of public safety is and
shall serve as the chief of police and fire chief of the village. The director
of public safety shall be appointed by the village manager and shall serve
until such time as he or she resigns or is removed or discharged by the village
manager; provided, however, that no such removal or discharge shall become
effective unless confirmed by a majority of the corporate authorities in
accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, § 10-2.1-4.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
§ 2-86 SAME - COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the director of public safety shall be fixed by the village
manager with the approval of the board of trustees.
§ 2-87 SAME - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The director of public safety shall have charge and control over the
department of public safety, and shall be responsible for the faithful and
efficient conduct and operation of the department, including police, fire and
emergency medical service operations.
   (b)   He or she shall enforce all provisions of this code and other
ordinances of the village and all statutes and laws effective in the village;
shall appoint the deputy chiefs of public safety; shall preserve order and
prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof; shall mitigate the
results and render aid in the case of accident or disaster; shall prevent and
extinguish accidental or destructive fires; and shall perform such other duties
in the preservation of life and property as may be assigned by the village
manager; shall be the keeper of the village jail and shall have custody of all
persons incarcerated therein; shall have custody of all apparatus and property
pertaining to the public safety responsibilities of the department; and shall
keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the village
manager. He or she shall have the power to appoint and remove non-sworn
employees of the department, to adopt rules to govern the operation of the
department and the conduct of its members and employees, to determine by rule
the title and order or rank of positions within the department, to designate
which positions within the department are entry level positions, which are
promotional positions and which are duty assignment positions and to fix the
duties of all members and employees of the department, all subject to approval
of the village manager.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814; Ord. No. 2001-11-3028)
   (c)   In addition, the director of public safety shall have power to assign
members of the department, for the purpose of training and improvement in their
knowledge and efficiency, to attend training schools and other training
facilities outside the village. Members of the department who may be so
assigned shall be considered as being on duty in the same manner as though
assigned to duty at the village public safety department.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
§ 2-88 DEPUTY CHIEFS - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Two deputy chiefs of public safety shall be appointed by the director of
public safety from any rank of sworn, full-time members of the department of
public safety and must have at least five years of full-time service as a
member in the department. The deputy chiefs of public safety shall be an exempt
rank immediately below that of the director of public safety. The deputy chiefs
of public safety shall serve at the discretion of the director of public safety
and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately
prior to appointment to the position of deputy chief of public safety.
(Ord. No. 2001-11-3028)
§§ 2-89 - 2-90  REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
§ 2-91 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS GENERALLY.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the members of the department of public safety
to enforce all of the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the
village and all statutes and laws effective in the village; to preserve order
and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof; to mitigate
the results and render aid in the case of accident or disaster; to prevent and
extinguish accidental or destructive fires, and to perform such other duties in
the preservation of life and property as may be assigned.
   (b)   Every member of the department is hereby declared to be a conservator
of the peace.
   (c)   All members of the department shall be authorized to serve writs,
summonses and other processes.
   (d)   Each member of the department shall have all the responsibility,
authority and liability prescribed by statute or ordinance for police officers
or firefighters; provided, however, that this provision shall not, from and
after March 1, 1982, be construed to disqualify members of the department from
being considered as "full-time police officers" or "full-time firefighters" for
purposes of the application of Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, § 10-2.1-26.
§ 2-92 APPOINTMENT AND DISCIPLINE OF MEMBERS.
   From and after March 1, 1982, the appointment, promotion, discipline,
removal and discharge of members of the department of public safety, other than
the director and the two deputy chiefs, shall be in accordance with the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners Act, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., and the rules
and regulations of the public safety commissioners of the Village of Glencoe
established pursuant to division 7 of this article V of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814; Ord. No. 2001-11-3028)
§ 2-93 ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS.
   No member of the department of public safety shall, for his or her own
benefit, share in any present, gift or emolument for public safety services
without the consent of the village manager.
§ 2-94 DUTY TO REPORT DELIVERY OF SEIZED PROPERTY, ETC.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the department of public safety to
report to the director of public safety at such times and places as may be
required, at all times to obey the orders and instructions of the director of
public safety, and also to deliver to the director of public safety all
property seized or found by them immediately after the same shall come into
their possession, which property, with the date of delivery and a description
of the same, and name of the member, shall be entered in a book to be kept for
the purpose by the director of public safety or his or her designee.
§ 2-95 BADGE TO BE WORN, ETC.
   Every member of the department of public safety shall wear a suitable badge
to be furnished by the village. Any member of the public safety department who
shall destroy his or her badge, or any other article issued him or her by the
village shall be required to pay the cost of replacing it.
§ 2-96 DUTY OF MEMBERS TO RETURN PROPERTY ISSUED BY THE VILLAGE UPON
RESIGNATION, ETC.
   Whenever any member of the department of public safety shall leave, resign,
be suspended or discharged, he or she shall immediately deliver his or her
badge and all other property of the village issued to him or her to the
director of public safety and any pay due or to become due such member shall be
withheld until such property has been returned.
Division 4. Fire Department
§ 2-97 DUTIES OF CITIZENS.
   It shall be the duty of all persons when called upon by a member of the
department of public safety to promptly aid and assist the officer in the
discharge of his or her duties.
§ 2-98 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a fire department, an administrative department of
the village. The fire department shall consist of a director of public safety,
chief of police and fire chief and such other members as may be authorized by
the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
§§ 2-99 - 2-101 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 90-5-1814)
§ 2-102 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the members of the fire department to prevent
and extinguish accidental or destructive fires; to mitigate the results and
render aid in the case of accident or disaster; to preserve order and prevent
infractions of the law and to arrest violators thereof; to enforce all the
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the village and all statutes
and laws effective in the village, and to perform such other duties in the
preservation of life and property as may be assigned.
   (b)   All members of the fire department shall be authorized to serve writs,
summonses and other processes.
   (c)   Each member of the department shall have all the responsibility,
authority and liability prescribed by statute, this code or other village
ordinances for firefighters or police officers.
Division 5. Health Department
§ 2-103 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the department of health, an administrative
department of the village. This department shall consist of the health officer
and such other members as may be authorized by the board of trustees.
§ 2-104 HEALTH OFFICER - OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of health officer, an administrative
office of the village.
§ 2-105 SAME - APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The village manager shall appoint as health officer a person suitable
trained or experienced in public health administration.
§ 2-106 SAME - GENERAL NATURE OF OFFICE.
   The health officer shall be head of the department of health and shall be
responsible to the village manager for the efficient administration of this
department.
§ 2-107 SAME - COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the health officer and his or her deputies and employees, if
not otherwise provided for, shall be fixed by the village manager with the
approval of the board of trustees.
§ 2-108 SAME - POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer and his or her duly authorized
deputies to execute and enforce all statutes of the state, provisions of this
code and other ordinances of the village, and regulations and rules of the
board of health, relating to health, and to take such other action as is
necessary for the determination of the status of and the promotion and
improvement of the public health, not inconsistent with the foregoing statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations. The health officer shall have the power to
appoint and remove and to fix the duties of his or her deputies and other
employees of the health department, subject to the approval of the village
manager.
§ 2-109 SAME - NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS AND PROCEDURE FOR PROSECUTION OF VIOLATORS.
   When it appears that any health ordinance or regulation of the board of
health has been violated, the health officer shall cause notice of such fact to
be given to the person concerned, who shall be given an opportunity to be heard
concerning such alleged violation. The notice shall specify the date, hour and
place of hearing and the hearing shall be private. If, after such hearing, the
health officer or other legally qualified authority shall believe the ordinance
or regulation has been violated, he or she shall cause the party to be
prosecuted.
§ 2-110 CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.
   If the village enters into a cooperative public health agreement with
another municipality for health services, by contract approved by the board of
trustees, the personnel of that health department, including the health
officer, shall be considered officers and employees of the village.
ARTICLE V. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Division 1. Board of Health
§ 2-111 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created and established a board of health for the village.
This board shall consist of the president of the village, who shall be ex
officio a member of the board of health and the board of trustees.
§ 2-112 MEETINGS.
   The board of health shall meet at such times and places as it may determine.
§ 2-113 ATTENDANCE OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   The board of health may require the health officer to attend any of its
meetings, and to give to the board such information or advice as it may desire.
§ 2-114 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   The board of health shall have the power to make reasonable rules and
regulations for the protection and betterment of the health of the residents of
the village, for the abatement of nuisances to health and for the prevention
and suppression of disease. Such rules and regulations shall take effect and be
in force ten days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the village, except in cases of emergency as hereinafter provided for.
   (b)   In case of contagious or epidemic disease, or of danger from
anticipated or impending contagious or epidemic disease, or in case the
sanitary condition of the village shall be so dangerous as to warrant it, it
shall be the duty of the board of health to make such rules and regulations,
and to take such measures, and to do and order to be done and caused to be done
such acts for the preservation of the public health, though not herein or
elsewhere or otherwise specifically authorized, as it may in good faith believe
and declare the public safety and health demand.
   (c)   All such rules and regulations so declared by the board of health to
be emergency rules and regulations shall take effect immediately, or as soon as
may be, after the promulgation of the same by the board of health. Such
emergency rules and regulations shall also be published in such manner as the
board of health shall determine, with notice that they are in force in the
village.
§ 2-115 ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the health department, and of every
member of the police and fire departments, to aid in the enforcement of any
order issued by the board of health.
Division 2. Board of Local Improvements
§ 2-116 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established a board of local improvements for the village,
which shall consist of the village president and the board of trustees.
§ 2-117 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The board of local improvements shall have such powers and duties as are or
may be given to it by the statutes of the state, the provisions of this code or
any other ordinance of the village.
§ 2-118 RECORDS.
   The board of local improvements shall keep adequate records of all work
undertaken by it, showing the work undertaken, the work accomplished, the
expenditures made and the amount of money received.
Division 3. Plan Commission
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-119 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (a)   There is hereby established a plan commission for the village to be
known as the "Glencoe plan commission." The Glencoe plan commission shall have
all the powers set forth in this division of this code.
   (b)   (1)   The Glencoe plan commission shall consist of the following
members:
         A.   A member of the board of trustees of the village appointed by the
village president, upon approval of the board of trustees;
(Ord. No. 96-12-2008)
         B.   The chief executive of each of the following boards, as ex
officio members: Glencoe elementary school district board; Glencoe park
recreation district board; and Glencoe library board; provided, however, that,
if ever the chief executive of any such board is unable to attend a meeting of
the plan commission, that chief executive's designee from such board shall
serve on the plan commission in that chief executive's absence;
         C.   Four members from the citizens of the village at large appointed
by the village president, upon approval of the board of trustees;
         D.   One member from the zoning board of appeals appointed by the
village president, upon approval of the board of trustees; and
         E.   One member from the historic preservation commission appointed by
the village president, upon approval of the board of trustees.
      (2)   All members shall be residents of the village. The terms of the
members appointed from the zoning board of appeals and historic preservation
commission shall be coincident with their respective terms on such bodies. The
members appointed at large shall serve from the time of appointment until May 1
following a regular election for the of office of village president. The
members now serving shall continue to exercise all the powers and be subject to
all the duties of members during the balance of their respective terms of
office and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The village
president shall have the power to remove any member for cause and after a
public hearing. A vacancy that may occur shall be filled for the balance of the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original selection or appointment for
the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
selection or appointment. All appointments of successors upon the expiration of
any term of any member shall be for the same period of time as the original
selection or appointment and until a successor has been appointed and has
qualified for office. All members of the plan commission shall serve without
compensation.
   (c)   The village president, upon approval of the board of trustees, shall
name one at large member of the plan commission as chairperson to preside at
all public meetings and hearings and to fulfill the customary functions of that
of office, and another member as vice chairperson. The chairperson and vice
chairperson may administer oaths. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice
chairperson or, in the absence of the vice chairperson, a temporary chairperson
designated by the members of the plan commission, shall act as chairperson and
shall have all the powers of the chairperson. The vice chairperson shall have
such other powers and duties as may from time to time be provided by thee rules
of the plan commission.
   (d)   The village manager shall designate a staff secretary of the plan
commission, who shall attend all meetings and perform all administrative and
recordkeeping duties of the plan commission.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-120 VOTING.
   (a)   No business shall be transacted by the plan commission without a
quorum, consisting of a majority of the members, being present. The concurring
vote of a majority of the members present shall be necessary on any motion to
approve any matter or any application. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even
if a majority of those voting, shall be considered a final decision to deny of
such matter or application. If less than a quorum is present, the public
hearing or meeting may be adjourned from time to time as provided in the
Illinois Open Meetings Act. The secretary shall in writing notify all members
of the date of the adjourned public hearing or meeting and shall also notify
such other interested parties as may be designated in the vote of adjournment.
   (b)   No member absent from any portion of a hearing shall be qualified to
vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first certify on the record
that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such portion of the
hearing during which he or she was absent and has fully informed himself or
herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter being heard so as to be
able to cast an informed and independent vote.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-121 MEETINGS; HEARINGS; PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Regular meetings of the plan commission shall be held in accordance
with the annual schedule posted in the manager's office when matters have been
placed on the agenda, and at such other times as the members of the plan
commission may determine.
   (b)   All meetings and hearings of the plan commission shall be open to the
public except when closed pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act.
   (c)   The plan commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the
conduct of its business not inconsistent with this code and the statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   (d)   The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes; all applications,
requests and papers filed in any proceeding before the plan commission; and the
decision and report, or reports, of the plan commission shall constitute the
record.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-122 DECISIONS AND REPORTS.
   (a)   Every decision of the plan commission upon an application filed
pursuant to this code shall be memorialized in a written resolution stating the
pertinent facts, evidence or considerations supporting the decision. Every
resolution shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions recommended
or imposed by the plan commission. Such resolution may be incorporated into the
minutes of the plan commission.
   (b)   The plan commission may take final action on any decision pertaining
to an application pending before it prior to the preparation of a written
resolution, but in such event it shall, before taking such action, first state
its findings and conclusions as above required at a meeting open to the public.
The plan commission's decision shall be deemed made as of the date of the
taking of such final action. The written resolution incorporating such findings
and conclusions shall be presented and approved at the next regular public
meeting of the plan commission.
   (c)   As to other matters brought before the plan commission, the plan
commission shall prepare such report as it shall deem appropriate to the
subject matter.
   (d)   No member of the plan commission shall participate in the hearing or
disposition of any matter in which that member has an interest. Any conflict of
interest prohibited by the Glencoe village code or state law shall disqualify a
member.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-123 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   (a)   The Glencoe plan commission shall have the power to prepare and
recommend to the board of trustees a comprehensive plan of public improvements
looking to the present and future development of the village, which plan, after
its adoption by the board of trustees, shall be known as the official plan of
the village. Such plan may include reasonable requirements in reference to
streets, alleys and public grounds in unsubdivided land within the village or
in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the
corporate limits and not included in any city, village or incorporated town.
Such requirements shall be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided
after the adoption of such plan.
   (b)   The Glencoe plan commission also shall prepare and recommend to the
board of trustees from time to time changes in the official plan; prepare and
recommend to the board of trustees from time to time plans for specific
improvements in pursuance of such of fiscal plans; give aid to the officials of
the village charged with the direction of projects for improvement embraced
within the official plan; further the making of such improvements, and shall
generally promote the realization of official plans and exercise such other
powers, germane to the powers granted by the statute, as may be conferred by
the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-124 MAPS AND PLATS OF SUBDIVISIONS.
   No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within
the village or within contiguous territory which is not more that one and one-
half miles beyond the corporate limits of the village and not included in any
city, village or incorporated town, after the adoption of the fiscal plan,
shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision provides
for streets, alleys and public grounds in conformity with the applicable
requirements of the official plan and the subdivision regulations of the
village.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-125 RECORDS.
   The Glencoe plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings
which shall be open to inspection by the board of trustees at all times.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 2-126 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to the powers and duties conferred on it by state statutes and
other codes and ordinances of the village, the plan commission shall have the
following powers and duties:
   (a)   To aid and assist the board of trustees and the departments of the
village in implementing general plans and in planning, developing and
completing specific projects;
   (b)   To review and report on any matters referred to it by the board of
trustees of the village manager;
   (c)   Upon reasonable written request, to make its special knowledge and
expertise available to any official, department, board or commission of the
village, county, state or federal governments to aid them in the performance of
their respective duties relating to the planning and development of the village
and its region; and
   (d)   To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by this
code and state statute, as may be conferred by the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 94-15-1951; Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
Division 4. Glencoe Sustainability Task Force
§ 2-127 ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE; DUTIES.
   (a)   There is hereby established a body that shall be known as the Glencoe
Sustainability Task Force ("GSTF").
   (b)   It shall be the intent and purpose of the GSTF to be a recommending
body with the following goals:
      (1)   To promote the conservation of natural resources and the
environment;
      (2)   To encourage environmentally sound and economically viable
practices for the maintenance of buildings, landscape, and structures in
residential, commercial, and public areas of the village; and
      (3)   To serve as a resource to the Village Board and the community
through environmental awareness programs and initiatives.
   (c)   The GSTF's duties shall consist of, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Sponsor awareness programs and pilot projects that encourage the
public to develop environmental sustainability measures that enhance health and
safety, reduce the consumption of energy and fossil fuels, conserve water,
reduce hazardous and solid waste, and reduce air pollution emissions;
      (2)   Reinforce alliances with sustainability organizations in order to
learn from, collaborate with, and share information;
      (3)   Explore grants and alternative funding to support the goals of the
GSTF, including but not limited to energy efficiency and cycling/walking
transit network improvements;
      (4)   Encourage collaboration and resource sharing between local
organizations, businesses, schools, and other agencies to partner in
sustainability initiatives that improve efficiencies;
      (5)   Encourage multi-agency initiatives to link local and regional bike/
pedestrian paths;
      (6)   Provide reviews of the Village Code, when directed, to remain
current with green building technologies and initiatives, making
recommendations for potential changes;
      (7)   Actively maintain and update the established sustainability portion
on the village website;
      (8)   Engage and participate in various studies as directed by the
Village Board; and
      (9)   Perform such other duties and functions as may be requested by the
Village Board.
(Ord. No. 2022-16-3536)
§ 2-128 ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   The maximum number of members of the GSTF shall be set by the Village Board
by resolution duly adopted. The Village President and Board of Trustees, in
appointing members to the GSTF, shall consider benefits to the village and its
residents of having members whose training, interest, background or experience
will aid the Task Force in its work.
   (a)   The Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees,
shall appoint all members and the chair of the GSTF. The chair shall set the
meeting agenda and shall preside over each meeting of the GSTF. All vacancies
shall be filled by appointment by the Village President, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees, for the unexpired term. Any member may be removed by the
Village President without hearing for failure to attend three consecutive
meetings, or otherwise for cause after a public hearing.
   (b)   Each member of the GSTF shall be a resident of the village and shall
serve without compensation. Any appointed member who ceases to be a resident
will be deemed to have resigned from the GSTF.
   (c)   The term of office of each member shall be for three years. If the
Village Board reduces the membership of the GSTF by resolution duly adopted,
the reduction will not serve to terminate any current member's term. All
members whose terms continue beyond the date which the reduction becomes
effective shall continue in office until the end of their term. Any reduction
in membership may only be effectuated through the natural expiration of terms
or resignations of members.
   (d)   The Village Manager shall staff the GSTF with a secretary, who shall
be a village employee. The secretary shall take minutes of each meeting and
distribute copies of the official minutes to the Village President, Board of
Trustees, Village Manager/Clerk and the GSTF members, and shall assist the GSTF
in preparing its annual report and other reports as necessary.
   (e)   Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the GSTF
shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation
ordinance and annual budget of the village, or as otherwise specifically
approved by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. No. 2022-16-3536)
§ 2-129 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The GSTF shall meet at least quarterly on a day and time designated by
it and may meet at other times upon the request of the Village President or the
chair, or any two members of the GSTF. The facilities of the Village Hall shall
be available to the GSTF for its meetings.
   (b)   The GSTF may adopt rules of order and procedure as it may deem
necessary and advisable. These rules and procedures may be changed or altered
as shall be consistent with village ordinances and other applicable laws.
   (c)   A majority of the currently appointed members of the GSTF shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business, notwithstanding
the number of open seats on the GSTF. Any action or recommendation shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of members in attendance.
   (d)   Each member of the GSTF shall have one vote and the chair shall have
the right to vote on all matters coming before the GSTF.
   (e)   All meetings of the GSTF shall be open to the public. The GSTF shall
keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open to public
inspection as required under the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   (f)   The GSTF, through its chair or other designated member, shall report
at least annually in writing to the Board of Trustees and the Village Manager,
and at such additional times as requested by the Village President. The annual
report shall cover the activities of the GSTF for the preceding calendar year.
(Ord. No. 2022-16-3536)
Division 5. Electrical Commission
§ 2-130 CREATION; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   (a)   There is hereby created an electrical commission which shall consist
of five members, as follows:
      (1)   The chief electrical inspector shall be a member and ex officio
chairperson of such commission;
      (2)   Of the other four members:
         A.   One shall be an electrical contractor;
         B.   One a journeyman electrician;
         C.   One a representative of an inspection bureau maintained by the
fire underwriters (or, if no such representative resides in the village, then
the chief of the fire department); and
         D.   One a representative of an electrical supply company.
   (b)   Such members shall be appointed for one year by the president and
board of trustees.
§ 2-131 FUNCTIONS.
   The electrical commission shall recommend safe and practical standards and
specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment
designed to meet the necessities and conditions that prevail in this village,
shall recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of
permits by the electrical inspectors and shall recommend reasonable fees to be
paid for the inspection by such inspectors of all electrical equipment
installed or altered within this village; provided, that such standards and
specifications, such rules and regulations and such fees shall not become
effective until adopted by ordinance by the board of trustees.
Division 6. Playground Commission
§ 2-132 ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (a)   There is hereby established a committee or commission which shall be
known as the municipal playground commission.
   (b)   The playground commission shall have the power, and it shall be a part
of its duties to investigate, formulate, promote and provide playgrounds and
areas or places for general outdoor and indoor sports and amusements, which
shall be open to the residents and citizens of the village under such
conditions as may hereafter be provided.
   (c)   For such purposes, the commission may receive, acquire, use and
disburse monies, funds or properties as specified in this division. It shall
also report quarterly each year to the board of trustees its acts and doings,
and semiannually shall submit a detailed financial statement of its receipts
and disbursements.
§ 2-133 COMPOSITION.
   The playground commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be the
village president and the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 66-7-1440, § 1)
§ 2-134 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 66-7-1440, § 2)
§ 2-135 OFFICERS.
   The village president shall serve as chairperson, the village treasurer
shall serve as treasurer and the village clerk shall serve as secretary of the
playground commission; the playground commission shall appoint such other
officers as the commission shall consider proper and necessary. Their terms of
office shall be determined by the playground commission and the rules
established by it. The officers shall have the usual powers and duties
pertaining to their respective offices.
(Ord. No. 66-7-1440, § 3)
§ 2-136 RULE MAKING POWERS; OTHER POWERS ENUMERATED.
   (a)   The playground commission shall have power to formulate, arrange,
change and enforce the rules and regulations for the uses, employment,
improvement and disposition of any of the property rights or privileges which
such commission may acquire, use, control, possess or establish; may form rules
and regulations as to fees, charges and uses thereof; formulate associations of
members, classes or other bodies in such manner and form as to the commission
may be found appropriate and be by it determined.
   (b)   Such commission may for the purpose hereof acquire by gift, donation,
lease, permit, license or otherwise, properties, rights, privileges, uses or
franchises, which may be held in its name, or in the name of a trustee for it.
   (c)   It may receive monies contributed for general or special purposes
consistent with the purpose for which such commission is hereunder formulated
and empowered. It may employ from time to time assistants and employees and
provide for their compensation, and may enter into contracts for employment,
service, merchandise or other purposes.
§ 2-137 CONTRACTS, ETC.
   In any event, any contract or commitment of the playground commission
involving an expenditure of more than $100 shall provide, among other items,
the following:
   (a)   That payment shall be made only out of the funds of the commission
raised by subscription or otherwise;
   (b)   That the party to whom payments are to be made shall look only to such
funds for payment, and not to the officers or members of the commission, or to
the officers of the village individually, or to the village; and
   (c)   That they are made subject to, and to be governed by the provisions of
this article establishing the commission, and the amendments thereto, and the
roles of such commission.
§ 2-138 REPORTS; REPEAL OF DIVISION.
   (a)   From time to time the playground commission shall file with the
village president and board of trustees certified copies of all the plats,
surveys, engineers' estimates, reports, examinations, contracts relating to any
work or action undertaken by the commission and shall give the village complete
information thereof, as the exclusive property of the village.
   (b)   In the event this division is repealed, all funds and property
appropriated for the use of the commission by the village then in the hands of
the commission or its officers, unexpended, shall be paid or turned over to the
village treasurer within ten days after such repeal is effected, but such
repeal shall not thereby work a dissolution of the commission; provided, that
three fourths of all of the members of such commission shall thereupon elect to
continue such commission as a non-official organization.
Division 7. Public Safety Commission
§ 2-139 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   In accordance with Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq., there is hereby established
a board of fire and police commissioners consisting of three members which
shall be known in the Village of Glencoe as the public safety commission.
§ 2-140 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   Members of the public safety commission shall be appointed by the village
president with the consent of the board of trustees. The terms of office of
members of the commission shall end at the end of the village fiscal year and
shall be three years and until their respective successors shall be appointed
and qualified; provided that:
   (a)   No appointment shall be made by the village president within 30 days
before the expiration of his or her term;
   (b)   The first appointments shall be for terms not to exceed one, two or
three years, respectively, and they shall serve such term until their
successors are appointed and qualified; and
   (c)   A vacancy on the commission shall be filled in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 2-141 QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL.
   The members of the public safety commission shall have such qualifications
as are now, or may here after be, required for members of boards of fire and
police commissioners by § 3 of Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, § 102.1-3 or its successor statutory
provision. Each member of the commission shall file an oath or affirmation of
office with the village and shall execute and deliver to the village a bond in
the sum of $1,000 with such surety as the village president and board of
trustees shall by motion or resolution approve, conditioned on the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office. Members of the commission shall
be subject to removal in the manner provided for removal of members of boards
of fire and police commissioners in the aforesaid section of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
§ 2-142 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The public safety commission shall have such powers and duties as are now,
or may hereafter be, given to boards of fire and police commissioners in
accordance with Division 2.1 of Article X of the Illinois Municipal Code, Ill.
Rev. Stat. ch. 24, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq., or its successor statutory provisions;
as supplemented by the ordinances and code of the Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 82-18-1659; Ord. No. 2024-05-3582)
§ 2-143 SECRETARY; DUTIES; COMPENSATION.
   The public safety commission may employ a secretary or designate one of its
own members to act as secretary. The duties of the secretary shall include
those described in § 20 of Division 2.1 of Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, § 10-2.1-20 or its successor statutory
provisions. If the commission employs a secretary, the compensation of that
secretary shall be fixed by the village manager with the approval of the board
of trustees.
§ 2-144 MEMBERS TO SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION.
   Members of the public safety commission shall serve without compensation.
Division 8. Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
(Ord. No. 2017-2-3410)
§ 2-145 AUTHORIZATION.
   There is hereby authorized a joint emergency telephone system board that
shall be established pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement approved by a
duly adopted resolution of the village's corporate authorities.
(Ord. 2017-2-3410)
§ 2-146 RESERVED.
Division 9. Glencoe Council for Inclusion and Community
§ 2-146.1 CREATION.
   There is created a Council that shall be known as the Glencoe Council for
Inclusion and Community.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2014-16-3368; Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
§ 2-146.2 PURPOSE OF COUNCIL.
   The Council is being created in recognition of the village's commitment to
fostering and maintaining a strong sense of community and to acknowledge the
value of diversity and inclusion within the Glencoe community. In furtherance
of this purpose, the Council shall promote and further the village's strong
public policy against discrimination, bigotry, bias, or hate in any form and
shall encourage mutual respect, cooperation, tolerance and understanding among
those who live, work, visit or do business in the village, regardless of race,
color, immigration or refugee status, national origin, ancestry, religion or
creed, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, cognitive or physical
ability, veteran status, marital status, parental status, socioeconomic status,
source of income, housing status, or any other social identities. The functions
and duties of the Council shall be to engage in the following activities, when
so directed by the Village Board or, if the Council otherwise believes such
activities are appropriate:
   (a)   Act in an advisory capacity to the Village President and Board of
Trustees on diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives within the village and
upon such specific matters as may be requested by the Village President or
Board of Trustees;
   (b)   Provide a public forum for diversity, equity, and inclusion issues and
initiatives;
   (c)   The Council supports, facilitates, and promotes public participation
in community dialogue on the issues of racism and social equity, and to work
closely with cultural, civic, governmental, and faith-based organizations to
develop recommendations and actions on behalf of initiatives that foster a more
inclusive environment.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
§ 2-146.3 ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   The maximum number of members of the Council shall be set by the Village
Board by resolution duly adopted. The Village President and Board of Trustees,
in appointing members to the Council, shall consider benefits to the village
and its residents of having members who reflect the diversity of the village
community and whose training, interest, background or experience will aid the
forum in its work.
   (a)   The Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees,
shall appoint all members and the chair of the Council. The chair shall set the
meeting agenda and shall preside over each meeting of the Council. All
vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Village President, with the
consent of the Board of Trustees, for the unexpired term. Any member may be
removed by the Village President without hearing for failure to attend three
consecutive meetings, or otherwise for cause after a public hearing.
   (b)   Each member of the Council shall be a resident of the village and
shall serve without compensation. Any appointed member who ceases to be a
resident will be deemed to have resigned from the forum.
   (c)   The term of office of each member shall be for four years, not to
exceed two consecutive terms. If the Village Board reduces the membership of
the forum by resolution duly adopted, the reduction will not serve to terminate
any current member's term. All members whose terms continue beyond the date
which the reduction becomes effective shall continue in office until the end of
their term. Any reduction in membership may only be effectuated through the
natural expiration of terms or resignations of members.
   (d)   The Village Manager shall staff the forum with a secretary, who shall
be a village employee. The secretary shall take minutes of each meeting and
distribute copies of the official minutes to the Village President, Board of
Trustees, Village Manager/Clerk and the Council members, and shall assist the
Council in preparing its annual report and other reports as necessary.
   (e)   Expenses for the operation and conduct of the affairs of the Council
shall be paid from funds provided for that purpose in the annual appropriation
ordinance and annual budget of the village, or as otherwise specifically
approved by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2012-19-3320; Ord. No. 2020-19-3485; Ord. No.
2021-15-3511)
§ 2-146.4 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The Council shall meet at least quarterly on a day and time designated
by it and may meet at other times upon the request of the Village President or
the chairperson, or any two members of the Council. The facilities of the
Village Hall shall be available to the Council for its meetings.
   (b)   The Council may adopt rules of order and procedure as it may deem
necessary and advisable. These rules and procedures may be changed or altered
as shall be consistent with village ordinances and other applicable laws.
   (c)   A majority of the currently appointed members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business, notwithstanding
the number of open seats on the forum. Any action or recommendation shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of members in attendance.
   (d)   Each member of the Council shall have one vote and the chair shall
have the right to vote on all matters coming before the Council.
   (e)   All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. The Council
shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open to public
inspection as required under the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   (f)   The Council, through its chair or other designated member, shall
report at least annually in writing to the Board of Trustees and the Village
Manager, and at such additional times as requested by the Village President.
The annual report shall cover the activities of the Council for the preceding
calendar year.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2020-19-3485; Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
ARTICLE VI. CODE OF ETHICS
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
Division 1. General Provisions
§ 2-147 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   It is the policy of the village that its elected and appointed officers and
employees should, in all cases, exercise their judgment and perform their
duties for the sole benefit of the citizens of the village. They shall conduct
village business with integrity and impartiality, without allowing prejudice,
favoritism or the opportunity for personal gain to influence their decisions or
actions or to interfere with serving the public interest. To this end, all such
persons should avoid accepting or retaining any economic benefits or
opportunities that could impair or present an actual threat to the exercise of
independent judgment. It is further the policy of the village that all
appearances of impropriety should be avoided. The board of trustees hereby
determines that a policy setting forth ethical principles and regulations
applicable to officers and employees is in the best interests of the village
and will contribute to the public confidence in the integrity, ability and
performance of village officers and employees.
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
§ 2-148 IMPARTIALITY; SPECIAL TREATMENT OF OTHERS.
   Every officer and employee shall perform his or her duties for the benefit
of all citizens of the village with impartiality and without prejudice or bias
toward any citizens and, to that end, shall not grant or make available to any
citizen any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is
available to every other citizen.
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
§ 2-149 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No officer or employee shall request or permit the unauthorized use of
village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal
convenience or profit.
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
§ 2-150 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No officer or employee with respect to any transaction which is or which is
reasonably expected to become the subject of an official act or action, shall,
without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information
concerning the property, government or affairs of the village or use such
information to advance the interests of such officer or employee or his or her
family members.
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
Division 2. Conflicts of Interest
§ 2-151 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this division 2, the following terms shall have the
following meanings.
   EMPLOYEE. All full-time, part-time and contractual employees of the village.
   FAMILY RELATIONSHIP. Any relationship of spouse, parent, child or sibling or
any personal relationship that would prevent an officer or employee from acting
with impartiality.
   INTEREST. Any economic interest or relationship, whether by ownership,
trust, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, investment, employment, gift,
fee or otherwise; whether present, promised or reasonably expected; whether
direct or indirect, including interests as a consultant, representative or
other person receiving (or who may be receiving) remuneration, either directly
or indirectly, as a result of a transaction; whether in the person itself or in
a parent or subsidiary corporation, or in another subsidiary of the same
parent; whether such interest is held directly or indirectly by the officer or
employee, the spouse or minor child of such officer or employee, or any other
person with a family relationship with such officer or employee owning or
sharing the same household as the officer or employee. INTEREST shall not
include interest in a mutual fund or managed account, an ownership interest of
less than 5% in any business entity or an interest of general applicability
affecting others in similar situations. An example of an "interest of general
applicability affecting others in similar situations" that is not an INTEREST
for purposes of this division 2. might include the following: an officer who
owns property in the central business district serves as a member of a board
that is considering a proposed amendment to the zoning code that would affect
all property within the central business district.
   OFFICER. All appointed and elected officials of the village, regardless of
whether the official is compensated; provided, however, that a member of a task
force, blue ribbon committee or similar group that is established solely for
the purpose of advising the village board on policy issues shall not be
considered an OFFICER for the purposes of this division 2.
   RECUSE. To refrain from participation in any official discussion or
deliberation regarding a transaction and abstain from any vote on such
transaction.
   TRANSACTION. Any matter, including without limitation contracts, work or
business with the village, the sale or purchase of real estate by the village,
and any requests for zoning, development or subdivision approvals, including
without limitation rezonings, variations and special use permits, pending
before the village, upon which an officer or employee performs an official act
or action.
(Ord. No. 06-01-3143)
§ 2-152 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (a)   No officer or employee shall participate in any official action that
would constitute a conflict of interest under the statutes or common law of the
State of Illinois.
   (b)   In addition to the requirements of subsection
2-152(a), no officer or employee shall have an interest in, or have a family
relationship with a person having an interest in, a transaction that is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties in the
public interest or that may impair his or her independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his or her official duties.
   (c)   Any employee or any officer whose office is elective shall recuse
himself or herself in connection with any transaction that comes before such
employee or officer in the course of his or her official duties, whenever such
employee or officer has actual knowledge that he or she has any interest in the
transaction, any family relationship with a person having an interest in such
transaction, or any interest in an applicant appearing before the employee or
officer in an official capacity, even if the employee or officer does not have
an interest in the transaction itself. Nor shall any officer whose office is
elective personally represent any person other than either the village or the
officer himself or herself or his or her spouse with respect to the personal
residence of such officer in any transaction before the board on which such
officer serves.
   (d)   Any officer whose office is appointive shall recuse himself or herself
from any transaction that comes before such officer in the course of his or her
official duties, whenever such officer has actual knowledge that he or she has
any family relationship with a person having an interest in such transaction,
or any interest in an applicant appearing before the officer in an official
capacity, even though the officer does not have an interest in the transaction
itself. Unless otherwise exempted pursuant to subsection
2-154(b) of this code, any officer whose office is appointive shall resign from
such office in the event that any transaction comes before such officer in the
course of his or her official duties and such officer has actual knowledge that
he or she has any interest in such transaction; provided, however, that any
officer who is a member of the historic preservation commission may recuse
himself or herself in connection with such transaction in lieu of resignation.
   (e)   Examples of conflicts of interest include the following:
      (1)   Interest in a transaction before the board, commission or committee
on which an officer serves as member:
         A.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she has an
interest in a transaction pending before the board, commission or committee on
which the officer serves as a member shall be required to resign from his or
her office if such office is appointive and shall recuse himself or herself in
connection with any official consideration of the transaction if such office is
elective;
         B.   An officer who has actual knowledge that a person with a family
relationship with and residing with such officer has an interest in a
transaction pending before the board, commission or committee on which the
officer serves as a member shall be required to resign from his or her office
if such office is appointive and shall recuse himself or herself in connection
with any official consideration of the transaction if such office is elective;
or
         C.   An officer who has actual knowledge that a person (other than a
spouse or minor child) with a family relationship with such officer but
residing apart from such officer has an interest in a transaction pending
before the board, commission or committee on which the officer serves as a
member shall recuse himself or herself in connection with any official
consideration of the transaction.
      (2)   Interest in a transaction pending before board, commission or
committee other than the board, commission or committee on which officer serves
as member:
         A.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she has an
interest in a transaction pending before a board, commission or committee other
than the board, commission or committee on which the officer serves as a member
shall not appear in person before such board, commission or committee relating
to such transaction; or
         B.   An officer who has actual knowledge that a person with whom such
officer has a family relationship has an interest in a transaction pending
before a board, commission or committee other than the board, commission or
committee on which the officer serves as a member shall either not appear or
participate in any way or manner in any village proceeding relating to such
transaction or disclose such family relationship on the record prior to
participating in any proceeding before a village board, commission or
committee.
      (3)   Representation of applicant before board, commission or committee
of which officer serves as member:
         A.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she, directly or
indirectly, represents an applicant in a transaction pending before the board,
commission or committee on which the officer serves as a member shall be
required to resign from his or her office if such office is appointive and
shall recuse himself or herself in connection with any official consideration
of the transaction if such office is elective;
         B.   An appointed officer who directly or indirectly appears on behalf
of an applicant before the board, commission or committee on which the officer
serves as a member shall be required to resign from his or her office. An
elected officer or employee who indirectly appears on behalf of an applicant
(e.g., through a partner in the officer's firm) shall recuse himself or herself
in connection with any official consideration of the transaction;
         C.   An elected officer shall not personally appear on behalf of
another person before the board, commission or committee on which the officer
serves;
         D.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she, directly or
indirectly, prepares materials for but does not appear on behalf of an
applicant whose transaction is pending before the board, commission or
committee on which the officer serves as a member shall recuse himself or
herself in connection with any official consideration of the transaction; and
         E.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she represents,
directly or indirectly, an applicant before the board, commission or committee
on which the officer serves but in matters unrelated to the transaction before
such board, commission or committee shall recuse himself or herself in
connection with any official consideration of the transaction.
      (4)   Representation of applicant before board, commission or committee
other than the board, commission or committee on which officer serves as
member:
         A.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she, directly or
indirectly, represents an applicant whose transaction is pending before a
board, commission or committee other than the board, commission or committee on
which the officer serves as a member shall either not appear or participate in
any way or manner in any village proceeding relating to such transaction, or
disclose such interest on the record prior to participating in any proceeding
before a village board, commission or committee; and
         B.   An officer who has actual knowledge that he or she, directly or
indirectly, prepares materials on behalf of an applicant whose transaction is
pending before a board, commission or committee other than the board,
commission or committee on which the officer serves as a member shall either
not appear or participate in any way or manner in any village proceeding
relating to such transaction, or disclose such interest on the record prior to
participating in any proceeding before a village board, commission or
committee.
   (f)   To the extent that any of the foregoing examples is inconsistent with
the other provisions of this article, such other provisions shall control.
§ 2-153 DISCLOSURE OF REAL ESTATE.
   (a)   Each officer and employee shall file with the village clerk a
statement disclosing direct or indirect ownership by the officer or employee or
by the spouse or minor children of the officer or employee in any real estate
located within the corporate limits of the village. The statement shall include
the legal description and common address of the real estate and shall indicate
the ownership interest held in the real estate.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, the ownership of a beneficial
interest in real estate held in a land trust, real estate being purchased by
contract or real estate held by a corporation, investment group or partnership
in which the officer or employee, or the spouse or minor children of the
officer or employee, owns more than a 5% interest, shall be considered real
estate.
   (c)   The real estate in which the officer or employee resides shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section, unless the real estate contains
more than three residential units.
§ 2-154 ADVISORY OPINIONS; ETHICS BOARD.
   (a)   Advisory opinions. When an officer or employee of the village is
uncertain as to the existence of a conflict of interest under this division 2,
the officer or employee may apply to the village manager for an advisory
opinion. The village manager, in consultation with the village attorney, may
advise the officer or employee as to the applicability of the provisions of
this division.
   (b)   Village board determination. When an officer is uncertain as to the
existence of a conflict of interest in a situation in which resignation would
be required under this division 2, the officer may apply to the village board
for a determination as to whether resignation is required or whether an
exemption is warranted. An exemption may be warranted if the officer's interest
is de minimis or if the transaction or issue at question is not extraordinary
or likely to give rise to a dispute. The officer shall have the opportunity to
present his or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the
applicability of the provisions of this division before the determination is
made. Such determination shall be made at a regular meeting of the board. Prior
to such board meeting, the village president may require the officer to provide
information relevant to the issue presented, to notify owners or occupants of
properties within 250 feet of a property that is the subject of a transaction,
or to undertake such other reasonable steps to ensure that the village board
may make an informed determination.
§ 2-155 EFFECT OF CONFLICT OF INTEREST ON DECISION.
   Unless otherwise required by applicable statutory or common law of the State
of Illinois or the United States, nothing in this division 2. shall be deemed
to reverse, or provide any basis for the reversal of or challenge to, any
decision by a board, commission or committee on any transaction or negate any
contract of the village. This division is intended only for the betterment of
village governance and provides no rights or benefits to any applicant,
interested party or third party to any transaction.
Division 3. Gift Ban and Prohibited Political Activities
§ 2-156 GIFT BAN AND PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (a)   Definitions. Whenever the following words or terms are used in this
section, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them below.
      CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state or local public office or office in a political
organization or the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice-
presidential electors, but does not include activities:
         A.   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;1
         B.   Relating to collective bargaining;2 or
         C.   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.
      CANDIDATE. Any person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at either a general primary election or general election.
      COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to an employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this
section, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off, or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
compensated time includes any period of time when the officer or employee is on
the premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of
location.
      COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Any authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
      EMPLOYEE. All full-time, part-time and contractual employees of the
village.
      GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
      INTER-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the
village from a member of the Illinois General Assembly; or from the Governor,
the Lieutenant Governor, the Attorney General, the Secretary of State, the
Controller, the Treasurer or the Auditor General of the State of Illinois; or
from a member, officer, appointee or employee of any state agency as defined in
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act,3 or of any federal agency, or of
any unit of local government or school district.
      INTRA-OFFICE GIFT. Any gift given to an officer or employee of the
village from another officer or employee of the village.
      LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
         A.   Compensation for employment;
         B.   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
         C.   Health insurance benefits paid for by the village.
      OFFICER. All appointed and elected officials of the village, regardless
of whether the official is compensated.
      POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
         A.   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action;
         B.   Relating to collective bargaining; or
         C.   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official
duties.
      POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code,4 but only with regard to those activities that require
filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk.
      PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
         A.   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event.
         B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
         C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any
document or report regarding any thing of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
         D.   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual
voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
         G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or
a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping
in an effort to get voters to the polls.
         H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective
office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
         J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
         K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
         L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
         M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention.
         O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
      PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
         A.   Is seeking official action by the village or by an officer or
employee of the village;
         B.   Does business or seeks to do business with the village or with an
officer or employee of the village;
         C.   Conducts activities regulated by the village or by an officer or
employee of the village;
         D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or non-performance of the official duties of the village or an
officer or employee of the village; or
         E.   Is registered or required to be registered with the Secretary of
State under the Lobbyist Registration Act, except that an entity does not
become a prohibited source merely because a registered lobbyist is one of its
members or serves on its board of directors.
      RELATIVE. Those people related to the officer or employee as father,
mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle,
first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson,
granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister and including the father,
mother, grandfather or grandmother of the officer's or employee's spouse and
the officer's or employee's fiancé or fiancée.
   (b)   Gifts.
      (1)   Gifts prohibited. Except as otherwise provided in subsection
2-156(b)(2) below, no officer or employee, spouse of an officer or employee or
immediate family member living with an officer or employee, shall intentionally
solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any
federal or state statute, rule or regulation. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
      (2)   Exceptions. The restrictions set forth in subsection
2-156(b)(1) above shall not apply to the following:
         A.   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
         B.   Anything for which the officer or employee pays the market value
or anything not used and promptly disposed of as provided in subsection
2-156(b)(3) below;
         C.   A contribution, as defined in Article 9 of the Illinois Election
Code,5 that is lawfully made under that Code or under the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act or activities associated with a fundraising event in
support of a political organization or candidate;
         D.   Educational materials and missions;
         E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business;
         F.   A gift from a relative of an officer or employee;
         G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the officer or employee has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee and not because of the personal
friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal
friendship, the officer or employee shall consider the circumstances under
which the gift was offered, such as:
            1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
            2.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
            3.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the officer or employee the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees.
         H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are:
            1.   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or
            2.   Purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.
         I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer or employee as
an office holder or employee) of the officer or employee or the spouse of the
officer or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because
of the official position or employment of the officer or employee and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances;
         J.   Intra-office and inter-office gifts;
         K.   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and
         L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
      (3)   Disposition of gifts. An officer or employee that is a recipient of
a gift that is given in violation of this section may, at his or her
discretion, return the item to the donor or give the item or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under §
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered or succeeded.
   (c)   Prohibited political activities.
      (1)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with
any prohibited political activity.
      (2)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
         A.   As part of that employee's duties;
         B.   As a condition of employment; or
         C.   During any compensated time off.
      (3)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded any additional compensation or any benefit, whether in
the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded
additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for the officer's or
employee's participation in any prohibited political activity.
      (4)   Nothing in this §
2-156 prohibits activities that are otherwise permissible for an officer or
employee to engage in as a part of his or her official or employment duties or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
as permitted by law.
      (5)   No person either:
         A.   In a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of
public employment; or
         B.   In a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by
federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System
of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be
denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member
or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political
organization or club.
   (d)   Ethics officer. The village manager or his or her designee shall be
designated the ethics officer for the village. The ethics officer's duties and
responsibilities shall include:
      (1)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in completing
statements of economic interest before they are filed with the appropriate
office;
      (2)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation
and implementation of this section and the requirements of § 5-15 and Article
10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act; and
      (3)   Providing guidance to officers and employees in the interpretation
and implementation of other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations of the village, the State of Illinois or the federal government
dealing with ethics, conflicts of interest, interests in contracts, jobs, work
or materials, or the profits thereof, or services to be performed for or by the
village.
   (e)   Ethics commission.
      (1)   Establishment. There is hereby established in the village an ethics
commission, consisting of the village board of trustees. Commission members
shall be non-salaried, except that they may be reimbursed for their reasonable
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The ethics commission may
contract for services that cannot be satisfactorily performed by the village
staff.
      (2)   Powers and duties.
         A.   The ethics commission shall have the following powers and duties:
            1.   To promulgate such procedures and rules governing the
performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers as deemed necessary or
appropriate;
            2.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct research, conduct closed hearings and deliberations, issue
findings, decisions and recommendations, and impose a fine when warranted;
            3.   To act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a
violation of this section, and not upon its own prerogative;
            4.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated this section as the commission deems appropriate;
            5.   When necessary, to subpoena witnesses and compel the
production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation authorized by this
section;
            6.   When necessary, to request that the state's attorney provide
legal advice without charge to the commission;
            7.   To prepare and publish such manuals and guides as the
commission deems appropriate explaining the duties of individuals covered by
this section;
            8.   To prepare such public information materials as the commission
deems appropriate to facilitate compliance, implementation and enforcement of
this section;
            9.   To prepare periodic statistical reports consisting of:
               a.   The number of complaints filed;
               b.   The number of complaints deemed to sufficiently allege a
violation of this section;
               c.   The recommendation, fine or decision issued for each
complaint;
               d.   The number of complaints resolved; and
               e.   The status of pending complaints.
            10.   The commission may delegate to a subcommittee the commission
its authority to conduct investigations pursuant to this subsection
2-156(e), and require a report of the subcommittee's findings to the full
commission for final action; and
            11.   In the event that a member of the commission is the subject
of a claimed violation of this section, such commissioner shall immediately
recuse himself or herself from the investigation of such claimed violation, and
shall take no part in the final action of the commission regarding such claimed
violation.
         B.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this section.
      (3)   Complaint procedure.
         A.   Complaints alleging the violation of this section shall be filed
as follows. If the complaint alleges a violation by an employee, appointed
officer or elected officer of the village, then the complaint shall be filed
with the ethics officer. In the event that the subject of the complaint is the
ethics officer, such complaint shall be filed with the village president. Any
complaint received by, or incident reported to, an employee alleging the
violation of this section, shall be forwarded to the ethics officer or village
president as provided above. Upon receipt of any such complaint, the ethics
officer or the village president, as the case may be, shall forward the
complaint to each member of the ethics commission.
         B.   Within three business days after the filing of an ethics
complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against
him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint
to the complainant within three business days after the submittal to the
commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise
them of the date, time and place of the meeting on the sufficiency of the
complaint and probable cause, which meeting shall be held within 14 business
days after receiving the complaint.
         C.   Upon at least 48 hours' public notice of the session, the
commission shall meet in a closed session to review the sufficiency of the
complaint and, if the complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of
this section, to determine if there is probable cause, based on evidence
presented by the complainant, to proceed. The commission shall issue notice to
the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint, and, if necessary, on probable cause. If the
complaint is deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of this section and
there is a determination of probable cause, then the commission's notice to the
parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four weeks after the
issuance of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint. If the
complaint is deemed not to sufficiently allege a violation or if there is no
determination of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to
dismiss the complaint and that notice shall be made public.
         D.   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours' public notice
of the hearing, the commission shall conduct a closed meeting on the complaint
and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
         E.   Within two weeks after the conclusion of the hearing on the
complaint, the commission shall:
            1.   Dismiss the complaint; or
            2.   Issue a preliminary recommendation to the alleged violator and
to the violator's ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both. The particular findings in the instant case, the preliminary
recommendation, and any fine shall be made public.
         F.   Within seven business days after the issuance of the preliminary
recommendation or imposition of a fine, or both, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint. The filing of the demand
shall stay the enforcement of the preliminary recommendation or fine. Within
two weeks after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public
hearing on the complaint after at least 48 hours' public notice of the hearing
and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
Within five business days after such public hearing, the commission shall
publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the
violator's ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both.
         G.   If the complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date
of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission shall
render its decision as required under subsection
2-156(e)(3)F. within seven days after the complaint is filed, and during the
seven days preceding that election, the commission shall tender such decision
before the date of that election, if possible.
         H.   The commission may levy a fine of up to $750 against any person
who knowingly files a frivolous complaint alleging a violation of this section.
         I.   A complaint alleging the violation of this section must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
      (4)   Enforcement.
         A.   The commission may recommend to a person's ultimate
jurisdictional authority disciplinary action against the person it determines
to be in violation of this section. The recommendation may prescribe the
following courses of action:
            1.   A reprimand;
            2.   An order to cease and desist the offensive action;
            3.   An return or refund of money or other items, or an amount of
restitution for services received in violation of this section;
            4.   Dismissal, removal from office or expulsion; or
            5.   Donation to a charity of an amount equal to the gift.
         B.   The ethics commission may impose a fine of up to $750 per
violation to be deposited into the general fund of the village.
         C.   1.   The village, through the ultimate jurisdictional authority
of an officer or employee, may take disciplinary action against any such
officer or employee:
               a.   Who the ethics commission finds is in violation of this
section;
               b.   Who is the subject of a recommendation by the ethics
commission; or
               c.   Described by both items in subsection
2-82.5(e)(4)C.1. and 2.
            2.   The village may take disciplinary action as recommended by the
ethics commission, if any, or as it deems appropriate, to the extent it has
constitutional and statutory authority to take that action.
            3.   The village shall make its action, or determination to take no
action, available to the public.
         D.   If after a hearing, the commission finds no violation of this
section, the commission shall dismiss the complaint.
      (5)   Penalty. An individual who knowingly violates this section is
guilty of a business offense and subject to a fine of up to $750.
      (6)   Review. The ethics commission's decision to dismiss a complaint or
its recommendation is not a final administrative decision, but its imposition
of a fine is a final administrative decision subject to judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law of the Code of Civil Procedure.
      (7)   Exemption. The proceedings conducted and documents generated under
this section are exempt from the provisions of the Open Meetings Act and the
Freedom of Information Act, except as expressly provided.
   (f)   Interpretation. It is the intent of the village that the provisions of
this section shall be substantially in accordance with the requirements of § 5-
15 and Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act. To the
extent that § 5-15 or Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act may be more restrictive than the requirements of this section, the
provisions of § 5-15 and Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act shall apply and control. This section does not repeal other relevant
personnel rules or regulations adopted by the village ("Existing Regulations").
To the extent that the Existing Regulations are less restrictive than § 5-15 or
Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act and this section,
the provisions of § 5-15 and Article 10 of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act and this section shall apply and control.
Statutory reference:
   1As those terms are defined in § 2 of the Lobbyist Registration Act, 25 ILCS
170/2
   2As defined in § 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3
   3ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.
   410 ILCS 5/9-3
   510 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq.
ARTICLE VII. PSEBA POLICY AND PROCEDURES
§ 2-157 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of an applicant for health insurance benefits
pursuant to the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.)
(“PSEBA”). This article is consistent with the obligations of the village under
state law to provide health insurance benefits to certain public safety
employees who qualify for, and are determined by the village to be eligible to
receive, continued health insurance coverage under the village’s basic group
health insurance plan pursuant to PSEBA.
(Ord. No. 2020-08-3474)
§ 2-158 APPLICATION PROCESS AND INITIAL REVIEW.
   All applications for benefits pursuant to PSEBA must be submitted and will
be considered according to the following process:
   (a)   Application form. Any person seeking PSEBA benefits from the village
(“applicant”) must complete and submit to the village the standard application
form prepared by the village, and all supporting documentation required by the
application. The PSEBA application must be completed, sworn, and notarized as
to the content of the application.
   (b)   Time period for submission of application. The completed application
for PSEBA benefits must be submitted either by hand delivery or certified mail
to the attention of the Village Manager, Village of Glencoe, 675 Village Court,
Glencoe, Illinois, 60022, not later than one year after the date on which the
event took place for which the applicant claims to qualify for PSEBA benefits;
provided, however, the time to submit an application for an applicant who has
timely filed an application for pension benefits with the village’s police
pension fund board be the date that is 30 days after the date of any final
ruling by the applicable pension board concerning any duty-related disability.
   (c)   Processing of application. Upon receipt of a timely, complete, and
executed application form, the village manager or their designee shall promptly
review the materials and other relevant information necessary or appropriate to
analyze whether the applicant is eligible for PSEBA benefits. If the village
determines that additional fact-finding is necessary or appropriate, the
applicant will respond to a written request by the village for additional
information not later than 30 days after receipt of the village’s request. If
the applicant does not respond to or cooperate with the village’s written
request for additional information, the village will send a reminder notice to
the applicant explaining the duty of full cooperation in the fact-finding
process. If the applicant does not provide the requested information or
otherwise cooperate with the village within 21 days after receipt of such
additional notice, then the village may deem the application for PSEBA benefits
to be withdrawn and waived.
   (d)   Initial determination of eligibility by village manager. The village
manager or their designee will review the facts contained in the completed
application, supporting materials, and any other information gathered through
any additional fact-finding. If the village manager or their designee
determines based on this review that the applicant is eligible for PSEBA
benefits, the village manager or their designee will grant the applicant’s
request for benefits and coordinate the provision of benefits to the applicant
consistent with PSEBA’s requirements and § 2-160 of this article. If the
village manager or their designee determines that the applicant is not
qualified for PSEBA benefits, the application will be considered by the
village’s hearing officer at an administrative hearing pursuant to § 2-159 of
this article.
(Ord. 2020-08-3474)
§ 2-159 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCESS; DETERMINATION OF HEARING OFFICER.
   (a)   Administrative hearing. If the village manager does not determine that
the applicant is eligible for PSEBA benefits, an administrative hearing shall
be held pursuant to this section to determine whether the applicant is eligible
for benefits under PSEBA.
   (b)   Hearing officer appointment. The village president with the consent of
the board of trustees shall appoint a person to hold the position of
administrative hearing officer (“hearing officer”) for the purpose of
considering applications for PSEBA benefits. In appointing the hearing officer,
the village president shall consider the following information, at a minimum:
      (1)   The candidate’s ability to comply with the roles and duties of the
administrative hearing officer;
      (2)   Experience concerning adjudication of administrative hearings,
including experience determining eligibility for PSEBA or similar benefits;
      (3)   Background and references;
      (4)   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois for at least three years and have knowledge and experience in
municipal law, employment and labor law (including PSEBA), general civil
procedure, the rules of evidence and administrative practice.
   (c)   Powers of the hearing officer. The Hearing Officer shall have all of
the powers granted under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing, including the power to:
      (1)   Preside over all village hearings involving PSEBA;
      (2)   Administer oaths;
      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documents at the request of one or both
parties or their representatives;
      (5)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (7)   Issue a determination based on evidence presented at the hearing,
the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a written
finding of fact, decision and order.
   (d)   Administrative hearing procedures. The hearing officer will conduct an
administrative hearing concerning an application for PSEBA benefits pursuant to
the following process:
      (1)   Time and date. Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place
as established by the village pursuant to notice as described in this § 2-159
(d).
      (2)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the scheduled hearing shall be sent by
the hearing officer via first class mail and certified mail to the applicant
and the applicant’s representative at the last known address as set forth in
the application for PSEBA benefits at least 30 days prior to the date set for
the hearing.
      (3)   Court reporter. The hearing officer shall arrange for a court
reporter to transcribe the contents of the hearing. The village is responsible
for paying any attendance fees charged by the court reporter; individuals
wishing to obtain a transcript of the hearing must pay for their own copy.
      (4)   Presentation of evidence; representation by counsel. The village
and the applicant shall be entitled to representation by counsel at the hearing
and may present witnesses, may present testimony, evidence, stipulations and
documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance
of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production
of relevant documents. Testimonial evidence shall be taken only on oath or
affirmation.
      (5)   Hearing proceedings. The hearing officer is responsible for
conducting the hearing; regulating all facets of the hearing, including (but
not limited to) the conduct of any parties and/or their counsel; the length of
the hearing; the number of witnesses; establishing reasonable limits on the
frequency and duration of the testimony of any witnesses; examining witnesses
and directing witnesses to testify; ruling on motions; objections and questions
of procedure; authorizing the submission of post-hearing briefs and setting the
time for their filing; hearing opening and closing arguments.
      (6)   Rules of evidence. Insofar as practicable, the hearing officer will
apply the formal and technical rules of evidence applicable in Illinois courts
in an administrative hearing conducted pursuant to this section; however, the
hearing officer is not required to strictly follow the rules of evidence.
      (7)   Decision. After considering the evidence presented the hearing
officer will enter a written decision granting or denying the application for
PSEBA benefits. The hearing officer shall serve the decision on all parties to
the proceeding. The decision by the hearing officer of whether the applicant is
eligible for the benefits under PSEBA shall constitute a final determination
for the purpose of judicial review pursuant to the Illinois Administrative
Review Law and the common law writ of certiorari.
(Ord. 2020-08-3474)
§ 2-160 DESIGNATION OF BASIC GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN; AWARD OF BENEFITS.
   (a)   Designation of basic group health insurance plan. Employees eligible
for PSEBA benefits receive continued health coverage pursuant to the village’s
“basic group health insurance plan” 820 ILCS 320/10(a). The basic group health
insurance plan is any group health insurance plan offered to active, full-time
sworn public safety employees (“village PSEBA plan”).
   (b)   Benefits limited to village PSEBA plan. If an applicant is determined
to be eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive
continued health coverage consistent with PSEBA under the village PSEBA plan.
PSEBA benefits do not include supplemental or additional benefits not provided
in the village’s PSEBA plan (e.g., dental, vision, life insurance, or similar
benefits).
   (c)   Reduction or elimination of PSEBA benefits by other health coverage.
If an applicant becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from any
other source, including but not limited to Medicare, the applicant’s PSEBA
coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined by the village consistent
with PSEBA.
   (d)   Affidavit of continued PSEBA benefits eligibility. All applicants
awarded PSEBA benefits by the village shall complete and return to the village
manager on an annual basis an affidavit verifying the applicant’s continued
eligibility for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be completed and returned to
the village manager or their designee within 30 days of the date set forth in
the affidavit.
(Ord. No. 2020-08-3474; Ord. No. 2023-30-3575)
CHAPTER 3: ADVERTISING
Section
Article I. In General
   
3-1   Injuring, etc., advertisement or notice
   
3-2   Certain advertising prohibited
   
3-3   Permission to post matter required; consents to posting to be filed
   
3-4   Exemptions from chapter
Article II. Distribution of Advertising Matter
   
3-5   License - required
   
3-6   Reserved
   
3-7   Reserved
   
3-8   Reserved
   
3-9   Reserved
   
3-10   Littering prohibited
   
3-11   Placing matter on parked cars prohibited
   
3-12   Reserved
Statutory reference:
   As to power of village to regulate, etc., signs upon buildings, etc., see
Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-15
   For state law as to power of village to regulate and prevent the use of
streets, etc., for signs, advertisements, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch.
24, § 11-80-14
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 3-1 INJURING, ETC., ADVERTISEMENT OR NOTICE.
   No persons shall injure, deface or mutilate any lawful advertisement or
notice.
(1929 Code, §§ 564, 778)
Cross-reference:
   As to destruction of property generally, see §
24-10
§ 3-2 CERTAIN ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall post or display any advertisement of an obscene or
immoral character or any advertisement tending to promote or cause a riot or
breach of the peace, or any advertisement for an unlawful gathering, or
advertisements of unlawful sales, unlawful businesses or unlawful articles.
   (b)   No person shall distribute on the streets or in other public places,
or from house to house, within the village, pamphlets, books, advertising or
printed matter treating of female diseases, self-abuse, venereal diseases or
any literature which may corrupt the morals of the young.
(1929 Code, §§ 563, 577, 778)
   (c)   No person shall post any bills or advertisements on any public
property without authority of the board of trustees. No person shall post any
bill or advertisement on any private property without the written consent of
the owner thereof, which consent shall be filed with the village manager.
(1929 Code, §§ 560, 776)
Cross-reference:
   As to obscene or indecent books, pictures, etc., see §
24-40
§ 3-3 PERMISSION TO POST MATTER REQUIRED; CONSENTS TO POSTING TO BE FILED.
   [Missing material]
§ 3-4 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to the
posting of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in
the performance of his or her duties.
(1929 Code, § 566)
ARTICLE II. DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATTER
§ 3-5 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the distribution of any circulars, dodgers,
handbills, pamphlets, booklets, newspapers or other advertisements, except
newspapers of general circulation as defined by general law or duly entered
with the Post Office Department of the United States, and periodicals or
current magazines regularly published with not less than four issues per year,
which are sold to the public, without first having obtained a solicitation
permit pursuant to article I of
chapter 25 in this code.
(Ord. No. l227; Ord. No. 2000-2-2084)
§ 3-6 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2000-2-2084)
§ 3-7 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2000-2-2084)
§ 3-8 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2000-2-2084)
§ 3-9 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2000-2-2084)
§ 3-10 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall litter any street or sidewalk in the village with any
circulars, dodgers, handbills, pamphlets, newspapers, booklets or other
advertisements.
(Ord. No. 1227)
Cross-reference:
   As to garbage, rubbish and weeds generally, see
ch. 20
§ 3-11 PLACING MATTER ON PARKED CARS PROHIBITED.
   No person, shall distribute newspapers, booklets, advertisements, pamphlets,
circulars, dodgers or handbills by placing any of the same on automobiles
parked on any street or public parking place within the village. Such
distribution is hereby defined to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1227)
Cross-reference:
   As to motor vehicles generally, see
ch. 23
§ 3-12 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2000-2-2084)
CHAPTER 4: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Article I. Definitions
   
4-1   Definitions
Article II. Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
4-2   Village president designated local liquor control commissioner
   
4-3   Powers and duties of the liquor control commissioner
   
4-4   Reserved
Article III. Licenses
   
4-5   Local liquor license required
   
4-6   Classification of local liquor licenses
   
4-7   Number of licenses
   4-8 - 4-9   Reserved
Article IV. Licensing Process
   
4-10   Application for license
   
4-11   Investigation of applicant
   
4-12   Approval or denial of application
   
4-13   Expiration of licenses
   
4-14   Records and reports
   
4-15   License amendments
   
4-16   License fees
   4-17 - 4-19   Reserved
Article V. Insurance and Training
   
4-20   Dram shop insurance
   
4-21   Responsible alcohol service training
   4-22 - 4-24   Reserved
Article VI. Sales
   
4-25   Sales restricted to authorized premises
   
4-26   Sanitary requirements
   
4-27   Sales within restaurants
   
4-28   Hours of business
   
4-29   Sales to minors
   
4-30   Sales by minors
   
4-31   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages by minors
   
4-32   Sales on credit
   
4-33   Special events
   
4-34   Sales promotions
   
4-35   Giveaways and tasting
   
4-36   Consumption of alcoholic beverages brought from off premises
   
4-37   Delivery and carry out of mixed drinks and single servings of wine
   4-38 - 4-39   Reserved
Article VII. Enforcement
   
4-40   Violations and penalties
   
4-41   Enforcement procedure
   
4-42   Liquor control commissioner hearings
   
4-43   Appeals
   
4-44   Automatic revocation
   
4-45   Forfeiture of fees
   4-46 - 4-49   Reserved
Article VIII. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
   
4-50   Intoxication
   
4-51   Consumption of intoxicating beverage in public
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
§ 4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All words
or phrases not defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in the Liquor Control Act or chapter 4 of this code.
(Ord. No. 74-11-1519; Ord. No. 86-11-1731; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, including, without
limitation, synthetic ethyl alcohol, but not including denatured alcohol or
wood alcohol.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any alcohol, spirits, wine and beer and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. For purposes of this chapter,
this definition shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, or to any liquid or solid containing not more than 0.5%
of alcohol by volume.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   BASSET PROGRAM.  Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training
program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission pursuant to
§§ 3-12(a)(l 1.1) and 6-27 of the Liquor Control Act and 77 Ill. Admin. Code §§
3500.101 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt, and hops in water, including,
without limitation, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, and similar
beverages.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   BREW PUB. An establishment where beer is manufactured for sale to importing
distributors, distributors, and to non-licensees for use and consumption only,
where beer is stored, and where beer is sold at retail to the general public,
provided that a brew pub may not sell for off-premises consumption more than
50,000 gallons per year (or such higher amount as may be permitted by the
Liquor Control Act).
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used  and maintained by its members,
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment, and maintaining a sufficient number of
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests.
(Ord. No. 86-11-1732; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   CRAFT BREWERY. A manufacturing facility with a capacity to brew up to
930,000 gallons of beer per year pursuant to a valid craft brewer license
issued by the state, and from which deliveries to importing distributors and
distributors and to retail licensees may be made.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   LICENSEE.  The person or entity named in a local liquor license to which the
license has been issued.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-
1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The village president.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   MIXED DRINK. Any beverage obtained by combining ingredients alcoholic in
nature, whether brewed, fermented, or distilled, with ingredients non-alcoholic
in nature, such as fruit juice, lemonade, cream, or a carbonated beverage.
(Ord. No. 2023-22-3567)
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment open to the general public that has kitchen and
dining room equipment and furnishings, and where meals are regularly sold,
served, and consumed by paying customers, and employing a sufficient number and
kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve such meals, at which the service
of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such
meals. This definition does not include hotels, motels, or other places with
sleeping accommodations.
(Ord. No. 96-14-2010; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   SALE or SELL.  Any transfer, exchange, barter, sale, or selling of alcoholic
liquor.
(Ord. No. 86-11-1732; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   SALE AT RETAIL or SELL AT RETAIL. Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   SHAREHOLDER. Any person, firm, corporation or limited liability company that
owns or controls 5% or more of a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or other business entity.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   SPECIAL EVENT. A fundraiser, grand opening, concert, show, festival, special
meeting, party, or similar nonrecurring or not regularly recurring function,
whether public or private.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   SPIRITS. Any beverage that contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substances in solution, including, without limitation,
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including, without
limitation, such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or
spirits.
(Ord. No. 74-11-1519; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE II. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
§ 4-2 VILLAGE PRESIDENT DESIGNATED LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The village president is hereby designated as the local liquor control
commissioner in and for the village.
(Ord. No. 74-11-1519; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-3 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (a)   The liquor control commissioner is charged with the administration
within the village of:
      (1)   The appropriate provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   All ordinances, resolutions, statutes, laws, rules, and regulations
relating to alcoholic liquor and applicable within the village.
   (b)   The liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   To enter, or to authorize any law enforcement officer or peace
officer to enter, at any time upon any premises licensed pursuant to this
chapter, to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter, or any
other applicable statutes, ordinances, resolutions, laws, rules or regulations,
have been or are being violated, and at the time of such entry to examine such
premises in connection therewith;
      (2)   To receive complaints from any citizen of the village that any of
the provisions of this chapter or of the Liquor Control Act, or any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or any other applicable rules or
regulations, have been or are being violated, and to act upon such complaints
in the manner set forth in this chapter;
      (3)   To grant or deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a
local liquor license, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter;
      (4)   To appoint one or more persons to assist in the exercise of all of
the powers and the performance of the duties of the liquor control
commissioner;
      (5)   To perform all other duties required pursuant to the Liquor Control
Act;
      (6)   To grant, suspend for not more than 30 days, or revoke for cause,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, all local licenses issued to
persons for premises within his or her jurisdiction; and
      (7)   To levy fines in accordance with this chapter for violations of the
Liquor Control Act, any applicable rule or regulation established by the State
Liquor Commission or any of the provisions of this chapter, as the case may be.
(Ord. No. 74-11-1519; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-4 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE III. LICENSES
§ 4-5 LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall sell at retail or offer for sale
at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village except in the manner authorized
by, and in compliance with, the terms, conditions, and restrictions of this
chapter, and of a valid local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer for sale at retail
any alcoholic liquor at any location within the village without first having
obtained a valid local liquor license issued by the village pursuant to this
chapter for each such location.
   (c)   Where two or more locations, places, or premises are under the same
roof but separated by any area not under the licensee’s control and open to the
general public, or at the same street address but separated by any area not
under the licensee’s control and open to the general public, a separate local
liquor license shall be obtained for each such location, place, or premises.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or interpreted as prohibiting,
and no local liquor license shall be required for, the following:
      (1)   The possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor by the
possessor for the personal use of the possessor, his or her family, or guests
at least 21 years of age;
      (2)   The making of wine, cider, or other alcoholic liquor by a person
from fruits, vegetables, or grains, or the products thereof, by simple
fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the
maker, his or her family, and guests at least 21 years of age;
      (3)   The possession or use of alcoholic liquor by:
         A.   A duly licensed practicing physician or dentist in the strict
practice of his or her profession; or
         B.   Any hospital or other institution caring for sick or diseased
persons for the treatment of bona fide patients of that hospital or
institution;
      (4)   The possession or use of alcoholic liquor by a drugstore employing
a licensed pharmacist, in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed
physicians; and
      (5)   The possession or dispensation of wine by an authorized
representative of any religious institution for the purpose of conducting any
bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-6 CLASSIFICATION OF LOCAL LIQUOR LICENSES.
   There shall be the following classes of local liquor licenses:
   (a)   Class A: Primary On-Premises Consumption, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor in establishments where on-premises consumption
of alcohol is the primary source of revenue for the establishment. The
incidental sale or service of food is permitted but not required in Class A-
licensed establishments. The alcoholic liquor sold may only be consumed on the
premises where sold. Patrons entering a Class A-licensed establishment must be
at least 21 years old or accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Class A
licenses shall be issued in two subcategories permitting the retail sale of the
following types of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Class A-l: beer and wine.
      (2)   Class A-2: spirits, beer, and wine.
   (b)   Class B: Incidental On-Premises Consumption, which shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor by restaurants, golf clubs, private clubs and
other venues where on-premises consumption is permitted. The sale of alcoholic
liquor pursuant to a Class B license must be incidental to the sale and service
of food, and the alcoholic liquor may only be consumed on the premises where
sold. Class B licenses shall be issued in three subcategories permitting the
retail sale of the following types of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Class B-l: beer and wine.
      (2)   Class B-2: spirits, beer, and wine.
      (3)   Class B-3: spirits, beer and wine by a recreational facility owned
or operated by a governmental entity.
   (c)   Class C: Consumer Retail/Service On-Premises Consumption, which shall
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption by
establishments whose primary business is to offer non-alcohol-related consumer
goods and services. Examples of such establishments include beauty salons, art
galleries, and bookstores. Alcoholic liquor may only be offered for value and
may not be offered by a Class C licensee as an inducement to purchase any
consumer good or service. The alcoholic liquor may only be consumed on the
premises where sold. Class C licenses shall be issued in two subcategories
permitting the retail sale of the following types of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Class C-l: beer and wine.
      (2)   Class C-2: spirits, beer, and wine.
   (d)   Class D: Off-Premises Consumption, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, in the original package, for consumption off the
premises where sold only, and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
Class D licenses shall be issued in two subcategories permitting the retail
sale of the following types of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Class D-l: beer and wine.
      (2)   Class D-2: spirits, beer, and wine.
   (e)   Class E: Special Event, which shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor at a special event, which Class E license shall not be valid
for a period exceeding eight consecutive hours. Class E licenses may permit the
sale of alcoholic liquor either for consumption within the area specifically
designated in such license or for consumption off of the premises of the
special event, subject to such conditions as the liquor commissioner may impose
and record on the license.
      (1)   Class E licenses shall be issued in two subcategories depending on
the status of the applicant:
         A.   Class E-1: For applicants that are registered educational,
political, civic, fraternal, religious, or other non-profit organizations.
         B.   Class E-2: For all other applicants seeking a special event
license.
      (2)   A Class E Special Event license will be required for events at
which:
         A.   Alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for value (including the
operation of cash bars, the exchange of purchased drink tickets, or the
offering of complimentary drinks with paid admission), regardless of whether
the special event is open to the general public or by invitation only; or
         B.   The special event is open to the general public.
      (3)   A Class E license will not be required if:
         A.   The special event is by invitation only, not open to the general
public; and
         B.   Alcohol is not sold or offered for value at the special event.
   (f)   Class F: Live Performance Theatres, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor, including beer, wine, and spirits, by theatres for
consumption on the premises as an incidental and complementary activity to the
presentation of live stage performances, provided that:
      (1)   Such sales shall be limited to the period commencing one hour prior
to the start of the live stage performance and terminating either (a) one hour
after the end of live stage performance, or (b) midnight, whichever occurs
earlier;
      (2)   Such sales are restricted to the area of the theatre presenting the
live stage performance that serves as the lobby; and
      (3)   Alcoholic liquor may only be dispensed by agents or employees of
the licensee theatre.
   (g)   Class G: Combination On-Premises and Off-Premises Consumption, which
shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises
and/or off premises at restaurants or retail establishments. Class G licenses
shall be issued in two subcategories permitting the retail sale of the
following types of alcoholic liquor:
      (1)   Class G-l: beer and wine.
      (2)   Class G-2: spirits, beer, and wine.
   (h)   Class H: Brew Pubs and Craft Breweries, which shall authorize alcohol
production facilities, including brew pubs and craft breweries, to offer
alcohol for on- and/or off-premises consumption. Food must be offered for
service at all Class H-licensed establishments that permit on-premises
consumption.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2; Ord. No. 2016-01-3392, § 2; Ord. No. 2022-10-
3530, § 2)
§ 4-7 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (a)   Number.  The number of licenses authorized pursuant to this chapter in
each class shall be as provided in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule, as amended from time to time. The maximum number of Class E Special
Event licenses authorized pursuant to this chapter shall be established by the
liquor control commissioner.
   (b)   Reduction in number of authorized licenses. The number of authorized
licenses in each license class will be reduced automatically if:
      (1)   A license within that class is terminated;
      (2)   A license within that class expires without renewal;
      (3)   A licensed establishment within that class is sold or the ownership
of that licensed establishment otherwise changes without the prior written
approval of the village;
      (4)   A licensed establishment within that class changes location without
the prior written approval of the village; or
      (5)   A licensed establishment within that class is discontinued for 30
consecutive days or longer without the prior written approval of the village,
or ceases to operate.
   (c)   No property right.  Each liquor license is purely a personal privilege
and is not a property right in any form. No license is or may be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution. No license is alienable or transferable,
whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or is subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. No license may descend by the laws of testate or intestate
succession. Every license ceases on the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of the
licensee; except only that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of the estate of any bankrupt or insolvent
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcohol liquor, may continue the
business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court,
and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, bankrupt, or insolvent
licensee until the original expiration date of that licensee’s license, but no
longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of that
licensee.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§§ 4-8 - 4-9 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE IV: LICENSING PROCESS
§ 4-10 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   New applicants.  An applicant for a new local liquor license shall
file an application therefor with the village clerk, on a form provided by the
village, which application shall include, without limitation, the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, date of birth, place of birth, driver’s license
number, telephone number, and country of citizenship of all officers,
directors, partners, managers, and shareholders of the applicant business;
      (2)   For all officers, directors, partners, managers, and shareholders
of the applicant business who are naturalized citizens of the United States,
the date and place of naturalization; if an officer, director, partner,
manager, or shareholder is not a citizen of the United States, a statement
indicating if the applicant is a permanent resident of the United States, and
if so, the date the officer, director, partner, manager, or shareholder’s
permanent resident status was granted;
      (3)   A photocopy of the driver’s license or other state-issued
identification for all officers, directors, partners, managers, and
shareholders of the applicant business;
      (4)   The character of business of the applicant, and the length of time
that the applicant has been in business of that character;
      (5)   The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time of
application;
      (6)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
at which the applicant proposes to sell alcoholic liquor;
      (7)   A statement of whether the proposed location is owned or leased by
the applicant, and, if the applicant does not own the proposed location, a copy
of the lease;
      (8)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any other person involved
directly or indirectly in the applicant’s business, is an elected public
official or law enforcement officer;
      (9)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any director, officer,
partner, manager, or shareholder thereof, has ever been convicted of:
         A.   A felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or the United
States; or
         B.   A violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance
concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor;
      (10)   A statement of whether the applicant, or any director, officer,
partner, manager, or shareholder thereof, possesses a current federal wagering
or gambling device stamp, or a current state bingo or charitable games license;
and, if so, the reasons therefor;
      (11)   A statement of whether the applicant has filed an application for
a liquor license on premises other than those described in the application, and
the disposition of that application;
      (12)   A statement of whether a liquor license issued by any state or
subdivision thereof, or by the federal government, has been previously revoked,
and, if so, the reasons therefor;
      (13)   A certificate of insurance, demonstrating proof of dram shop
insurance coverage covering the period for which the requested local liquor
license will be effective, as required pursuant to §
4-20 of this chapter;
      (14)   For corporate applicants, a copy of the State of Illinois
certificate of incorporation, and, if incorporated in a state other than
Illinois, a copy of the State of Illinois certificate showing the date that the
applicant became qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983, 805 ILCS
5/1.01 et seq., to do business in Illinois;
      (15)   A notarized affidavit, signed by an authorized representative of
the applicant and in a form acceptable to the village attorney, stating that:
         A.   The applicant, and all directors, officers, partners, managers,
and shareholders thereof, have not received or borrowed money or anything else
of value, and will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value, or
accept or receive credit (other than merchandising credit in the ordinary
course of business for a period not to exceed 30 days, or as otherwise
permitted pursuant to the Liquor Control Act), directly or indirectly from any
manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor of alcoholic liquor, or from
any officer, manager, agent, representative, or family member thereof;
         B.   The applicant has not been a party in any way, directly or
indirectly, to any violation of the Liquor Control Act by a manufacturer,
distributor or importing distributor;
         C.   The applicant, and all directors, officers, partners, managers,
and shareholders thereof, are not disqualified to receive a local liquor
license by reason of any provision of this chapter, the laws of this state, or
the ordinances of the village;
         D.   The applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of
Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village in the
conduct of the applicant’s place of business, including, without limitation,
the responsible alcohol service training requirements set forth in §
4-21 of this chapter;
         E.   The applicant has paid all taxes due and owing to the village as
of the date of the application;
         F.   The applicant may be held liable for any violation of this
chapter by an officer, director, manager, or employee of the applicant, as set
forth in §
4-44 of this chapter;
         G.   The issuance of a new or renewal local liquor license pursuant to
this chapter will not be deemed as vesting any right to the applicant, or to
any partner, officer, director, manager, shareholder, agent, or employee
thereof, of an additional local liquor license or to future local liquor
licenses; and
         H.   If the applicant is a club, no member, officer, agent, or
employee of the applicant is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the
form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale
of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests,
beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual
meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out
of the general revenue of the club; and
      (16)   For all new applications, a non-refundable administrative
application fee, and a license fee, each in the amount set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   Renewal applications.  A local liquor licensee may request the renewal
of a local liquor license by filing an application therefor with the Village
Clerk, which application shall include, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Any change in the information required pursuant to subsection (a)
above that has occurred since the date the applicant filed the local liquor
license application for the previous calendar year;
      (2)   The affidavit required pursuant to subsection (a) above;
      (3)   An application fee and license fee in the amount set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule; and
      (4)   For all applications for a renewal local liquor license that are
filed after December 1 of the last calendar year for which the applicant held a
local liquor license, a late renewal application fee, in the amount set forth
in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (5)   Investigation.  Prior to renewal of a local liquor license, the
village public safety director, or his or her designee, shall investigate the
fitness and character of the applicant and all partners, officers, managers,
directors, shareholders, and agents thereof, as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety, and order in the manner described in §
4-11.
   (c)   Special event licenses.  Notwithstanding any provision of this
subsection to the contrary, the following provisions shall apply to all
applications filed for a Class E Special Event local liquor license:
      (1)   The application must be filed no later than the date that is 14
days before the beginning of the special event for which the Class E license is
sought;
      (2)   The application must include all information required pursuant to
subsection (a) above, as the case may be, except that a qualifying not-for-
profit applicant for a Class E-1 license shall not be required to disclose any
information or make any statement regarding its directors, except to the extent
that a director is also an officer, partner, manager, or shareholder;
      (3)   The applicant shall identify the name, location, dates and times of
the special event for which the Class E license is sought; and
      (4)   Any applicant for a Class E-1 license shall submit proof of its
status as a not-for-profit organization.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2; Ord. No. 2020-03-3469; Ord. No. 2022-10-3530, §
2)
§ 4-11 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (a)   Investigation.  Prior to issuance or renewal of a local liquor
license, the village public safety director, or his or her designee, shall
investigate the fitness and character of the applicant and all partners,
officers, managers, directors, shareholders, and agents thereof, as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and order.
   (b)   Fingerprinting.  As deemed necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety, and order, the village director of public safety, or his or her
designee, shall, within ten days after receipt of a complete application filed
pursuant to this chapter, take and record the fingerprints of: (1) all
partners, officers, managers, directors, shareholders, and agents of a new
applicant for a local liquor license; and (2) all new partners, officers,
managers, directors, shareholders, and agents of existing or renewal local
liquor license applicants. The applicant shall pay to the director of public
safety, or his or her designee, a fingerprinting fee for each set of
fingerprints taken, covering the administrative costs of all fingerprinting
required pursuant to this subsection, in the amount set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (c)   Within 30 days after receipt of a complete application filed pursuant
to this chapter, the village director of public safety shall certify to the
liquor control commissioner his or her recommendations as to whether or not a
local liquor license should be issued to the applicant, together with a
statement of the reasons therefor. The failure of the director of public safety
to provide such recommendations and statement within 30 days after the date on
which a complete application is filed, or such further time as the applicant
may, in writing, agree, shall not be deemed as either a recommendation for or
against the issuance of the requested local liquor license.
   (d)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no investigation
is required for an applicant of a Class E-1 Special Event license.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2; Ord. No. 2022-10-3530, § 2)
§ 4-12 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (a)   Approval.  The liquor control commissioner shall approve a local
liquor license application, and issue a local liquor license to the applicant,
upon the occurrence of each of the following:
      (1)   Receipt of a complete application for a new or renewal local liquor
license, in accordance with §
4-10 of this chapter;
      (2)   Receipt of the recommendations and statement of the director of
public safety pursuant to §
4-11 of this chapter, if applicable;
      (3)   The determination by the liquor control commissioner that the
application satisfies the standards and conditions set forth in this section;
and
      (4)   Payment of the local liquor license fee for the specific class of
local liquor license sought, in the amount set forth in the Comprehensive Fee
and Fine Schedule, which fee shall be reduced in proportion to the number of
whole calendar months that have expired in the license year prior to the
issuance of the local liquor license.
   (b)   Denial.
      (1)   Definition.  For purposes of this section only, except as expressly
provided otherwise, the term APPLICANT shall include the entity or individual
named on the application for a local liquor license, as well as all partners,
officers, managers, directors, shareholders, and agents of the entity or
individual that has applied for a local liquor license pursuant to this
chapter; except that the term APPLICANT shall not include the directors of a
not-for-profit organization that has applied for a Class E Special Event local
liquor license pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Mandatory denial. The liquor control commissioner shall deny any
application for a new or renewal local liquor license that satisfies any of the
following conditions:
         A.   Where the applicant is a corporation or limited liability
company, if any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village;
         B.   The applicant does not own the premises for which a local liquor
license is sought, and does not have a lease for such premises for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;
         C.   Any law-enforcing public official, or any member of the village
board of trustees, has a direct or indirect interest in the manufacture, sale,
or distribution of alcoholic liquor in the village by the applicant; except
that this section shall not be deemed or interpreted as prohibiting the
issuance of a local liquor license to a bona fide not-for-profit club or
charitable organization, owned and operated by its members, one or more of
which members is a law-enforcing public official or a member of the village
board of trustees;
         D.   The applicant has been convicted of a gambling or related
offense, in violation of Article 28 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, 720
1LCS 5/28-1 et seq., as amended;
         E.   A federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal
government to the applicant or for the premises for which a local liquor
license is sought, unless the applicant is eligible for a local liquor license
pursuant to the Illinois Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq., or the Illinois
Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act, 230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.;
         F.   The applicant does not possess a valid policy for dram shop
insurance covering the period for which a local liquor license is sought, as
required pursuant to §
4-20 of this chapter;
         G.   The applicant is a club that has been in operation in the village
for less than one year, as of the date of application;
         H.   The applicant is the subject of a complaint received by the
liquor control commissioner from the Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to
§ 6-3 of the Liquor Control Act, alleging that the applicant has committed a
violation of any tax statute administered by such Department;
         I.   The applicant is a club of which any member, officer, agent, or
employee is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or
other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests, beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue
of the club;
         J.   The application is for a Class E local liquor license, and the
applicant has previously received Class E local liquor licenses authorizing the
sale of alcoholic liquor for more than 15 days in the 12-month period preceding
the date of application;
         K.   The application is for any premises located within 100 feet of
any religious institution, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons
or veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station;
except that this section shall not apply to the following:
            1.   The renewal of a local liquor license for the sale at retail
of alcoholic liquor on any premises located within 100 feet of any religious
institution occupied after the date of issuance of the original local liquor
license, measured to the nearest part of any building used by the religious
institution for worship services or educational programs;
            2.   The renewal of a local liquor license for the sale at retail
of alcoholic liquor on any premises located within 100 feet of any school
occupied after the issuance of the original local liquor license;
            3.   Religious institutions or private schools that sell alcoholic
liquor at retail for limited periods during which groups are assembled on the
premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors; or
            4.   Institutions of higher learning; or
         L.   The village has not taken and recorded all fingerprints of the
applicant, or the applicant has not paid all required fingerprinting fees, as
required pursuant to §
4-11 of this chapter.
   (c)   Permissive denial.  The liquor control commissioner shall have the
right, but not the obligation, to deny any application for a local liquor
license that satisfies any of the following conditions:
      (1)   The application is for any premises, or is filed by any applicant,
for which a license issued pursuant to this chapter has been revoked;
      (2)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law or local ordinance concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of
alcoholic liquor;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
State of Illinois or the United States;
      (4)   The application is for any premises for which there exists a
violation of Chapter 153 of this Code;
      (5)   The applicant is delinquent in the payment to the village of any
tax or payment required pursuant to this Code; or
      (6)   The applicant is not of good character or reputation in the village
or in the community in which the applicant resides.
      (7)   The applicant provided a false, materially inaccurate, or
misleading statement in connection with obtaining a local liquor license.
      (8)   The special event for which a Class E-2 license is requested will,
in the determination of the liquor commissioner, result in disruptions of
traffic, create public safety concerns, or be out of character with the area or
venue the event is proposed to be held in.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2; Ord. No. 2022-10-3530, § 2)
§ 4-13 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
   Every local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter, other than a
Class E Special Event local liquor license, shall terminate on the last day of
February following its issuance.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-14 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (a)   The village clerk shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete record
of all local liquor licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall furnish
the director of finance and village director of public safety each with a copy
thereof
   (b)   The village clerk shall give written notice of the issuance,
suspension or revocation of a local liquor license to the director of finance
and village director of public safety within two business days thereof.
   (c)   At the request of the village board of trustees, the liquor control
commissioner shall report to the village board of trustees:
      (1)   All of his or her acts and doings in the enforcement of this
chapter; and
      (2)   The date of collection and amount of all local liquor license fees
paid pursuant to this chapter.
   (d)   All local liquor licensees shall make their books and records
available, upon reasonable notice, for investigation and control by any
designee of either the liquor control commissioner or the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-15 LICENSE AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   Changes in personnel.
      (1)   Any change in the information required pursuant to §§
4-10 and
4-11 of this chapter regarding the partners, officers, directors, managers, or
shareholders of a local liquor licensee shall be reported in writing to the
liquor control commissioner within ten days after the change. All new partners,
officers, directors, managers and shareholders shall meet all of the standards
of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a local liquor license. All
changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the liquor control
commissioner.
      (2)   Upon any change regarding a local liquor licensee, or regarding any
existing or new partner, officer, director, manager, or shareholder thereof,
that causes the local liquor licensee to be ineligible for a local liquor
license pursuant to this chapter, the liquor control commissioner shall hold a
public hearing to consider revocation of the liquor license, in accordance with
§
4-42 of this chapter.
   (b)   Change in location. The premises at which the sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor is licensed pursuant to this chapter may be changed only upon
the prior written approval of the liquor control commissioner, which approval
shall not be granted unless the proposed new location is suitable for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to this chapter and all other
applicable statutes, ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-16 LICENSE FEES.
   (a)   Fees for replacement license.  Any local liquor licensee that, during
the term of its current license, applies for a new local liquor license that is
intended to replace the current license, and not to supplement it, shall be
required to pay only the prorated difference between the replacement local
liquor license fee and the value of the current local liquor license fee. The
village shall have no obligation to reimburse the licensee if the replacement
local liquor license fee is less expensive than the current local liquor
license fee.
   (b)   Refunds of application fees.  The village shall have no obligation to
refund any application fee paid pursuant to this chapter to an applicant or
local liquor licensee for any reason.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§§ 4-17 - 4-19 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE V. INSURANCE AND TRAINING
§ 4-20 DRAM SHOP INSURANCE.
   All local liquor licensees shall maintain dram shop insurance, in a minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence, for the premises within which alcoholic
liquor is sold. The dram shop insurance coverage shall name the village and its
elected and appointed officers, agents, employees, and officials as additional
insured parties.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-21 RESPONSIBLE ALCOHOL SERVICE TRAINING.
   (a)   Responsible alcohol service training required. Each manager of a local
liquor licensee, and each employee of a local liquor licensee who will be
engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering alcoholic liquor
to customers, guests or patrons for consumption on or off the licensed
premises, shall, within ten days after the manager or employee begins
employment with the local liquor licensee, successfully complete a BASSET
program.
   (b)   Proof of training.  Each local liquor licensee shall maintain on the
licensed premises proof of completion by each manager and employee of the local
liquor licensee of the training required pursuant to this section, in a manner
that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any full-time, part-time, or
auxiliary village police officer or by any designee of either the State Liquor
Control Commission or the liquor control commissioner.
   (c)   Restrictions on sales by untrained personnel.
      (1)   No person shall sell, mix, prepare, serve, or deliver alcoholic
liquor in the village, for consumption on a licensed premises, unless that
person has successfully completed a BASSET program, as required pursuant to
this section.
      (2)   No local liquor licensee shall sell, serve, or deliver any
alcoholic liquor at any time at which there is not physically present on the
licensed premises a manager or employee of the local liquor licensee who has
successfully completed a BASSET program as required pursuant to this section.
      (3)   Exception for Class E-1 Special Event licenses.  Notwithstanding
the requirements of this section, alcoholic liquor may be sold, mixed,
prepared, served, or delivered at a special event that has received a Class E-
1 license by persons who have not completed a BASSET program, on the condition
that a representative or employee of the licensee that has completed the
training required pursuant to this section shall:
         A.   Be present at all times when alcoholic liquor is being served;
and
         B.   Supervise all persons who are selling, mixing, preparing,
serving, or delivering alcoholic beverages to the public.
   (d)   Any person who attends a program provided by the village department of
public safety for the responsible alcohol service training required pursuant to
this section shall pay a program fee in the amount set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2; Ord. No. 2022-10-3530, § 2)
§§ 4-22 - 4-24 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE VI. SALES
§ 4-25 SALES RESTRICTED TO AUTHORIZED PREMISES.
   A local liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in or
from the premises described in the local liquor license, and only in the manner
therein authorized and in compliance with the terms thereof.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-26 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   All premises used for the retail sale or storage of alcoholic liquor shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance
with the provisions of the Village Code regulating the condition of premises
used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-27 SALES WITHIN RESTAURANTS.
   (a)   Size of bar and lounge areas limited.  No Class B local liquor
licensee may maintain within the licensed premises a bar or lounge area
containing more than 25% of the total number of seats located within the entire
licensed premises.
   (b)   Sales to waiting patrons.  Class B local liquor licensees may sell
alcoholic liquor to dining patrons waiting to be seated at tables for the
service of food, at a bar or within a lounge located within the licensed
premises.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-28 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   (a)   It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor, for consumption on the premises, in the village between the hours of 1:
00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
   (b)   It is unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor, in its original package for consumption off the premises, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. on the following day.
   (c)   Licensed premises may remain open for the sale of food or other
products during the hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited pursuant to this section; except that no alcoholic liquor may be
sold to, or consumed by, the public during such hours.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-29 SALES TO MINORS.
   (a)   Except as may be permitted pursuant to §
4-31, no person shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of 21 years or to any intoxicated person; except that it shall
not be a violation of this section if the person who sells, gives, or delivers
alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years:
      (1)   Is shown, and relies upon, adequate written evidence of the age and
identity of the person to whom the alcoholic liquor is sold, given, or
delivered; and
      (2)   Does not know the written evidence to be false or fraudulent.
   (b)   In the event that a local liquor licensee, or agent or employee
thereof, believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is younger than 21 years
of age, he or she shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand
presentation of a valid, written, positive, government-issued identification
containing proof of age.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village
at which alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (d)   No person under the age of 21 years shall possess, present, or offer
false or fraudulent evidence of age or identity for the purpose of purchasing
or obtaining any alcoholic beverage.
   (e)   No person shall transfer, alter, or deface an identification card, use
the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information, for the purpose of purchasing or procuring alcoholic liquor.
   (f)   In any place in the village at which alcoholic liquor is sold, there
must be displayed at all times, in a prominent place, a printed card, supplied
by the village clerk, that shall read substantially as follows:
      WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE
         YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF
GLENCOE IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian who has legal custody
and control over a person who is under 18 years of age to permit such person to
violate any provision of this section.
   (h)   All patrons entering a Class A Primary On-Premises Consumption
licensed-establishment must be at least 21 years old or accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-30 SALES BY MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any local liquor licensee, or manager, agent, employee,
or representative thereof, to permit any person less than 21 years of age to
sell, serve, prepare, mix, or deliver any alcoholic liquor in any licensed
premises; except that employees of on-premises local liquor licensees that are
at least 18 years of age may sell, serve, and deliver alcoholic liquor that has
been prepared or mixed by a manager or employee of the local liquor licensee
that is 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-31 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY MINORS.
   No minor may consume alcoholic liquor, purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a
gift of alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession;
provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the consumption of
alcoholic liquor by a minor in the performance of any religious ceremony or
service, or in a home pursuant to the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or legal guardian of such minor.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-32 SALES ON CREDIT.
   Except for Class E local liquor licensees with respect to members, no local
liquor licensee shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person
on credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in
exchange for any goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services
rendered; except that this section shall not be deemed or construed to prohibit
payment by credit card.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-33 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (a)   General requirements.  No person, firm, corporation or limited
liability company may sell, offer for sale, or dispense any alcoholic liquor at
a special event located in the village, except in compliance with the
following:
      (1)   The seller shall obtain a Class E license as required pursuant to
this chapter and the Liquor Control Act;
      (2)   No individual shall be permitted to purchase more than two
alcoholic beverages at any one time; and
      (3)   The quantity of alcoholic liquor within each beverage sold shall
not exceed 12 ounces of beer, six ounces of wine, or one and one-half ounces of
distilled spirits.
   (b)   Licenses.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, no Class A, B, or G local liquor licensee shall be required to obtain
an additional local liquor license for the sale of alcoholic liquor at a
special event.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-34 SALES PROMOTIONS.
   (a)   All local liquor licensees shall maintain a schedule of prices for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any local liquor licensee, or any employee or agent
thereof, to:
      (1)   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one
drink of alcoholic liquor;
      (2)   Sell, offer to sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
      (3)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
      (4)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
that involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for the game or contest on the licensed premises; or
      (5)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited pursuant to this section.
   (c)   Notwithstanding this section, a local liquor licensee may:
      (1)   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;
      (2)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      (3)   Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, without limitation,
buckets), carafes, or bottles of beer or wine customarily sold in such
quantities and delivered to two or more persons at one time; or
      (4)   Increase the prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled at the licensed premises.
   (d)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it is
unlawful to sell or serve a bottle of any type of alcoholic liquor, other than
beer or wine, to two or more persons at one time for consumption on the
premises where sold, except at private functions not open to the public at
which ten or more persons are present.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-35 GIVEAWAYS AND TASTING.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to give away or otherwise dispense free
of charge, by the drink or in any other manner, within the village, an
alcoholic beverage with the intent of promoting the sale of an alcoholic
beverage, except that Class D and Class H licensees may, without charge,
provide samples of spirits, beer, or wine in the amounts listed below, for
tasting purposes only, immediately prior and incident to, the sale of alcoholic
liquor in the original package for off-premises consumption. The provision of
such tasting samples, however, shall be strictly subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
      (1)   The preparation and services of tasting samples must be conducted
by a full-time employee of the licensee who has gone through BASSET training,
and only in a designated area on the licensed premises as approved by the and
designated in the license;
      (2)   The actual amount of alcohol offered per individual may not exceed:
         A.   One ounce of distilled spirits;
         B.   Four ounces of wine;
         C.   Sixteen ounces of beer;
      (3)   The sample shall be served in a container that must be disposed of
following the sampling.
   (b)   Furthermore, it is unlawful to advertise the availability of tasting
samples through any public media or other means of communication other than on
the premises itself.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-36 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BROUGHT FROM OFF PREMISES.
   Pursuant to §§
22-27 and
22-34 of the Village Code, no restaurant, retail, or service business
establishment required to obtain either a specific or a general business
license from the village shall establish, maintain or encourage a policy,
commonly known as “BYOB,” that allows patrons of establishment to bring into
the establishment for consumption on the premises, any alcoholic beverages of
any kind acquired off of the premises.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-37 DELIVERY AND CARRY OUT OF MIXED DRINKS AND SINGLE SERVINGS OF WINE.
   Class A-2, Class B-2, Class B-3 and Class G-2 licensees may sell mixed
drinks and single servings of wine for off-premises consumption, but only as
permitted by, and in strict compliance with, the applicable provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, including without limitation, Section 6-28.8
thereof (235 ILCS 5/6-28.8), and any regulations and guidelines promulgated by
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. No. 2023-22-3567)
§§ 4-38 - 4-39 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE VII. ENFORCEMENT
§ 4-40 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Fines.
      (1)   Except where otherwise permitted or required by the Liquor Control
Act or this Code, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, who
makes a false, materially inaccurate, or misleading statement in an application
for a liquor license pursuant to this chapter, or who violates a condition of a
local liquor license granted pursuant to this chapter, shall be fined an amount
as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter by any officer, director, manager, or
employee of a local liquor licensee shall also be deemed and held to be the act
of the licensee, who shall be punished in the same manner as if the violation
had been committed by the licensee itself.
      (3)   Each day on or during that any person violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (4)   All fines and other monetary penalties imposed by the liquor
control commissioner shall be remitted to the village and deposited in the
general corporate fund of the village.
   (b)   Suspension and revocation of local liquor license. The liquor control
commissioner may, at its discretion and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §§
4-40 through
4-43 of this chapter, fine a local liquor licensee, or revoke or suspend any
local liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter, upon the occurrence of
any of the following:
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this chapter by a local liquor
licensee, or any officer, director, manager, representative, agent or other
employee thereof, while:
         A.   Engaged in activities in furtherance of the business of the local
liquor licensee; or
         B.   On the licensed premises;
      (2)   Violation of any federal, state, county, or village statute,
ordinance, law, rule or regulation pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor;
      (3)   Failure to pay any license fee or any tax imposed by any unit of
government on alcoholic liquor or the sale thereof;
      (4)   Receipt by the liquor control commissioner of a complaint of the
Illinois Department of Revenue pursuant to § 6-3 of the Liquor Control Act,
alleging that the local liquor licensee has committed a violation of a tax
statute administered by such Department;
      (5)   Issuance of a false, materially inaccurate, or misleading statement
in connection with obtaining a local liquor license pursuant to this chapter;
      (6)   Violation of a condition of a local liquor license granted pursuant
to this chapter;
      (7)   Conviction of the applicant, or any officer, director, manager, or
shareholder thereof, of a felony pursuant to any federal or state law; or
      (8)   Any change regarding a local liquor licensee, or regarding any
existing or new partner, officer, director, manager, or shareholder thereof,
that causes the local liquor licensee to be ineligible for a local liquor
license pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Additional penalties. In addition to, or in lieu of, the penalties
available pursuant to §
4-40(a) and (b) of this chapter, the liquor control commissioner shall have the
right, but not the obligation, to:
      (1)   Require the local liquor licensee to reimburse the village for its
third-party costs, including attorneys’ fees, incurred in connection with the
enforcement action before the liquor control commissioner;
      (2)   Impose a penalty of community service and/or a penalty of
probation; and/or
      (3)   Require the local liquor licensee to reimburse the village for the
cost of publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, of a
public safety announcement that advocates for the safe and responsible service,
possession, and consumption of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-41 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Enforcement against violator. All alleged violations of this chapter
shall be adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (b)   Enforcement against local liquor licensee.  The liquor control
commissioner may conduct a hearing in accordance with §
4-42 of this chapter regarding any action to be taken or penalty to be imposed
against a local liquor licensee for a violation of this chapter that occurs at
the licensed premises under the control of the local liquor licensee.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-42 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER HEARINGS.
   (a)   Except as provided in §
4-44 of this chapter, no local liquor license shall be revoked or suspended,
and no fines shall be assessed against a local liquor licensee pursuant to §
4-40 of this chapter, except after a public hearing held by the liquor control
commissioner in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Written notice of the date, time, and place of, and the general
reasons for, the hearing shall be transmitted to the local liquor licensee at
the licensed premises by personal service, if possible, and/or by certified
United States mail, affording the local liquor licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend.
      (2)   No public hearing authorized by this section may be conducted less
than three days after receipt by the local liquor licensee of the notice
required pursuant to this section.
      (3)   The liquor control commissioner shall hold the hearing at the date,
time and place set forth in the notice, and shall give the licensee an
opportunity to be heard.
   (b)   The liquor control commissioner may, upon a reasonable belief that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, order a licensed premises closed for not more
than seven days, pending a hearing on the suspension or revocation of the local
liquor license: (1) upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for
such conclusion; and (2) without notice or hearing. Any order issued pursuant
to this section shall include the notice of public hearing required pursuant to
subsection (a)(l) of this section. If the local liquor licensee is also engaged
in the conduct of another business on the licensed premises, the order issued
pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section shall not be applicable to the
other business.
   (c)   Within 14 days of the public hearing, the liquor control commissioner
shall issue a written order setting forth any penalties to be assessed against
or imposed upon the local liquor licensee, and the reasons therefor. A copy of
the written order shall be served upon the local liquor licensee by personal
service or by certified United States mail.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-43 APPEALS.
   (a)   Pursuant to § 7-9 of the Liquor Control Act, all appeals of orders or
actions of the liquor control commissioner shall be made to the State Liquor
Control Commission.
   (b)   Appeals to the State Liquor Control Commission from an order or action
of the liquor control commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official
record of the proceedings before the liquor control commissioner. In the event
of such an appeal, the liquor control commissioner shall file, or cause to be
filed, with the State Liquor Control Commission a certified official record,
taken and prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand
reporter, of the hearing before the liquor control commissioner, within five
days after receipt of notice of the appeal and upon payment by the appellant of
the cost of the certified official record.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-44 AUTOMATIC REVOCATION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a local
liquor license shall be terminated, automatically and without a public hearing,
upon the conviction of the local liquor licensee, or any officer, director,
manager, partner, or shareholder thereof, by any court of law of a willful
violation of any of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-45 FORFEITURE OF FEES.
   Upon revocation of a local liquor license by the liquor control commissioner
pursuant to this chapter, all fees paid by the local liquor licensee pursuant
to this chapter shall be forfeited.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§§ 4-46 - 4-49 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
ARTICLE VII. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 4-50 INTOXICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition on any
street, alley or public place in the village, or in any private house or place
to the disturbance of another.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
§ 4-51 CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or ingest any intoxicating
beverage, or carry or possess the same except in the original container,
unopened, and with the seal unbroken, in or on any street or public place, or
in any place or premises open to public view, within the village; provided,
however, that this prohibition shall not apply to: (1) any person who is seated
at a table within an outdoor seating area of any premises possessing a valid
liquor license that permits the serving of alcoholic liquor within an outdoor
dining area; or (2) any person attending a special event on public property
subject to a properly issued Class E license.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 2)
CHAPTER 5: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Article I. In General
   
5-1   License - required
   
5-2   Same - application
   
5-3   Same - fees
   
5-4   Seating capacity; standing during performances
   
5-5   Obedience to chapter, etc.
   
5-6   Audience to be orderly; fire, etc., risks
   
5-7   Inspections
   
5-8   Indecent shows, etc.
   
5-9   Exhibition of criminals, etc.
   
5-10   Shows, etc., tending to cause riots, etc.
   
5-11   Approval of premises by director of public works
   
5-12   Lighting of premises generally
   
5-13   Lighting of exits; exit signs
   
5-14   Obstruction of exits, passageways, etc.
Article II. Billiards and Pool
   
5-15   License - required; fee
   
5-16   Same - good character of applicant a prerequisite to issuance;
investigation of applicant, etc.
   
5-17   Hours of operation
   
5-18   Conduct of patrons, gambling, etc.
   
5-19   Minors under 16 years of age
   
5-20   Inspections by police
Article III. Bowling Alleys
   
5-21   License - required; application
   
5-22   Same - fee
   
5-23   Hours of operation
   
5-24   Minors under 16 years of age
Article IV. Motion Pictures
   
5-25   License to operate motion picture projector - required
   
5-26   Same - qualifications of operator; duration
   
5-27   Same - fee
   
5-28   Theatre projector permit; fee
   
5-29   Prohibited pictures
   
5-30   Crowding in theatres
   
5-31   Obstructing exits, etc.
   
5-32   Projection booths
   
5-33   Hours of business for theatres
   
5-34   Assignment of licenses and permits
   
5-35   Violations of article
Article V. Public Dance Halls
   
5-36   License - required; issuance
   
5-37   Same - application; fees
   
5-38   Inspections; exits
Article VI. Meetings on Public Property
   
5-39   Approval or permit required
   
5-40   Application for permit
   
5-41   Bond; reimbursement of costs
Article VII. Commercial Filming or Taping on Public Property
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
   
5-42   Permit - required
   
5-43   Application for permit
   
5-44   Application fee
   
5-45   Rights of the village
   
5-46   Rates for use of village personnel, equipment and property
   
5-47   Bond
Article VIII. Special Events
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
   
5-48   Definition of special event
   
5-49   Permit required
   
5-50   Permit fee; security; reimbursement of costs
   
5-51   Compliance with laws
Cross-reference:
   As to proximity of filling stations to theatres, etc., see §
15-6
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to license, tax and regulate places
of amusement, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-5
   For state law as to authority of village to license, regulate, etc.,
billiards and pool, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-2
   For state law as to the authority of village to license, regulate, etc.,
bowling alleys, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-2
   For state law as to authority of village to license, regulate, etc., places
of amusement, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-5
   For state law as to authority of village to license, regulate, etc.,
theatricals, places of amusements, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, §
11-42-5
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 5-1 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate any theatrical, circus, carnival,
exhibition or public amusement of any kind without having first obtained a
license as is required in this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 335)
§ 5-2 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses required by §
5-1 shall be made to the village manager and shall designate the place where
the amusement is to be held, and the nature and type thereof. Each application
shall be accompanied by a payment of the fee required, except as is otherwise
provided, and no license shall be issued until the fee is paid.
(1929 Code, § 348)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 5-3 SAME - FEES.
   (a)   The fee for licenses required by §
5-1 shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   The owner or manager of any building who shall procure an annual
license as is required by §
5-1 shall be permitted to conduct amusements and shows, except races and
athletic contests, throughout the year on the premises for which the license
was issued without the payment of a daily fee.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-4 SEATING CAPACITY; STANDING DURING PERFORMANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to allow in theatres or opera houses more persons than
can be accommodated by the seating capacity thereof. It shall be unlawful for
any person to remain standing or to permit any person to remain standing during
the performance of an amusement licensed by this article that is conducted or
displayed in a building or hall.
(1929 Code, § 351)
§ 5-5 OBEDIENCE TO CHAPTER, ETC.
   Every person licensed as provided by §
5-1 shall obey all the provisions in this chapter in addition to all other
provisions that may relate to amusement or theatrical licenses or the premises
occupied.
(1929 Code, § 336)
§ 5-6 AUDIENCE TO BE ORDERLY; FIRE, ETC., RISKS.
   (a)   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical shall be orderly and
quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
such amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or
other risks.
(1929 Code, § 337)
Cross-reference:
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
§ 5-7 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of police and fire chief each to see that
every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public show or amusement is
inspected by a member of the police and fire departments to insure conformity
with the provisions concerning such amusements.
(1929 Code, § 338)
§ 5-8 INDECENT SHOWS, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to present, exhibit, conduct, produce or
in any manner assist in or take part in any indecent or immoral show,
theatrical, play, motion picture, exhibition or other form of public amusement
or show.
(1929 Code, § 339)
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to authority of village with regard to prohibiting,
etc., indecent exposure, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 21
§ 5-9 EXHIBITION OF CRIMINALS, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful to exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal, or
any person who shall have become notorious because of the commission of a
crime, in any theatrical, exhibit, carnival or other public amusement.
(1929 Code, § 340)
§ 5-10 SHOWS, ETC., TENDING TO CAUSE RIOTS, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of any kind
that tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or public
disturbance.
(1929 Code, § 341)
§ 5-11 APPROVAL OF PREMISES BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   No license shall be issued to any person to produce, present, conduct,
operate or offer for gain or profit any theatricals, shows or amusements until
the director of public works shall have certified in writing that the room or
place where it is proposed to produce, present, conduct, operate or offer such
theatricals, shows or amusements complies in every respect with the building
code and other ordinances of the village.
(1929 Code, § 342)
Cross-reference:
   As to director of public works generally, see §§
2-74 to
2-76
§ 5-12 LIGHTING OF PREMISES GENERALLY.
   Every portion of any building or structure in which theatricals, moving
picture shows and amusements are offered, operated, presented or exhibited for
gain or profit devoted to the use or accommodation of the public, and all
outlets therefrom leading to the street, including all open courts, corridors,
stairways, exits and emergency exit stairways, shall be well and properly
lighted with electric lights during every performance, and shall remain lighted
until the entire audience has left the premises.
(1929 Code, § 343)
§ 5-13 LIGHTING OF EXITS; EXIT SIGNS.
   (a)   All stairways and corridors in every building or structure in which
theatricals, shows and amusements are offered, operated, presented or exhibited
for gain shall be supplied with a supplemental lighting system of electricity
or gas, and such system shall be independent of all other lights in such
building or structure and shall be in operation during the entire period that
such building or structure is open to the public and until the entire audience
has left the building.
   (b)   The word "Exit" shall appear in letters at least six inches high over
the opening of every means of egress from such building or structure, and a red
light shall be kept burning over such sign at all times at which the building
is open to the public.
(1929 Code, § 344)
§ 5-14 OBSTRUCTION OF EXITS, PASSAGEWAYS, ETC.
   (a)   No exit door or gate in any place in which theatricals, shows or
amusements are offered, operated, presented or exhibited for gain shall be
locked or fastened in any manner during the entire time that such place of
amusement is open to the public.
   (b)   All aisles, passageways, corridors and exits of all such places of
amusement shall be kept free from camp stools, stairs, sofas, draperies and
other obstructions and no person shall be allowed to stand in or occupy any of
such aisles, passageways, corridors or exits during any performance.
(1929 Code, § 345)
Cross-reference:
   As to obstructing exits, etc., in motion picture theatres, see §
5-31
ARTICLE II. BILLIARDS AND POOL
§ 5-15 LICENSE - REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or
pigeon hole table open to the public without having obtained a license therefor
as provided by this article. Every person keeping for use any billiard table,
pool table, bagatelle or pigeon hole table or any other tables or implements
for similar purposes and open to the public shall pay a license fee of $10 per
year for each billiard or other such table he or she may keep.
(1929 Code, § 353)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 5-16 SAME - GOOD CHARACTER OF APPLICANT A PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE;
INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT, ETC.
   No license required by this article shall be issued to any person who is not
a person of good character. Upon receipt of an application for such a license,
the village manager shall cause an investigation to be made of the character of
the applicant; if the result of such investigation is not favorable, or if the
village manager is not convinced of the good character of the applicant, he or
she shall return the fee for license.
(1929 Code, § 354)
§ 5-17 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All pool or billiard halls open to the public in this village are hereby
required to be closed for all purposes and cease doing business of any kind
whatsoever at 12:00 midnight and they shall remain so closed and no business
whatever shall be done therein until 5:00 a.m. the following morning. No such
place shall be kept open for business on Sundays.
(1929 Code, § 355)
§ 5-18 CONDUCT OF PATRONS, GAMBLING, ETC.
   Persons frequenting any pool or billiard hall in the village shall conduct
themselves in a quiet manner. It shall be unlawful to gamble or to permit any
gambling in any billiard or poolroom. It shall be unlawful to use or to permit
the use of any boisterous or profane language in any billiard or poolroom.
(1929 Code, § 356)
Cross-reference:
   As to gambling generally, see §§
24-23 to
24-26
§ 5-19 MINORS UNDER 16 YEARS OF AGE.
   Minors under age of 16 years shall under no circumstances frequent, loiter,
go or remain in any pool hall or billiard parlor within the village at any
time, unless it be upon some lawful errand and such minor is sent by the
direction and with the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other
person having the legal custody and control of such minor. Proprietors of pool
halls or billiard parlors shall not permit such minors under the age of 16
years to frequent, loiter or remain within such pool halls or billiard parlors.
(1929 Code, § 357)
Cross-reference:
   As to minors under 16 years of age in bowling alleys, see §
5-24
   As to sale, etc., of weapons to minors, see §
24-50
   As to sale of cigarettes to minors under 18 years of age, see §
24-8
§ 5-20 INSPECTIONS BY POLICE.
   Any member of the police department shall have free access to all parts of
any premises used for a pool or billiard room at all reasonable hours for the
purposes of making inspections to see to the enforcement of the provisions of
this article.
(1929 Code, § 358)
Cross-reference:
   As to police department generally, see §§
2-84 to
2-96
ARTICLE III. BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 5-21 LICENSE - REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a bowling or pin alley open to
the public for which a fee is charged without having first obtained a license
therefor as provided by this article. All applications for such a license shall
be made in writing to the village manager and shall state therein the intended
location of the place of business and the number of alleys to be used therein.
(1929 Code, § 360)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 5-22 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for any license required by §
5-21 shall be $100.
(1929 Code, § 361) (Ord. No. 1223)
§ 5-23 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   All bowling or pin alleys open to the public are hereby required to be
closed for all purposes and to cease doing business of any kind whatsoever at
12:00 midnight and they shall remain so closed and no business whatever be done
therein until 5:00 a.m. the next morning.
   (b)   All places of business licensed under the provisions of this article
are required to be closed for all purposes at 11:00 p.m. every Saturday night
and shall remain so closed until 5:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning.
(1929 Code, §§ 364, 365)
§ 5-24 MINORS UNDER 16 YEARS OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any place of business licensed
under the provision of this article, or any person in charge thereof, to allow
any minor under the age of 16 years to frequent, loiter, go or remain in any
such place of business at any time, unless it be upon some lawful errand and
such minor is sent by the direction and with the consent and knowledge of the
parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody and control of such
minor.
(1929 Code, § 362)
Cross-reference:
   As to minors under 16 years of age in poolrooms, etc., see §
5-19
ARTICLE IV. MOTION PICTURES
§ 5-25 LICENSE TO OPERATE MOTION PICTURE PROJECTOR - REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any moving picture
projecting machine or device in any public place or any place where the public
is admitted within the village, unless such person so operating the same shall
have first obtained, and be at such time the proper holder of, a license
therefor as a moving picture projector operator, as set forth in this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ, engage or use a moving
picture projector operator who shall not have prior thereto procured, or who
shall not at that time be the proper holder of a license, as provided for by
this article.
(1929 Code, § 372)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 5-26 SAME - QUALIFICATIONS OF OPERATOR; DURATION.
   (a)   A license to operate a moving picture projecting machine or device may
be issued to any person applying therefor who shall be over the age of 21
years; provided, that the board of trustees or the village president shall,
upon an examination of such applicant, find the applicant competent, or shall
find the applicant to be the holder in good standing of a license issued by the
City of Chicago or some other municipality of the state by which an examination
of such applicants is required; provided, further, that no license shall be
issued to any person if in the opinion of the board of trustees, after due
examination by them, such applicant therefor shall be determined by them to be
irresponsible or incompetent.
   (b)   Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be
valid for the period of one year from its date of issue only, but may be
revoked at any time during such period.
(1929 Code, § 373)
§ 5-27 SAME - FEE.
   No license shall be issued to any person under this article as a motion
picture projecting machine operator except upon the payment, which sum shall be
paid to the village clerk for the general uses of the village upon the issuance
of such license as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(1929 Code, § 384) (Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-28 THEATRE PROJECTOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, manage or control the
operation of any moving picture projecting machine or device, where an
admission fee is charged, and the same is operated for the purpose of profit,
unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and issued by order of the
board of trustees, which permit shall state upon its face the location of the
moving picture projecting machine or device to be operated, that the same is
issued under the conditions specified in this article, and that the same shall
be valid for the period of one year after date of issue.
   (b)   Such permit when duly issued shall authorize the holder thereof to
operate; provided, that he or she shall also be the holder of a license duly
issued under the provisions of this article or shall cause to be operated by
the holder of a duly issued license a moving picture machine or device for such
purpose and for the period of one year, subject, however, to all the terms and
conditions of this article. Such permit shall be issued and any renewal thereof
shall be issued only upon the payment of a fee per annum for each seat provided
in the theatre, room, hall or auditorium in which such moving picture machine
or device is to be operated as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule.
(1929 Code, § 385) (Ord. No. 1188; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-29 PROHIBITED PICTURES.
   It shall be unlawful to offer or present any motion picture that has a
tendency to cause a riot or public disturbance, or any immoral, indecent or
blasphemous pictures or performances or picture that might suggest or incite to
crime.
(1929 Code, § 374) (Ord. No. 1188)
Cross-reference:
   As to indecent shows, etc., generally see §
5-8
   As to obscene and indecent pictures, books, etc., see §
24-40
§ 5-30 CROWDING IN THEATRES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any person, except ushers or other employees,
to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is presented,
during the time of such performance, or for any such person to remain standing
therein at such at time. It shall be unlawful to admit to any such hall or room
more persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangement for such
premises.
(Ord. No. 1188)
§ 5-31 OBSTRUCTING EXITS, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles,
corridors or exits leading from any room or enclosure in which a motion picture
performance is being given.
(Ord. No. 1188)
Cross-reference:
   As to obstruction of exits, passageways, etc., in places of amusements, see
§
5-14
§ 5-32 PROJECTION BOOTHS.
   (a)   Moving picture projecting machine and devices temporarily installed in
assembly rooms or halls shall be placed in an enclosure or booth made of
suitable fireproof material, or lined or covered with suitable fireproof
material. Such enclosure or booth shall be thoroughly ventilated and large
enough for the operator to walk freely on either side of and back of the
machine. All openings into this enclosure or booth shall be arranged so as to
be entirely closed by doors or shutters of like material and held normally
closed by springs, hinges or other devices. All other provisions of the
building code of the village, as amended, and future amendments thereto, shall
apply to and govern the operation and use of such booths.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to smoke, or to carry
or use lighted matches or to use fire or an open light, or oil, gas or
illuminating lamps in an operating booth while any motion picture projecting
device is being operated, or during the time any audience is in the building;
provided, that such lights as may be necessary for use in operating such
machine only may be used.
(1929 Code, §§ 382, 383)
§ 5-33 HOURS OF BUSINESS FOR THEATRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit to be
operated any motion picture projecting machine, device, show or entertainment
for profit under this article before 1:00 p.m. on Sundays, or to keep the
premises open in which the same may be or are operated later than 1:00 a.m. of
any weekday or Sunday.
(1929 Code, § 386) (Ord. No. 1188)
§ 5-34 ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (a)   No license for the operation of a moving picture projecting machine or
device shall be assigned or transferred to any person.
   (b)   No permit for the operation of any moving picture projecting machine
or device, show or entertainment shall be assigned or transferred to any
person, whatever, unless the same shall have first been authorized or permitted
by action of the president and board of trustees of the village.
(1929 Code, § 387)
§ 5-35 VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
as provided in §
16-1. In addition thereto the president of the village may revoke the permits
or licenses or any of them issued under this article to such person.
(1929 Code, § 388)
ARTICLE V. PUBLIC DANCE HALLS
§ 5-36 LICENSE - REQUIRED; ISSUANCE.
   No person shall operate or conduct a public dance hall without having
obtained a license to do so. No such license shall be issued except on order of
the president and board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 389)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 5-37 SAME - APPLICATION; FEES.
   (a)   Application for licenses required by this article shall be made to the
village manager, and shall designate the place, premises or building intended
to be occupied.
   (b)   The fee for a license to operate or conduct a public dance hall shall
be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. No such
license shall be issued without the payment of the fee.
(1929 Code, § 390) (Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-38 INSPECTIONS; EXITS.
   (a)   The inspections to be made under the supervision of the chief of
police and the fire chief provided for in §
5-7 shall be made of the premises occupied by any person licensed under this
article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall that is not
equipped with sufficient and adequate exits, and no hall or building that is
not equipped with at least two exits of four feet or more in width shall be
used for a public dance in the village.
(1929 Code, § 391)
ARTICLE VI. MEETINGS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 5-39 APPROVAL OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person or group of persons shall hold any meeting or event of any kind on
village owned property (including village streets or rights-of-way) or within
village owned buildings without first having obtained approval or a permit from
the village manager or the manager's designee.
(Ord. No. 70-11-1480, § 1; Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
§ 5-40 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (a)   Information. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the village manager. The application shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The name and address of the person or persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity if any;
      (3)   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
      (4)   The village property for which such permit is desired;
      (5)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
      (6)   An agreement to indemnify and save harmless the village against any
and all liability, loss, damages, costs or expense which it may incur, suffer
or be required to pay by reason of the issuance of such permit and the use of
the public property; and
      (7)   Any other information that the village manager shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue hereunder.
   (b)   Standards for issuance of permit. The village manager shall issue a
permit hereunder when he or she finds:
      (1)   The proposed activity or use of the village property will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from any general public enjoyment of
such village property;
      (2)   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety;
      (3)   The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence or disorderly conduct;
      (4)   The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the village; and
      (5)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour required in the application.
   (c)   Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all applicable
ordinances fully as if the same were inserted in such permit.
   (d)   Revocation. The village manager shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any ordinance or upon good cause shown.
(Ord. No. 70-11-1480, § 1)
§ 5-41 BOND; REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.
   (a)   In addition to the agreement for indemnification contained in the
application for a permit, the village manager may in his or her discretion
require the applicant to furnish a bond in an amount and with or without surety
as determined by the village manager in the exercise of his or her sound
discretion if the manager determines such bond or surety is in the best
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the village based on the size,
scope and nature of the applicant's proposed activity or use; provided,
however, that neither the purpose of the meeting or event nor the applicant
shall be considered in determining whether such financial security shall be
required.
   (b)   To the extent village personnel, equipment or supplies will be
required in connection with the proposed activity or use, the applicant shall
be required to reimburse the village for the costs of such personnel, equipment
or supplies in accordance with generally applicable rates established by the
village manager from time to time.
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
ARTICLE VII. COMMERCIAL FILMING OR TAPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
§ 5-42 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   No person or group of persons shall use any street, right-of-way or public
building, equipment or personnel for commercial use in the filming or taping of
movies, television programs, commercials or training films and related
activities without first having obtained a permit from the village manager.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
§ 5-43 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (a)   Information. A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this
article shall file an application with the village manager at least 48 hours
before the desired production date. The application shall state:
      (1)   The title of the production to be filmed or taped;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant production
company;
      (3)   The name and phone number of the producer and the director;
      (4)   The name, phone number and address of the location coordinator and,
if such location coordinator does not reside within 50 miles of the Village of
Glencoe, the name and phone number of the Illinois Film Office representative
for the production;
      (5)   The type of production;
      (6)   The production schedule;
      (7)   The proposed location(s) of production;
      (8)   A general description of the script or content of the production,
as well as a description of any proposed special effects for the production;
      (9)   The anticipated need of village personnel, equipment and or
property;
      (10)   An agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the village and its
corporate authorities, officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees,
attorneys, agents and representatives from and against any loss, damage,
expense, claims, costs of every nature and kind arising out of or in connection
with any filming or taping or by reason of issuance of any permit, or the use
of public property, or the assistance of village personnel; and
      (11)   Any other information that the village manager shall find
reasonably necessary to determine whether permit should issue hereunder.
   (b)   Certificate of insurance.
      (1)   The applicant shall attach to such application a certificate of
insurance, naming the Village of Glencoe and its corporate authorities,
officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents and
representatives as additional insured, in the amount of $1,000,000 general
liability, including bodily injury and property damages; and automobile
liability (if applicable) in the amount of $1,000,000 including bodily injury
and property damage. Such certificate shall include the following language:
"The Village of Glencoe, its corporate authorities, officers, officials,
boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents and representatives are made
additional insured with respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or
are in any way related to, the operations of the film maker while present in
the Village of Glencoe."
      (2)   The applicant shall also attach to such application proof that the
appropriate worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance have been
provided for the employees of the filming company.
   (c)   Report on discussions with property owners in the affected
neighborhoods. The applicant shall provide a short written description of and
schedule for the proposed production to the owners and residents of each
property in the affected neighborhood (as defined by boundaries set by the
village manager). The applicant shall talk with owners and residents of all
such property and submit as part of the application a report noting any owner
or resident's reaction along with the addresses and phone numbers of all such
property owners and residents.
   (d)   Vehicles and equipment. The applicant must submit a report listing the
number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the production
including their proposed parking locations. Such locations are subject to the
specific approval of the village manager in order to maintain traffic safety.
   (e)   Effect of permit. A permittee shall fully comply with all applicable
ordinances as if the same were fully set forth in such permit.
   (f)   Time period of permit. The authorization granted pursuant to and in
accordance with the application shall be for a specific time period to be
determined by the village.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
§ 5-44 APPLICATION FEE.
   The nonrefundable application fee for the permit to conduct professional
filming or taping or other related activities designated in this article shall
be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. The fee
can be reduced or waived at the discretion of the village manager.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-45 RIGHTS OF THE VILLAGE.
   As a condition of any permit granted pursuant to this article, the applicant
shall agree that the village may in its discretion:
   (a)   Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the use of
public streets, rights-of-way and buildings of the village during the time of
production;
   (b)   Exercise control over or otherwise regulate or restrict the hours of
production and the general location of the production;
   (c)   Prohibit all filming or taping or order cessation of filming or taping
and the revocation of the permit if determined to be hazardous to the public
health, safety and welfare or upon a finding of violation of any ordinance or
any condition or provision of the permit; and
   (d)   Inspect all structures and/or devices and equipment to be used in
connection with the filming and taping.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
§ 5-46 RATES FOR USE OF VILLAGE PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY.
   (a)   Personnel. The producer shall pay for the costs of any public safety,
public works or other village personnel assigned to the project (whether
specifically requested by the producer or not) at a rate established by the
village manager.
   (b)   Equipment. The remuneration rates for the use of any village equipment
shall be established on a case-by-case basis.
   (c)   Property. Based upon the extent of the use of village property, the
producer shall reimburse the village for using village property and the
inconvenience resulting from such use. Reimbursement shall be set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and shall depend on the level of
disruption caused by the commercial filming or taping.
   (d)   Payment. All checks should be made payable to “Village of Glencoe.”
Anticipated fees shall be paid in advance of production.
   (e)   Restoration. The producer shall be responsible to restore all public
property or village equipment to substantially the same condition that such
property or equipment was in prior to its use for the production.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-47 BOND.
   In addition to the agreement for indemnification contained in the
application for a permit, the village manager may in his or her discretion
require the applicant to furnish a bond in order to protect adequately the
interests of the village and its residents. The terms and amount of any such
bond shall be determined by the village manager in the exercise of his or her
sound discretion.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
ARTICLE VIII. SPECIAL EVENTS
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
§ 5-48 DEFINITION OF SPECIAL EVENT.
   (a)   For purposes of this article, the term SPECIAL EVENT shall mean any
activity or use that is not subject to a permit pursuant to article VI or VII
of this chapter and either:
      (1)   Requires the use or assistance of, or imposes an impact on, any
village property, equipment, or personnel to an extent greater than is
customary in the ordinary course of village business;
      (2)   Involves the use of or impact on village streets or sidewalks in a
manner that would exceed normal use or travel on such streets or sidewalks;
      (3)   Involve a gathering of more than 100 people, other than gatherings
at a religious congregation or other place designed and intended for assembly
purposes and permitted under the village zoning code;
      (4)   Involves a gathering of more than 50 people at a dwelling for an
activity or use that assesses a charge or fee in connection with participation
in or attendance at such activity or use, or is organized or intended for the
purpose of raising funds;
      (5)   Involves the organized transport of persons from parking areas
within the village to sites either within or outside the village; or
      (6)   Is classified as a temporary use under subsection 5-102D1, 5-102D2,
5-102D5 or 5-102D6 of the village zoning code.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following events shall not be
considered "special events:"
      (1)   A visit or appearance of the President or Vice-President of the
United States provided that the visit or appearance is for official business
and is open to the general public;
      (2)   A visit or appearance by the Governor of the State of Illinois
provided that the visit or appearance is for official business and is open to
the general public;
      (3)   A visit or appearance by an incumbent United States Senator elected
by the voters of the State of Illinois, provided that the visit or appearance
is for official business and is open to the general public;
      (4)   A visit or appearance by a member of the United States House of
Representatives elected by the voters of the Congressional District in which
the village is located, provided that the visit or appearance is for official
business and is open to the general public; and
      (5)   An activity or event that occurs outside the corporate limits of
the village, for which village personnel, services and/or resources are
provided pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, other intergovernmental agreement,
or a custom and practice of intergovernmental cooperation in which the
participating municipalities do not charge each other for services provided.
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
§ 5-49 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct a special event without first having made
application for and been issued a special event permit from the village in
accordance with the special event policy adopted by the village board, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
§ 5-50 PERMIT FEE; SECURITY; REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS.
   The permit fee for a special event, as well as any requirement for the
depositing of financial security or reimbursement of costs, shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 5-51 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Under no circumstance shall any use or activity be permitted as a special
event that is otherwise prohibited under the village zoning code or any other
federal, state or local ordinance, rule or regulation.
(Ord. No. 06-13-3155)
CHAPTER 6: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
Article I. Animal Care and Control
   
6-1   Definitions
   
6-2   Owner's duty to control animals
   
6-3   Guide dogs
   
6-4   Animals prohibited on beach
   
6-5   Animals prohibited in certain public places
   
6-6   Unleashed dogs prohibited on public property
   
6-7   Control of animals on owner's property
   
6-8   Control of animals in heat
   
6-9   Certain animals prohibited
   
6-10   Animal care
   
6-11   Animal litter on owner's premises
   
6-12   Cruelty to animals
   
6-13   Abandoning of animals
   
6-14   Keeping diseased animals
   
6-15   Dangerous or vicious animal at large
   
6-16   Motorists' duty towards animals
   
6-17   Poisoning animals
   
6-18   Animal litter off owner's premises
   
6-19   Reserved
Article II. Licensing of Animals
   
6-20   Licensing of dogs and cats
   6-21   Licensing of accessory animals
   6-22 - 6-29   Reserved
Article III. Impoundment of Animals
   
6-30   Impoundment
   
6-31 - 6-39   Reserved
Article IV. Rabies Control
   
6-40   Animal bite notice
   
6-41   Duty to keep animal for observation
   
6-42   Procedure for observation
   
6-43   Animals as public nuisances
   
6-44 - 6-49   Reserved
Article V. Penalties
   
6-50   Penalties
Charter reference:
   As to animals generally, see
char., art. IV, §§ 17 to
19
   For charter provision as to authority of village with regard to regulations
etc., of animals, see char.,
art. IV, § 17
Cross-reference:
   As to hunting, see §
24-28
   As to persons riding or driving animals being subject to traffic
regulations, see §
23-5
   As to rodents, see §
21-23
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to animals generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 8
   For state law as to rabies among dogs, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 8, §§ 351 et
seq.
ARTICLE I. ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL
§ 6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ACCESSORY ANIMAL. A certain class of animal that is uncommon in residential
areas and that, if kept improperly, would be detrimental to the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.
   ANIMAL. A living creature, domestic or wild, but does not include humans.
   AT LARGE. An animal which is off the premises of the owner and which is
neither in an enclosed motor vehicle nor, while on a leash, under the immediate
control of a responsible person.
   ATTACK. When an animal, without provocation, makes actual physical contact
with another animal or person that includes, but is not limited to, biting,
scratching or clawing.
   DOG. Both male and female dogs.
   LEASH. A leash, cord, chain or similar device.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 71-10-1490; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-19-3036; Ord. No. 2022-09-3529, § 2)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to domestic animals running at large, see Ill. Rev. Stat.,
ch. 8, § 359
§ 6-2 OWNER'S DUTY TO CONTROL ANIMALS.
   Animal care and control is the responsibility of the owner. An owner of any
animal shall be in violation of this section in the event such animal shall:
   (a)   Be at large;
   (b)   Chase a vehicle in any manner;
   (c)   Put another animal or person in imminent danger of being attacked;
   (d)   Attack persons in any manner;
   (e)   Attack other animals, including dogs, in any manner;
   (f)   Damage property other than the owner's; or
   (g)   Make excess noises, including barking, so as to disturb the peace and
quiet.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 71-10-1490; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-19-3036)
§ 6-3 GUIDE DOGS.
   The provisions of §§
6-4 and
6-5 are inapplicable to guide dogs for the handicapped.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 71-10-1490; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. No.
2001-19-3036)
§ 6-4 ANIMALS PROHIBITED ON BEACH.
   No animal shall be permitted, even though on a leash, to be on the public
beach from May 15 through September 15 of each year.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547)
§ 6-5 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No animal shall be permitted, even though on a leash, to be in or enter upon
any school, school grounds, church, temple or public hall at any time. No
animal shall be permitted, even though on a leash, to be in or enter upon any
public garage, gas station, restaurant, ice cream parlor, soft drink parlor,
office, store (excluding pet shop), market or confectionery shop anywhere
within the village during the time that such place is open for public business.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. 2001-19-3036)
§ 6-6 UNLEASHED DOGS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No animal shall be permitted, except on a leash, to use or be upon any
public street, sidewalk, parkway or public place.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. 2001-19-3036)
§ 6-7 CONTROL OF ANIMALS ON OWNER'S PROPERTY.
   No owner of an animal shall fail to control such animal on the owner's
property through the means of a leash, fence or the immediate control of a
responsible person to whose hand or voice commands the animal is obedient.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-8 CONTROL OF ANIMALS IN HEAT.
   No owner of an animal shall permit such animal to disturb the peace and
quiet of any neighborhood by attracting other animals to the owner's premises.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-9 CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No horse, cow, hog, sheep, goat, goose or duck nor any animal, the
possession or keeping of which is prohibited by applicable state or federal law
or regulation, shall be kept on private property within the village.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. 2001-19-3036; Ord. No.
2022-09-3529, § 2)
§ 6-10 ANIMAL CARE.
   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient food and
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and inhumane care and
treatment.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 72-4-1496; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-11 ANIMAL LITTER ON OWNER'S PREMISES.
   No owner shall allow an accumulation of animal feces in any yard, pen or
premises in or upon which the owner's animal shall be confined or kept so that
such accumulation becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or a
health hazard to such animal.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-12 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No persons shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or
otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any combat between
animals or animals and humans.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 72-4-1496; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-13 ABANDONING OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall abandon any animal owned or possessed by that person.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-14 KEEPING DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No persons shall keep any animal that is known to be infected with any
disease transmissible to other animals or man, including severe parasitism,
unless such animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other
animals or humans to such disease.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-15 DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL AT LARGE.
   No person shall permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to be at
large within the village.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-16 MOTORISTS' DUTY TOWARDS ANIMALS.
   No person shall willfully injure or run down with a vehicle any animal. Any
person who kills or injures an animal while driving a vehicle shall stop at the
scene of the accident and render such assistance as practicable, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate and identify himself or herself to the owner or any
person having custody of the animal, and shall report the accident immediately
to the public safety department.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-19-3036)
§ 6-17 POISONING ANIMALS.
   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with
food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by an animal;
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on their private
property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-18 ANIMAL LITTER OFF OWNER'S PREMISES.
   (a)   No owner of an animal shall cause or permit such animal to be on the
private property of any person other than such owner or on any public property
unless such owner has in his or her immediate possession an appropriate device
for the removal of such animal's excrement.
(Ord. No. 68-14-1464; Ord. No. 84-1-1687; Ord. No. 2001-19-3036)
   (b)   No owner of a dog shall permit such dog to deposit excrement on the
private property of any person other than such owner or on any public property
unless such owner shall immediately thereafter remove such excrement to a
proper receptacle located on such owner's property.
   (c)   This §
6-18 shall not apply to guide dogs for the handicapped.
(Ord. No. 84-1-1687; Ord. No. 2001-19-3036)
§ 6-19 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. LICENSING OF ANIMALS
§ 6-20 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (a)   Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog or
cat over six months of age within this municipality must obtain a license as
herein provided.
   (b)   Written application for licenses shall be made to the village that
shall include all information required by the application form.
   (c)   If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats shall be for
a period of up to one year.
   (d)   Application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining
a dog or cat which is over six months, except that this requirement will not
apply to a non-resident keeping a dog or cat within the municipality for no
longer than 60 days.
   (e)   License fees shall not be required for guide dogs for the blind.
   (f)   (1)   Upon acceptance of the initial license application and fee, the
village shall issue a durable license tag stamped with an identifying number
and the year of issuance.
      (2)   The license tag is issued once for the life of the pet and annual
license renewal will occur without replacement of the tag.
      (3)   License tags shall be designed so that they may be conveniently
fastened to the animal’s collar or harness.
   (g)   Dogs and cats must wear license tags and collars at all times when off
the premises of the owners.
   (h)   The village shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all
license tags issued.
   (i)   The licensing period shall begin on May 1 and shall run for one year.
Application for annual licenses may be made 45 days prior to May 1 (by March 15
each year). Persons applying for a license during the licensing year shall be
required to pay the full fee stipulated in this section.
   (j)   The annual renewal application requires the payment of the applicable
fee set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (k)   No more than four dogs and four cats may be licensed to be kept at any
family dwelling.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2017-1-3409)
§ 6-21 LICENSING OF ACCESSORY ANIMALS.
   (a)   Accessory animal license application. Any person owning, keeping,
harboring or having custody of any accessory animal within the village must
obtain a license as herein provided. Only chickens may be kept as accessory
animals on property within the village. Keeping of any other accessory animal
is not permitted.
      (1)   Only the owner of a property used as a single-family dwelling may
apply for and receive an accessory animal license to keep chickens on their
property.
      (2)   A written application for an accessory animal license must be
submitted to the village and must include all information required by the
application form.
      (3)   Accessory animal licenses issued by the village shall be valid from
the date of issuance until the next succeeding January 1. Licenses must be
renewed annually.
      (4)   Maximum number of licenses: A maximum of ten accessory animal
licenses may be issued by the village at any time. Applications for accessory
animal licenses will be granted on a first come/first served basis. Renewals of
current accessory animal licenses will be given priority over new license
applicants.
      (5)   Application for an accessory animal license and each subsequent
renewal application must be accompanied by a payment of the applicable fee in
the amount set forth in the village's Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (6)   Licenses issued shall only benefit and inure to the applicant
listed on the application and will not run with property. A new license and
application fee shall be required in the event that an applicant or licensee
moves to a new address or transfers ownership of their accessory animals to a
person not already possessing an accessory animal license.
      (7)   At the time of issuance or renewal of an accessory animal license,
the village may impose specific conditions and restrictions upon the licensee
to prevent or minimize adverse effects on surrounding properties. Such
conditions or restrictions shall be expressly set forth in the license.
Violation of any such condition or restrictions shall be a violation of this
article and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license.
      (8)   Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the
director of public safety or their designee for a violation of any condition or
restrictions imposed upon a license, any provision of this chapter of the
village's code ordinances, or upon satisfactory proof that the licensed
activity was conducted in a manner detrimental to the public safety, health, or
welfare. Such revocation may be in addition to the imposition of any other
fines or penalties that may be applied pursuant to §
6-50 of this code of ordinances and shall be no defense to a prosecution for
such violation. A determination to revoke an accessory animal license by the
director of public safety or their designee shall be appealable to the village
manager no later than ten days after the issuance of the determination. The
appeal shall set forth with particularity the aspect or aspects of the
revocation determination from which the appeal is sought and the basis on which
the applicant believes the revocation determination was inconsistent with the
standards of this article. The village manager shall, after reviewing such
written appeal and making such investigations as the manager deems necessary or
appropriate, render a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall
either affirm, reverse or modify the determination of the director of public
safety or their designee. The decision of the village manager on the appeal
shall be final. Upon revocation of an accessory animal license, the accessory
animals and all enclosures, supplies and materials associated with the
accessory animals must be removed from the licensee's property no later than 14
days after the revocation is ordered.
   (b)   Inspections.
      (1)   Initial inspection. An inspection of the premises where accessory
animals are proposed to be kept shall be performed by the village prior to the
initial issuance of an accessory animal license, and periodically thereafter as
described herein. The applicant or licensee shall permit such inspection at
reasonable times and upon reasonable notice. Inspections shall be conducted
during regular business hours and only after reasonable advanced notice to the
applicant or licensee. An applicant's or licensee's consent to inspect their
property is an ongoing condition of any accessory animal license, and refusal
to permit an inspection shall be cause for rejection of an application or
revocation of an accessory animal license.
      (2)   Periodic inspections. The village may perform an inspection of
premises where accessory animals are kept for any of the following reasons:
         A.   The village requires an inspection as a condition of renewal of
an accessory animal license;
         B.   The applicant or licensee been issued a citation for violation of
any provision of this Code related to animal-keeping within the preceding 12
months; or
         C.   The village has probable cause to believe a violation of this
Code related to the licensed activity exists.
      (3)   Inspection criteria. The inspection shall verify that the applicant
or licensee provides adequate shelter, food, water, yard condition, yard
security, and other necessary conditions to preserve the health of the
accessory animals; and otherwise complies with the requirements of this
chapter. If any deficiency or deviation from the code of ordinance's conditions
and restrictions is found, the applicant or licensee must correct such
violation within such period of time as the village shall direct.
   (c)   Regulations for chickens. In addition to any other requirement of this
article, the following conditions and restriction shall apply to the keeping of
chickens authorized by an accessory animal license:
      (1)   No fewer than two adult chickens, and no more than four, adult
chickens may be kept or maintained on the property of a licensee at any one
time.
      (2)   Only female chickens (hens) may be kept or maintained on the
property of a licensee.
      (3)   A licensee shall not sell eggs produced by chickens upon the
property.
      (4)   No slaughtering of chickens may be conducted in public view on a
licensee's property.
      (5)   Enclosures for chickens:
         A.   Chickens must be kept in an enclosure, which may be in the form
of a pen, coop, or run.
         B.   Chicken enclosures will be considered accessory structures and
must satisfy all zoning requirements for accessory structures set forth in §
3-104 of the village's zoning code as well as all building permit requirements
for accessory structures set forth in Chapter 9 of the village code.
Notwithstanding any other applicable setback requirement for accessory
structures, chicken enclosures may be located no closer than ten feet from any
lot line of a property on which the enclosure is to be located.
         C.   Chicken enclosures may only be erected or maintained in the rear
of residential property, behind the principal structure on the licensee's lot.
Provided, however, that the village may, for good cause shown, allow enclosures
to be sited at an alternative location on a lot that provides a similar level
of visual screening, security, and privacy. No special notice or procedure is
required to grant this exception.
         D.   Chicken enclosures shall provide no less than four square feet of
area for each chicken housed.
         E.   Chicken enclosures must be maintained in a structurally sound and
useable condition.
         F.   Chicken enclosures must be constructed of sturdy and weather-
resistant materials, including without limitation, sturdy wire, wood, and
hardware cloth.
         G.   Chicken enclosures shall be secured to predators. All access
doors must be able to be shut and locked. All opening windows and vents must be
covered with predator-proof wire with less than one-inch openings.
      (6)   Chickens shall be provided with adequate open space on a licensee's
property in the form of either an enclosed chicken run or a yard fully enclosed
by a fence.
      (7)   Both a licensee's chicken enclosure and the accompanying open space
must be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
      (8)   All feed as well as other supplies and materials associated with
the keeping of chickens must be stored or contained in a manner to prevent
rats, mice or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with
the feed.
      (9)   No licensee shall permit:
         A.   Noxious or offensive odors from chicken-keeping, including the
odor of chickens or manure, to be perceptible at or beyond the boundary of the
licensee's property;
         B.   Offensive noise from chickens that disturbs the peace at any
time; or
         C.   Any other public or private nuisance resulting from the licensed
activity, consisting of litter, droppings, feathers, waste, or attraction of
pests or rodents.
      (10)   The licensee shall submit a livestock premises registration form
to the Illinois Department of Agriculture and shall provide a copy of the
submitted form to the village unless the Department shall stop accepting
residential chicken registrations.
(Ord. No. 2022-09-3529, § 2)
§§ 6-22 - 6-29 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
§ 6-30 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of such village employees as shall be designated
for that purpose by the director of public safety to take up and impound any
animal found in the village in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   Unless claimed by the owner, impounded animals shall be kept for not
less than five working days.
   (c)   If by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal
can be identified, the public safety department shall immediately upon
impoundment notify the owner by telephone or personal notification, if
practicable, and otherwise by mail.
   (d)   Any animal not claimed by its owner within five working days shall
become the property of the village, and shall be placed for adoption in a
suitable home or humanely destroyed as determined in the discretion of the
director of public safety.
   (e)   A complete registry of all impounded animals shall be kept indicating
breed, color and sex, and, if licensed, the name and address of the owner and
the license tag number.
   (f)   An owner or person claiming an impounded animal shall pay, before
release of such animal, an impounding fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee
and Fine Schedule, plus all costs of maintaining the animal while impounded and
any license fees required.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371)
§§ 6-31 - 6-39 RESERVED.
ARTICLE IV. RABIES CONTROL
§ 6-40 ANIMAL BITE NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing that a person has been bitten by
an animal to fail to notify within 24 hours the director of public safety of
such fact.
(Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-41 DUTY TO KEEP ANIMAL FOR OBSERVATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner to sell, give away, destroy or otherwise
dispose of, or have inoculated against rabies an animal known to have bitten a
person until it has been released from confinement for observation for rabies
as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§ 6-42 PROCEDURE FOR OBSERVATION.
   (a)   The owner of an animal involved in a biting incident, upon receiving
notice of such fact in any manner, shall confine the biting animal under
observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten days beginning
within 24 hours of the biting incident. The biting animal may be confined on
the premises of its owner in a manner that will prohibit it from biting any
person or animal if a licensed veterinarian adjudges such confinement
satisfactory.
      (1)   When the biting animal is currently inoculated with rabies vaccine
the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the director of
public safety on the first and tenth day of observation.
      (2)   When the biting animal is not currently inoculated with rabies
vaccine the animal's health shall be reported by the veterinarian to the
director of public safety on the first, fifth and tenth days of observation.
   (b)   If it is determined by the examining veterinarian that the confined
animal has rabies the director of public safety shall order the animal humanely
destroyed.
   (c)   If it is determined that the confined animal is not infected with
rabies then at the end of the period of confinement it shall be released to the
owner of such animal upon proof of a current rabies inoculation certificate and
license tag and upon payment of any fees and charges, including any fee for
veterinary services. If the animal is not claimed by the owner the animal may
be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch.
8, par. 361.
(Ord. 77-5-1547. § 1)
§ 6-43 ANIMALS AS PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   Any animal that shall bite, attack or attempt to bite one or more persons
three or more times within any five-year period is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. The license for such animal shall be revoked by the director
of public safety and such animal shall not be kept within the village. If any
such animal shall be found within the village it shall be impounded and
disposed of as an unclaimed dog and the owner shall have no right to claim such
dog.
(Ord. No. 77-5-1547, § 1)
§§ 6-44 - 6-49 RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. PENALTIES
§ 6-50 PENALTIES.
   (a)   The owner of an animal violating §§
6-2(a),
6-2(b),
6-2(f),
6-2(g) or §
6-18 of this code in any licensing period shall be subject to a fine in the
amounts set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   Any violation of §§
6-2(c),
6-2(d),
6-2(e) or §
6-15 of this code shall require a court appearance and shall be subject to a
fine in the amounts set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, and
any other additional relief that the court finds necessary and appropriate,
including, but not limited to, ordering any dog to be muzzled, to be kept out
of the village or to be destroyed.
   (c)   The owner of an animal failing to provide required animal licensing
documentation as required under §
6-20 within 30 days of being notified of a deficiency in the application for a
pet license shall be subject to an additional administrative processing charge
in the amount set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (d)   Any other violation of this chapter not specifically addressed in this
§
6-50 shall be subject to the provisions of §
16-1 of this code.
   (e)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from seeking relief
in the civil courts against the owner of an animal committing a private
nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371)
CHAPTER 7: AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
Section
   
7-1   Auctioneer's license - required
   
7-2   Same - application
   
7-3   Same - fees
   
7-4   Same - investigation of applicant
   
7-5   Same - denial to persons not of good moral character
   
7-6   Same - issuance
   
7-7   Employees
   
7-8   Auctions on streets, etc., prohibited
   
7-9   Chapter not applicable on certain sales
Charter reference:
   As to authority of village to license, tax and regulate auctioneers, etc.,
see char.,
art. IV, § 25
Cross-reference:
   As to police auction of bicycles, see §
23-45
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to license and regulate
auctioneers, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 24, § 11-42-1
§ 7-1 AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct an auction in the village or do business as an
auctioneer without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter
provided in this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 393)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 7-2 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Application for auctioneers' licenses shall be made in writing to the
village manager. Such application shall state therein the place of business, if
any, intended to be occupied, and the names of any employees, not to exceed
two, who are desired to be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority
of the license.
(1929 Code, § 395)
§ 7-3 SAME - FEES.
   The fee, payable in advance, for auctioneers' licenses shall be $100 for an
annual license, $30 for a monthly license and $5 for a daily license.
(1929 Code, § 394)
§ 7-4 SAME - INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   The chief of police, or any other officer designated by the village manager,
shall investigate the character of every applicant for an auctioneer's license.
(1929 Code, § 396)
§ 7-5 SAME - DENIAL TO PERSONS NOT OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER.
   No auctioneer's license shall be issued under this chapter to any person who
is not of good moral character.
(1929 Code, § 396)
§ 7-6 SAME - ISSUANCE.
   Upon receipt of satisfactory proof of good moral character of an applicant
for an auctioneer's license, and upon receipt of the fee therefor required by §
7-3, the village manager shall cause the desired license to be issued.
§ 7-7 EMPLOYEES.
   Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate employees, not to
exceed two in number, who may be authorized by him or her to conduct auctions.
Notice containing the names of the employees so designated shall be given to
the village manager, and an employee’s license shall be issued on the payment
of a fee as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
This license shall be valid for one year. It shall be unlawful for any employee
not licensed under this section to conduct an auction, or for an auctioneer to
permit an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed employee.
(1929 Code, § 397) (Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 7-8 AUCTIONS ON STREETS, ETC., PROHIBITED.
   No persons shall sell or attempt to sell or cry for sale at public auction
any goods, chattels or personal or real property of any kind upon the streets
or sidewalks of the village.
(1929 Code, § 398)
Cross-reference:
   As to streets and sidewalks generally, see
ch. 30
§ 7-9 CHAPTER NOT APPLICABLE ON CERTAIN SALES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any public auction or sale made or
conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by
virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
(1929 Code, § 399)
CHAPTER 8: BARBERSHOPS
Section
Article I. In General
   
8-1   Definition
   
8-2   Permit - required
   
8-3   Same - application; inspection of premises, etc.; issuance
   
8-4   License - required
   
8-5   Same - application, etc.
   
8-6   Same - fee
Article II. Sanitary Regulations
   
8-7   Compliance with article
   
8-8   Ventilation, lighting and construction of premises
   
8-9   Premises, fixtures, instruments, etc., to be kept clean, sanitary, etc.
   
8-10   Hot and cold running water required; bowls, etc., to be cleaned after
use
   
8-11   Combs and brushes to be kept in sanitary condition, etc.; sterilization
of razors, clippers, etc.
   
8-12   Cleaning and sterilization of articles that cannot be boiled
   
8-13   Towels, linen, etc.
   
8-14   Use of styptic, alum, etc.
   
8-15   Barber with contagious, etc., disease prohibited
   
8-16   Sleeping in barbershop
   
8-17   Sterilization of instruments, etc., after use upon sick person
   
8-18   Personal cleanliness of barbers
   
8-19   State sanitary rules to be enforced
   
8-20   Regulations to be posted
   
8-21   Barber's certificate of registration to be displayed
   
8-22   Violation of article
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
Statutory reference:
   As to authority of village to license, regulate, etc., barbers and
barbershops, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-1
   For state law as to barbers generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 16 3/4,
§§ 14.35 to 14.96
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 8-1 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter a BARBERSHOP means a fixed place of business
wherein barbering is practiced and carried on.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-2 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   Every person in the village who desires to establish a barbershop or who
desires to continue and maintain a barbershop shall make application to the
health officer for a permit to do so.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 8-3 SAME - APPLICATION; INSPECTION OF PREMISES, ETC.; ISSUANCE.
   The application referred to in the preceding section shall be made in
writing and shall set forth the name of the proprietor or owner, the name of
the manager and the names of all persons who are employed in such barbershop,
together with the location, giving the street and number where such shop is to
be operated and maintained. If, upon inspection, it is found that such location
is suitable and that the persons to be employed are free from all communicable
diseases and that the sanitary regulations provided for in §§
8-7 to
8-22 can be strictly observed, then the health officer shall issue to such
person the permit applied for.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-4 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, maintain or operate any barbershop, as defined in
this chapter, without first having obtained a license to do so, in addition to
the permit from the health officer as provided for in §
8-2.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 8-5 SAME - APPLICATION, ETC.
   Every applicant for a license to operate a barbershop shall make application
for such license to the village clerk. At the time of making such application,
the applicant shall exhibit to the village clerk a valid state certificate of
registration as a registered barber and a permit from the health officer, as
required by §
8-2.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-6 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for a barbershop shall be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-
3394)
ARTICLE II. SANITARY REGULATIONS
§ 8-7 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.
   The owner or manager and all of the employees of any barbershop shall
conform strictly to the sanitary regulations set out in this article.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-8 VENTILATION, LIGHTING AND CONSTRUCTION OF PREMISES.
   Every barbershop shall be located in a building or room that is well
ventilated and well lighted and of such construction that it may be easily
cleaned.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to buildings and construction generally, see
ch. 9
§ 8-9 PREMISES, FIXTURES, INSTRUMENTS, ETC., TO BE KEPT CLEAN, SANITARY, ETC.
   All barbershops, together with the furniture, fixtures, instruments, and
linen therein, shall be kept in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-10 HOT AND COLD RUNNING WATER REQUIRED; BOWLS, ETC., TO BE CLEANED AFTER
USE.
   All barbershops shall be at all times supplied with hot and cold running
water. All bowls, basins, jars and like receptacles shall be antiseptically
cleaned immediately after using.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-11 COMBS AND BRUSHES TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION, ETC.; STERILIZATION
OF RAZORS, CLIPPERS, ETC.
   Combs and hair brushes shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times
and shall be cleaned thoroughly with soap and hot water after each using. All
razors, shears, clippers and appliances shall be sterilized immediately after
being used by boiling water or steam sterilization or by proper use of approved
liquid germicides. Thereafter, until used, such instruments and appliances
shall be kept in a sterilized cabinet full of the fumes of formaldehyde gas
solution, changed daily.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-12 CLEANING AND STERILIZATION OF ARTICLES THAT CANNOT BE BOILED.
   Glass or metal articles that cannot be boiled shall be cleaned in soap and
water, wiped in alcohol and kept in a formaldehyde sterilizer, or immersed in
an approved germicidal solution for not less than one hour.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-13 TOWELS, LINEN, ETC.
   Only unused, freshly laundered towels, including dry towels, steamed towels
or wash cloths, shall be used for each patron. All clean linen shall be kept in
a closed cabinet until used. The headrest shall be covered with a freshly
laundered towel or fresh paper before using for each patron. In cutting the
hair of any person, a freshly laundered towel or fresh paper neck strip shall
be placed about the neck so as to prevent the hair cloth from touching the
skin.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-14 USE OF STYPTIC, ALUM, ETC.
   The use of lump alum, styptic pencils, finger bowls, shaving mugs, powder
puffs and sponges is prohibited. The use of styptic, alum in powder or liquid
form and individual applicators is permitted.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-15 BARBER WITH CONTAGIOUS, ETC., DISEASE PROHIBITED.
   No barber having a contagious or infectious disease shall be permitted to
work in a barbershop.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to authority of village with regard to prevention
of contagious diseases, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 5
§ 8-16 SLEEPING IN BARBERSHOP.
   No barbershop shall be used as a place in which to sleep.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-17 STERILIZATION OF INSTRUMENTS, ETC., AFTER USE UPON SICK PERSON.
   All tools, instruments or appliances shall be thoroughly sterilized
immediately after their use upon any sick person.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-18 PERSONAL CLEANLINESS OF BARBERS.
   Every barber or other employee shall wash his or her hands thoroughly
immediately before and after serving each customer and shall, while serving
customers, wear a clean, washable apron or coat.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-19 STATE SANITARY RULES TO BE ENFORCED.
   The sanitary rules for barbershops of the State Department of Registration,
or any other agency of the state authorized to promulgate such rules, that are
now and from time to time in the future enforced, shall be given the same force
and effect as if they were set forth in this article insofar as they are not
inconsistent with the requirements of this article, and violations thereof
shall be subject to the same penalties provided for the violations of the other
regulations of this article.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-20 REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED.
   A copy of the regulations set out in this article shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each barbershop for the information and guidance of
persons working or employed therein and for the public at large.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-21 BARBER'S CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION TO BE DISPLAYED.
   It shall be the duty of every barber to conspicuously display his or her
certificate of registration at all times in front of his or her work stand or
mirror where it may readily be seen by all persons whom he or she serves.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 8-22 VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.
   Any person violating any of the regulations set out in this article shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
16-1.
(Ord. No. 1406)
CHAPTER 9: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Article I. In General
   
9-1   Definitions generally
   
9-2   "Building officers" defined
   
9-3   Right of entry, etc., of building officers
   
9-4   Inspections generally
   
9-5   Stop work orders
   
9-6   Compliance with chapter
   
9-7   Conflicts between general and specific provisions
   
9-8   Procedure on violations and appeals
Article II. Building Permits
   
9-9   When required
   
9-10   Time limit; extension
   
9-11   Waived for ordinary repairs
   
9-12   Application; plans; plats
   
9-13   Issuance
   
9-14   Temporary permit
   
9-15   Fees and charges
   
9-16   Permit renewal prohibited; restoration of work
   
9-17   Alterations in plans
Article III. Classification and Regulations for Construction of Buildings
   
9-18   Adoption of the 2021 editions of the International Building Code,
International Existing Building Code, and the International Residential Code
   
9-18a   Adoption of the National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition
   
9-18b   Adoption of the International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition
   
9-18c   Adoption of the Illinois State Plumbing Code
   
9-18c.1   Water saving device required
   
9-18c.2   Faucets in public restrooms
   
9-18c.3   Recycling of water in car washes
   
9-18d   Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 Edition
   
9-18e   Energy Conservation Code
   
9-18f   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021 Edition
   
9-18g   Adoption of the Illinois State Accessibility Code
   
9-18.1   Repealed
   
9-18.2   Repealed
   
9-18.3   Repealed
   
9-18.4   Repealed
   
9-18.5   Repealed
   
9-18.6   Repealed
   
9-19   Change of classification of buildings
   
9-20   Application of chapter to existing buildings
   
9-21   Reserved
   
9-22   Reserved
Article IV. Occupation of Streets and Street Openings
   
9-23   Street occupation permit - required
   
9-24   Same - application; issuance
   
9-25   Same - limit of occupation as to time
   
9-26   Same - limit of occupation as to space
   
9-27   Sidewalk and driveway maintenance
   
9-28   Street, etc., to be kept clear
   
9-29   Barricades
   
9-30   Fees for street occupation and deposit for restoration of streets and
sidewalks
   
9-31   Street openings
   
9-32   Driveways; tree preservation
   
9-33 - 9-36   Reserved
Article V. Sewers
   
9-37   Connections generally
   
9-38   Reserved
   
9-39   Manholes at angles; manhole, etc., construction generally
   
9-40   Sewer pipe - material
   
9-41   Same - sizes
   
9-42   Same - how laid generally
   
9-43   Same - joints
   
9-44   Same - grade
   
9-45   Garage drainage
   
9-45A   Maintenance and repair of sewer service pipes
Article VI. Fire District
   
9-46   Reserved
   
9-47   Reserved
Article VII. Signs
   
9-48 - 9-48.5   Repealed
   
9-49 - 9-49.9   Repealed
Article VIII. Dangerous Buildings
   
9-50   Deemed a nuisance
   
9-51   Report to board of trustees; investigation; notice to owner, etc., to
abate nuisance; abatement by village on failure of owner, etc.
   
9-52   Posting notice on building; removal, etc., of such notice
   
9-53   Account and recovery of costs when structure removed, etc., by village
   
9-54   Inspections and records thereof; right of entry of certain village
officers
   
9-55   Emergency action
   
9-56   Closing dangerous buildings; suspension of occupant's business license
   
9-57   Remedy of unsanitary conditions prerequisite to occupancy; refusal of
buildings permit pending recovery of costs
Article IX. Moving Buildings
   
9-58   Permit - required
   
9-59   Same - application
   
9-60   Same - issuance; fee
   
9-61   Bond and insurance required
   
9-62   Compliance with code and ordinances, etc.
   
9-63   Appeal of decision of development services director regarding moving
buildings
   
9-64   Reserved
   
9-65   Village control
   
9-66   Lights and warnings
Article X. Private Swimming Pools
   
9-67   Definition
   
9-68   Permit for construction - required; application
   
9-69   Same - fees
   
9-70   Sanitation generally
   
9-71   Enclosures
   
9-72   Water supply, filter system, etc.
   
9-72.1   Permit for discharge of water from swimming pools
   
9-72.1(a)   Compliance required
   
9-72.1(b)   Definitions
   
9-72.1(c)   Permits - information and fees
   
9-72.1(d)   Approval of application - permit conditions
   
9-72.1(e)   Bond
   
9-73   Enforcement of article; right of entry; penalties
Article XI. Fences
   
9-74   Definitions
   
9-75   Height restrictions
   
9-75.1   Measurement of height along a street line; other locations
   
9-76   Density restriction
   
9-76.1   Measurement of density
   
9-77   Permit required
   
9-77.1   Finished sides of fences
   
9-78   Fence board of appeals
   
9-79   Issuance of variations
   
9-80   Nonconforming fences, etc. - notice to owner, etc.
   
9-81   Same - demolition by village
Article XII. Storm Water Runoff Restrictions
(Ord. No. 2007-19-3196)
   
9-82   Purpose and scope
   
9-83   Regulation
   
9-84 - 9-87   Repealed
Article XIII. Land Grades
   
9-87A   General prohibition
   
9-88   Permit required
   
9-89   Permit application
   
9-90   Issuance of permit
   
9-91   Exemptions
   
9-92   Fees
   
9-93   Abatement; lien
Article XIV. Flood Control Regulations
(Ord. No. 2008-16-3227)
   
9-94   Purpose
   
9-95   Definitions
   
9-96   Administration; duties of enforcement official
   
9-96.1   Floodplain development permit
   
9-97   Base flood elevation
   
9-98   Occupation and use of flood fringe areas
   
9-99   Occupation and use of regulatory floodways
   
9-100   Occupation and use of SFHA areas where regulatory floodways are not
identified
   
9-101   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas
   
9-102   Application to other approvals
   
9-103   Variations
   
9-104   Disclaimer of liability
   
9-105   Penalty
   
9-106   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
9-107   Separability
   
9-108 - 9-109   Reserved
Article XV. Steep Slope Regulations
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
   
9-110   Introduction
   
9-111   Statement of purpose; applicability
   
9-112   Definitions
   
9-113   Development in slope transition area
   
9-114   Development in the steep slope zone
   
9-115   Development standards
   
9-116   Required plans and permits
   
9-117   Stability of the steep slopes
   
9-118   Tree removal in the slope impact area
   
9-119   Appeals of Director's decisions
   
9-120   Zoning variations
   
9-121   Enforcement and penalties
   
9-122   Corrective measures
   
9-123   Administration; fees; conflicting regulations
   
9-124   Effective date
Article XVI. Excavations
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869)
   
9-125   Excavations - when allowed; nuisances
   
9-126   Excavations - barriers and other safeguards
   
9-127   Excavations - standing water
Cross-reference:
   As to barb-wire fences, see §
24-4
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
   As to railroad right-of-way fences, see §§
27-7,
27-8
   As to streets and sidewalks generally, see
ch. 30
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate partition fences and
party walls, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-30-1
   For state law as to authority of village with regard to unsafe buildings,
see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 24 §§ 11-31-1, 11-31-2
   For state law as to authority of village with regard to use of streets, see
Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-2
   For state law as to recording of building permits, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963,
ch. 24, §§ 11-39-1, 11-39-39-1, 11-39-2
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 9-1 DEFINITIONS GENERALLY.
   Unless otherwise defined in this chapter or in the edition of the various
construction codes adopted herein,, the terms used in this chapter shall have
the same definitions or meanings that such terms have in the Glencoe Zoning
Code. Words and terms not defined in the Zoning Code and not otherwise defined
in this chapter shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the
context may imply. The word SHALL is always mandatory and not directory.
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-2 "BUILDING OFFICERS" DEFINED.
   The title BUILDING OFFICERS, when used in this chapter, shall mean and
include the development services director, building commissioner, public safety
director, public works director, health officer, and all deputies, inspectors
and assistants, as provided for by the president and board of trustees, or
their respective designees.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-3 RIGHT OF ENTRY, ETC., OF BUILDING OFFICERS.
   Subject to the provisions in this section, in the discharge of his or her
duties, the building officer shall have the authority to enter at any
reasonable hour any building, structure, or premise in the jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this code. Except where the owner or operator or
occupant refuses entry, an order of court, subpoena, or other legal process
shall not be necessary to any entry, examination, or survey in connection with
the inspections and duties of any building officer under this code. However,
whenever any building officer, after presentation of proper credentials and
request for entry to inspect, is refused access to any building, dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit, the building officer is authorized to petition
any court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search warrant
authorizing the inspection of such building, dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit, for the purpose of making such inspections as shall be necessary
to the enforcement of the provisions of this code.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-4 INSPECTIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   The development services director shall cause to be inspected all
buildings, structures and portions thereof which are in course of being
constructed, erected, remodeled, enlarged, altered, repaired, raised, lowered,
underpinned, moved or wrecked under a permit issued by the village for such
work.
   (b)   A final inspection shall be made upon the completion of any work done
under a permit issued by the village for such work as determined to be
necessary by the development services director.
   (c)   Such other inspections shall be made as the development services
director may from time to time deem necessary in order to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or the zoning code, and to promote public health and
safety.
   (d)   Records of inspections shall be made and kept on file in such manner
as the village manager may direct, or as the president and board of trustees
may provide.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-5 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   (a)   In case work is being done in violation of, or contrary to, the manner
prescribed in this chapter, any building officer is hereby authorized to order
such work stopped. Such verbal stop order shall be followed by a written stop
work order from a building officer.
   (b)   On receipt of such stop work order, it shall be unlawful to continue
with the work, except pumping or such other work as may be necessary to prevent
property damage, until written notice to proceed shall be given by the
development services director. Such written notice shall be given when the
provisions of this chapter are complied with.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-6 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain,
enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin, move, wreck or
excavate for any building or structure, or any portion thereof, in the village
in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or to change the use or
occupancy of any such building, structure or portion thereof, unless the
building, structure or portion thereof is in full compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter for such use or occupancy.
§ 9-7 CONFLICTS BETWEEN GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PROVISIONS.
   When a general provision or requirement of this chapter conflicts with a
specific provision relating to the construction, equipment or maintenance of
any building or structure, or any portion thereof, then, and for that case, the
specific provision or requirement shall govern.
§ 9-8 PROCEDURE ON VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS.
   (a)   In case of violations of the provisions of this chapter, a verbal
notice thereof shall be immediately served by the development services director
or other building officer on the person in charge of, or responsible for, the
work. Such verbal notice shall be followed by a written notice.
   (b)   If the verbal and written notices are respected and steps are promptly
taken to correct the deviation observed, so as to conform to the provisions of
this chapter, then the deviation observed shall not be deemed a willful
violation thereof, nor be subject to any penalty provided in §
16-1.
   (c)   In the event that the work, or condition, continues in defiance of
such verbal and written notices, or if the deviation is not promptly corrected,
then the deviation shall be deemed a willful violation, and the development
services director shall promptly stop the work until the provisions of this
chapter are complied with.
   (d)   The development services director and other officers of the village
are hereby authorized to use the police power of the village in such manner and
to such extent as the character of the violation and the interests of public
health and safety may demand in securing compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (e)   Any person who causes any erection, construction, repair, alteration,
removal, or excavation to be made in or for any building, structure, or any
part thereof, without first obtaining the requisite permit or permits shall be
subject to any fines or penalties available under this code.
   (f)   Where any work requiring a building or construction permit in
accordance with Section
9-9 of this code has been started without the required permit, the fee for the
retroactive issuance of the required permit will be double the typically
applicable total fees as set forth in the village’s comprehensive fee and fine
schedule.
   (g)   Penalty for violation. Any person who violates a provision of this
code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of an
approved plan or directive of the building officer, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a
civil fine as set forth in the village’s comprehensive fee and fine schedule.
The building officer may elect to prosecute any such violation as a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $750, or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or both fine and imprisonment for each provision of this
code violated. Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary,
whenever any statute or public act of the General Assembly shall limit the
amount of any fine or penalty, the fine or penalty imposed by this code shall
be maximum amount permitted by such statute or public act.
   (h)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from
instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure, or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or
occupancy of a building or structure on or about any premises.
   (i)   Appeals. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person
aggrieved by an action taken, order issued, or determination made pursuant to
this code, may appeal to the development services director for reconsideration.
   (j)   Court review. Any person aggrieved following an appeal as provided in
this section may petition the Cook County Circuit Court in the manner provided
by law for administrative review.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
ARTICLE II. BUILDING PERMITS
§ 9-9 WHEN REQUIRED.
   (a)   Before proceeding with the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
or excavation for any building or structure in the village, a permit for works
listed in subsection (b) below shall first be obtained by the owner or his or
her agent from the development services director as provided in this article.
   (b)   A list of construction activities that require a building permit shall
be maintained by the village and made publicly available. All fees for any
application and permit pursuant to this code are as set forth in the village’s
comprehensive fee and fine schedule.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-10 TIME LIMIT; EXTENSION.
   (a)   A building permit shall expire if the work covered by the permit is
not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit or if the work is
not completed and a certificate of occupancy has not been issued within 15
months after issuance of the permit. No permit fees shall be refunded because
of the expiration of any permit, except as specifically provided in this
section.
   (b)   If an applicant fails to complete the work for which a building permit
has been issued within the time provided in subsection (a) of this section, the
applicant may request a six-month extension of the original permit. The
applicant shall be required to submit a written request for a permit extension,
stating that the plans, specifications, and conditions included in the original
permit application required by §
9-12 have not changed. Upon receipt of a complete request and payment of a
permit extension fee, the development services director shall grant the
applicant a six-month permit extension. After the expiration of the permit
extension, the applicant may apply for additional extensions as may be
necessary to complete the project. The fee for the first six-month extension
shall be 50% of the original building permit fee; the fee for a second six-
month permit extension shall be 75% of the original building permit fee; and
the fee for any subsequent six-month extensions shall be 100% of the original
building permit fee, as set forth in the village's Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule. The applicant will be required to pay the full fee for the permit
extension prior to the issuance of the six-month permit extension, regardless
of the scope of work remaining to be completed. However, if the work authorized
by the permit extension is completed prior to six months after the issuance of
the permit extension, the village will refund a portion of the permit extension
fee to the applicant in an amount prorated by the number of full months
remaining in the permit extension (e.g., if the work in completed in four and
one-half months, one sixth of the fee will be returned to the applicant). If
the applicant fails to request a permit extension, the original permit shall be
deemed to have expired, and any subsequent requests to extend the permit time
shall be treated as applications for a new building permit, which permit shall
be granted upon payment of new building permit fees in the amount prescribed in
§
9-15 of this code for an original permit; provided, however, that if any code
requirements have changed since the issuance of the original permit affecting
portions of the work that has not yet been constructed and inspected, then the
plans and construction documents for the work shall be modified to comply with
such changed code requirements.
   (c)   In the event that the erection, construction, alteration, repair,
removal or the excavation of any building or structure allowed by a building
permit or permit extension issued by the code official pursuant to this section
is temporarily halted, delayed or substantially impaired as a result of
circumstances that were (1) outside of the applicant’s control, and (2) not
reasonably foreseeable with the exercise of due diligence and professional
judgment meeting the standards of the building trades industry (referred to
hereafter as “uncontrollable circumstances”), the applicant may petition the
code official for a permit tolling extension. Uncontrollable circumstances
warranting the issuance of a permit tolling extension include, but are not
limited to, strikes or labor disputes (other than those caused by the unlawful
acts of the applicant, its partners, or affiliated entities), the default,
dissolution, or bankruptcy of the general contractor, extraordinary weather
conditions, or other similar acts of God.
   (d)   The applicant shall be required to deliver evidence that the applicant
has prosecuted construction of the permitted work with diligence, and shall
provide evidence of causes of uncontrollable circumstances that have prevented
the work from being completed within the original permit or permit extension
period. If the code official determines that the applicant has prosecuted work
with diligence, or that the applicant’s inability to complete the work within
the original permit or permit extension period was due to uncontrollable
circumstances, the code official may, at his sole and absolute discretion,
authorize a permit tolling extension to extend the term of the original permit
or permit extension for a period of time equal to the duration the
uncontrollable circumstance persisted, or such lesser period that the code
official determines to be appropriate. Permit tolling extensions may be granted
retroactively on the condition that the applicant must apply for the permit
tolling extension as soon as is reasonably possible after the uncontrollable
circumstances have abated or subsided.
(Ord. No. 2015-16-3388, § 2; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2022-05-3525, § 2;
Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-11 WAIVED FOR ORDINARY REPAIRS.
   A permit will not be required for ordinary repair work, incidental to the
upkeep of a building or structure; provided, that there is not contemplated or
involved any change in the classification or any increase in the fire hazard
thereof; nor the removal of any beam or support; nor the renewal of any
external or division wall or portion thereof; nor the installing, closing or
changing of any stairs, exits, scuttles, skylights or fire escapes, nor
changing the number, location or connections of the fixtures, traps, vents,
waste, soil or drain pipes of the plumbing system; nor changing the number,
location or connections of the lighting system; nor re-shingling or recovering
of roofs or the renewing of the exterior woodwork of any frame building,
structure or portion thereof, inside the fire district.
§ 9-12 APPLICATION; PLANS; PLATS.
   (a)   (1)   Application for a building permit shall be made by the owner or
his or her agent on forms prepared and kept on file by the village, and shall
describe the location of the proposed work by setting forth the correct address
of the land upon which the building, structure or part thereof is to be
erected, constructed, altered or repaired and the street named and number
assigned to the site; the purpose for which the building or structure is
designed to be used; the length, width and height thereof; the number of rooms;
the total cost of the work proposed to be done under the permit sought; the
name and address of the owner, or his or her agent or architect; and, if
contracts for the work have been let, the names of the general contractors and
subcontractors, such as mason, carpenter, sewer builder, plumber and
electrician.
      (2)   Such application shall also contain an agreement to be signed by
the owner or by his or her agent or architect on his or her behalf, conditioned
that he or she or his or her duly authorized agent or architect, if granted the
permit sought, will construct the work in accordance with the description set
forth in the application and accompanying plans and specifications. It shall
also contain a statement that the applicant is the legal owner of all of the
property scheduled to be built upon as shown in the description and survey
plat, including all open spaces required by the zoning ordinance.
   (b)   (1)   An application for a building permit shall be accompanied by
sets of plans and specifications which shall be examined and approved by the
development services director or his or her assistants before a permit is
granted. All such plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale and pursuant to a
method required by the village and clearly set forth in the permit application
form. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured, and drawings
made explicit and complete, including the location of all sewers and drain
pipes. The plans, drawings and specifications shall be sufficiently complete
that the proposed structure could be constructed therefrom by a competent
contractor, building or engineer without further directions of any kind.
      (2)   No permit shall be granted or plans approved unless such plans are
made and signed by such persons as are permitted, under the laws of the state,
to make plans for buildings, as provided in “An Act to Provide for the
Licensing of Architects and Regulating the Practice of Architecture as a
Profession in the State of Illinois,” approved June 24, 1919, and amendments
thereto, or in “An Act to Provide for the Licensing of Structural Engineers,”
approved June 24, 1919, and amendments thereto; except, that plans for a
single-family dwelling or a private garage may be made and signed by the owner;
provided, that such buildings are to be occupied and used by the owner as a
permanent residence, or accessory thereto; and provided further, that plans for
not more than one single- family dwelling or private garage shall be so
excepted during a period of one year from date of permit, for any one owner.
      (3)   True copies of such plans as may be required, in the opinion of the
director of public works, to illustrate the features of construction and
equipment of the building referred to, shall be filed with the development
services director, and shall remain on file with the village for a period of
six months after the occupation of such building, after which such plans shall
be returned by the development services director to the person by whom they
have been deposited with him or her, upon demand. It shall not be obligatory
upon the development services director to retain such plans in his or her
custody for more than six months after the occupation of the building to which
they relate.
      (4)   Complete plans and specifications of buildings for public or
business use for which permits are granted shall remain on file permanently
with the village.
      (5)   In all cases, the approved plans, together with building permits,
shall be kept on the premises while the work is in progress.
   (c)   As determined to be necessary by the development services director, an
application for a building permit may be required to be accompanied by a plat
of survey of the property prepared by a state registered land surveyor and
compliance with the provisions of the zoning code shall be deemed requisite
before a building permit shall be granted.
   (d)   (1)   Application for a permit for the removal of a building or
structure or any part thereof shall be made by the owner or his or her agent to
the development services director on forms prepared and kept on file with the
village, and shall describe the location of the proposed work by setting forth
the correct street name and number assigned to the site; the name and address
of the owner, or his or her agent of architect; and, if contracts for the work
have been let, the names of the general contractors and subcontractors. Such
application shall also contain an agreement to be signed by the owner or by his
or her agent or architect on his or her behalf, conditioned that he or she or
his or her duly authorized agent or architect, if granted the permit sought,
will remove the building or structure or part thereof in accordance with the
description set forth in the application and accompanying plans. The permit
application shall also contain a statement that the applicant is the legal
owner of all of the property and the building or structure scheduled to be
removed as shown in the application materials.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans or
details for the demolition and removal of the building or structure, as well as
the restoration of the premises, in accordance with the requirements of this
code.
(Ord. No. 89-8-1801; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-13 ISSUANCE.
   (a)   When the application for a building permit has been made, and the
plans, specifications and plats in conformity with the provisions of this
article have been submitted, examined and approved, as provided for by this
article, the development services director shall issue a permit, and shall file
such application, and shall apply to such plans and plans a final official
stamp, stating that the drawings to which the same has been applied comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   No permit issued for the erection, construction, alteration, repair or
excavation for any wall, structure or building, or any portion thereof, for
which a fee is prescribed by this article shall be in force until the fees
prescribed therefor shall have been paid.
   (c)   The development services director shall not sign or issue any permit
authorizing the construction, erection, repair, alteration or excavation for
any building or structure unless the plans submitted for the approval of the
development services director show that such building or structure with all its
appurtenances, foundations and attachments can be erected entirely within the
limits of the lot or tract of land upon which it is proposed to erect such
building or structure, in accordance with the zoning ordinance, except as
otherwise provided in this code; and no permit to erect, repair, alter or
excavate for any building or structure shall authorize the use of any part of
any public highway or other public ground for the construction or maintenance
of such building or structure, except as otherwise provided in this code; nor
shall any permit be issued for the construction or maintenance of any balcony
or canopy extending over any public highway, public street, public alley or
other public ground, except as allowed by the provisions of this code and the
zoning code. No building permit for the construction of a new principal
building, or for the construction of an accessory building or structure,
addition or residential recreational facility, shall be issued unless the
provisions of chapter 34, article III (Tree Preservation) are satisfied.
(Ord. N0. 2000-10-2092)
   (d)   (1)   Demolition permits. No building permit for removal of any
principal building or principal structure may be issued earlier than 60 days
after the village has received completed application therefor; provided,
however, that no building permit for removal of any principal building or
principal structure that has been designated by the village as either a
landmark, or within a historic district, pursuant to Chapter 26A or Chapter 26B
of this code, may be issued earlier than 180 days after the village has
received a completed application for such removal.
      (2)   Notice shall be provided to the preservation commission within 30
days of the filing of any application for removal of any such landmark building
or structure.
      (3)   Such application shall include evidence satisfactory to the
development services director or the director’s designee that the applicant has
notified the owners and residents of all nearby properties regarding such
proposed removal. The development services director may, at their discretion,
provide this notification to nearby property owners and residents in lieu of
requiring the applicant to do so.
      (4)   In addition, no building permit for removal of any principal
building or structure on a lot shall be issued until:
         A.   A building permit has been issued for the replacement principal
building or structure; or
         B.   In the absence of such permit, site restoration plans have been
approved by the development services director or the director’s designee
establishing that the lot will be adequately graded, landscaped and buffered
to:
            1.   Avoid runoff, siltation, erosion and related drainage
problems; and
            2.   Ensure compliance with requirements of the zoning code and
other codes, ordinances, policies and practices of the village.
      (5)   In addition, any site restoration plan shall be subject to such
conditions necessary to ensure that the site restoration plans are timely
implemented and the conditions thereby established are maintained.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, such building permit may be issued earlier than
herein prescribed if the development services director determines that the
building or structure is in an unsafe, uninhabitable, dangerous or unhealthful
condition or that emergency conditions otherwise warrant such earlier issuance.
(Ord. No. 94-10-1946, Ord. No. 96-3-1999; Ord. No. 2000-14-2096; Ord. No. 2002-
12-3057; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-14 TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   Where in the judgment of the development services director it is justified,
the development services director may authorize building operations to commence
and proceed for such limited time, not exceeding ten days, as the development
services director may deem and fix as sufficient to allow the owner, his or her
architect or agent to complete the filing of detailed plans and other data
required for the issuance of the final permit. The applicant for a temporary
permit shall furnish the development services director with sufficient plans
and data to enable the development services director to determine that the work
be commenced, and proposed subsequently to be done, is of a lawful nature.
Temporary permits shall be revocable at the will of the director of public
works.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-15 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Fees and charges for permits and inspection services required by this
Chapter shall be as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   The term "basement area", when used in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule, shall mean those portions of a basement consisting of habitable space
(as defined by the International Building Code as adopted pursuant to §
9-18 of this Code), and related bathrooms, toilet, closets, halls and storage
areas, but shall not include areas of a basement such as utility spaces and
similar areas in which the walls and ceiling are not finished with drywall or
similar building material.
   (c)   In addition to the permit fees noted in this section, there shall be
paid such charges for water used in connection with building operations as are
fixed by the scheduled water rates now in force or as the same may be amended
from time to time by the development services director.
   (d)   All fees shall be paid to the village before issuance of any permits
provided for by this article.
   (e)   All work being done on public property shall require that a cash
deposit be posted in an amount the development services director deems adequate
to restore that property and its improvements to its original condition.
   (f)   Permits for construction, alteration or improvements listed in
subsection
9-15(a), (b) or (c) above, except for permits for the erection or construction
of any new dwelling, will not be issued until permit applicant has provided an
accurate estimate, appraisal or other instrument describing the value that
would result from the construction, alteration or improvement, which estimate,
appraisal or instrument shall be acceptable to the development services
director. The development services director may establish, from time to time,
minimum amounts or rates upon which any estimate, appraisal or instrument shall
be formulated. Upon completion of the work authorized under the building
permit, and prior to the issuance of a certificate for occupancy, the
development services director may require the permit applicant to deliver to
the development services director verifiable evidence of the actual value
relating to the construction, alteration or improvement for which the permit
was issued. To the extent that the actual value is more than the estimated
value reported at the time of the application (or any application or notice
regarding revisions to the permit activities), the permit applicant shall be
required to pay an additional permit fee in an amount that reflects the actual
final value; provided, however, in the event that the actual value exceeds the
estimated value reported for permit application purposes by more than 25%, then
an additional charge of 10% to the final permit amount, as adjusted, shall be
imposed. To the extent that the final value is less than the estimated value
reported for permit application purposes, the building permit fee shall be
adjusted and a refund will be issued.
(Ord. No. 04-26-3115; Ord. No. 06-08-3150; Ord. No. 2019-11-3459)
   (g)   Charitable institutions applying for permits for construction or
improvements listed in subsection
9-15(a), (b) or (c) above shall be charged a fee of .25% of the value of the
new construction, improvement, installation or alteration. In no event shall
such fee be less than $50.
(Ord. No. 94-13-1949)
   (h)   When required by the zoning code, an application for exterior
appearance review for a development in the R-D, B-1 and B-2 zoning districts
filed pursuant to §
7-503 of the zoning code shall be accompanied by an application fee as
determined to be appropriate by the village.
(Ord. No. 04-09-3098)
      (1)   The village may require an application fee for exterior appearance
review applications as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (2)   From the date of the filing of any application pursuant to this
code, the village may require the maintenance of an accurate record of the
recoverable costs as herein above defined, incurred in the processing of such
application. If the project is withdrawn at any time before the building permit
is issued, the development services director shall draw funds from the escrow
account established for such application to pay such costs and shall transfer
such funds to the appropriate village accounts. The development services
director shall maintain an accurate record of all such drawings.
      (3)   Should the development services director at any time determine that
the escrow account established in connection with any application is, or is
likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of processing such
application, the village manager shall inform the applicant of that fact and
demand an additional deposit in an amounted deemed by the department of public
works/community development to be sufficient to cover foreseeable additional
costs. Unless and until such additional amount is deposited by the applicant,
the village manager may direct that processing of the application shall be
suspended or terminated.
      (4)   As soon as reasonably feasible following the issuance of a building
permit, the development services director shall return the escrow deposit to
the applicant.
      (5)   In the event that the project is withdrawn at any time before the
building permit is issued and the amount in the escrow is insufficient to pay
the total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall
be mailed to the owner and the applicant. If unused balance remains in the
escrow account after paying the total actual costs, it shall be returned to the
applicant.
      (6)   The owner of the property subject of the application and, if
different, the applicant shall jointly and severally be liable for the payment
of the fee. By signing the application (either directly or through an agent),
the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the
filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection
of any such fee, plus the costs of collection, in the event such fee has not
been properly paid as required with the filing of the application. Any lien
filed pursuant to this subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by
statute for mortgages or mechanics’ liens.
   (i)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 2010-01-3259)
   (j)   Reserved.
(Ord. No. 2010-01-3259)
   (k)   For any permit application submitted pursuant to this §
9-15 in connection with a multiple family dwelling or non-residential
structure, to the extent that the development services director determines that
third-party consultant services are required to review, process or inspect such
multiple family dwelling or non-residential structure, an additional building
permit fee shall be imposed, which additional building permit fee shall be in
the amount of the direct costs incurred by the village for such third-party
consultant services.
(Ord. No. 92-39-1905; Ord. No. 06-08-3150; Ord. No. 08-04-3215; Ord. No. 2016-
04-3394; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-16 PERMIT RENEWAL PROHIBITED; RESTORATION OF WORK.
   (a)   Any building permit or permit extension issued pursuant to this
article that has expired by the terms of §
9-10 hereof shall be deemed void and a nullity and shall not be renewed. Work
authorized under any such expired permit shall not be commenced except upon the
filing of a new application, payment of a new fee and issuance of a new permit,
all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as they shall exist at
the time such new application is filed.
   (b)   Unless a new permit is issued as provided in subsection (a) of this
section, any work commenced pursuant to a permit that has expired by the terms
of §
9-10 hereof, and the property on which such work is located, shall be restored
to a safe, secure, sanitary and nuisance-free condition by the owner
immediately upon such permit expiration.
(Ord. No. 79-15-1590; Ord. No. 2015-16-3388, § 2)
§ 9-17 ALTERATIONS IN PLANS.
   It shall be unlawful to alter or in any way modify plans that have been
approved by the development services director, as provided by this article. If,
during the progress of such work, it is desired to deviate, in any manner
affecting the construction or other essentials of the building, from the terms
of the application, or drawing, notice of such intention to alter or deviate
shall be given to the development services director, and his or her written
assent shall first be obtained before such alteration or deviation may be made;
but alterations in buildings which do not involve any change in their
structural parts or of their stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means
of communication or ingress or egress, or in lighting or ventilation or in
plumbing or electric wiring, and that are not in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, may be made without the permission of the
development services director.
ARTICLE III. CLASSIFICATION AND REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS
§ 9-18 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE, 2021 EDITION, THE
INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE, 2021 EDITION, AND THE INTERNATIONAL
RESIDENTIAL CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The provisions of the International Building Code, 2021 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., (hereafter referred to as
the “Building Code"), the International Existing Building Code, 2021 Edition,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc., (hereafter referred to as
the “Existing Building Code”), and the International Residential Code “For One-
and Two-Family Dwellings,” 2021 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. (hereafter referred to as the “Residential Code"), are hereby
adopted, subject to the additions, deletions and modifications hereinafter set
forth, as criteria for the issuance and re-issuance of building permits. The
additions, deletions and modifications to the Building Code, Existing Building
Code and Residential Code as applicable to the village are as follows:
2021 IBC Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
2021 IBC  Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim    Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear, they
          shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim    Wherever the phrase “building official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
          Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
          All provisions of the Code applicable to new structures and additions in the “B-1"
          Business or “B-2" Business Zoning Districts are hereby modified to require exterior
          masonry, pre-cast concrete, or poured-in-place concrete construction; a fire resistance
          rating of at least two hours for all exterior walls; and installation of an annunciator
          alarm system. Furthermore, all provisions of the Code applicable to structures
          containing either two or more living units, or a combination of two or more living
          units and any non-residential use in the “R-D” Multiple Family, “B-1" or “B-2" Business
          Zoning Districts are hereby modified to require exterior four-inch thick masonry, four-
Passim    inch thick concrete block with stucco, pre-cast concrete, or poured-in-place concrete
          construction. A fire resistance of at least two hours utilizing masonry, pre-cast
          concrete, or poured-in-place concrete is required for all tenant separation walls and
          floors, party walls and floors, load-bearing walls, common exit walls, and exterior
          walls. An annunciator alarm system is required for new structures in the “B-1" and “B-
          2" Districts. Exterior cladding with E.I.F.S. (Exterior Insulation and Finishing
          System, a/k/a “dryvit”) is not permitted in the “R-D,” “B-1", or “B-2" Zoning Districts
          for new buildings, additions, or alterations.
          In addition, dwelling unit bathroom, kitchen, or dryer exhaust duct work may not
          penetrate tenant separation walls or ceilings.
          Whenever exterior claddings with E.I.F.S (exterior insulation and finishing systems, a/
Passim    k/a/ “dryvit”) is proposed for use in connection with any permitted activities, permit
          applicants may be required to provide certifications in a form established by the
          building code official regarding the installation and performance of such materials.
          Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, the perimeter for all
          foundations of any principal building shall be 42 inches minimum below grade and 6
Passim    inches minimum above grade, continuous, and uninterrupted except for any portion of a
          principal building in which there is not a roof. This requirement shall apply to any
          wood deck with a roof. The perimeter foundation wall and footing is required to be
          poured-in-place concrete. A concrete slush coat is required for all crawl spaces.
          Add the following new Section:
102.7     102.7 Continuation of unlawful use. The continuation of occupancy or use of a building
          or structure, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed
          a violation and be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 114.4.
          Add the following new Section:
          102.8 Other regulations. When the provisions herein specified for health, safety, and
          welfare are more restrictive than other regulations, this Code shall control; but in
          any case, the most rigid requirements of either the Building Code or other regulations
102.8     shall apply wherever a conflict exists. Nothing herein shall be construed as
          authorizing any use or construction not authorized by the zoning, subdivision, and
          other applicable ordinances of the Village and the mention of uses and building types,
          sizes, or configurations in the Code that are not permitted by other ordinances of the
          Village shall not be given any force, effect, or meaning in the Village.
104.4     Add the following new sentence at the end of this Section:
          All fees or costs incurred for such expert opinions shall be paid by the applicant.
          Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
104.6     104.6 Right of entry. The right of entry shall be provided according to the provisions
          of §
          9-3 of the Village Code.
104.8     Delete the Section without substitution.
          Add the following new sentence at the end of this Section:
105.1     Notwithstanding anything contrary in this code, categories of work, set forth in a
          schedule required by §
          9-9 above, shall require a permit.
          Add the following new Section:
          105.1.3 Historic preservation. In addition to and notwithstanding any requirement or
          exception in § 105.1, a building permit shall be required to enlarge, alter, demolish,
105.1.3   or change any feature in the exterior architectural appearance of a building,
          structure, object, or site that has been identified in an ordinance designating a
          certified landmark or a certified historic district pursuant to Chapter 26B of the
          Glencoe Village Code. No fee shall be required for any permit that is required solely
          by virtue of this Section.
          Add the following new Section:
105.1.4   105.1.4 Notice to adjoining owners.  Notice of demolition permit applications shall be
          provided in accordance with §
          9-13 above.
105.2     Delete the Section without substitution.
          Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
          109.5 Application and permit fees. All fees for any application and permit pursuant to
109.5     this Code are as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule in
          accordance with §
          9-8 of the Village Code.
          Delete the entire Section and substitute the following new Section:
113       113.1 Appeal. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, appeals may be made in
          accordance with §
          9-8 of the Village Code.
          Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
          114.4 Violation penalties. Violations of a provision of this Code or failure to comply
114.4     with any of the requirements thereof shall be subject to the penalties as described in
          §
          9-8 of the Village Code.
          Add the following new Section:
114.5     114.5 Abatement of violation shall be in accordance with §
          9-8 of the Village Code.
          Delete the section and substitute the following new Section:
          115.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been
115.4     served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform
          to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a civil fine as set
          forth in the Village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
          Add the following new Section:
          115.5 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue to work in or about the
115.5     structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as he is
          directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to
          punishment as provided in § 113.4 of this Code.
          Add the following new Section:
          115.6 Stop order fee. Where any project has been issued a stop work order, the general
115.6     contractor will be required, in addition to other corrective requirements, to pay a fee
          as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for the stop work
          order to be lifted..
          Amend Section 202 (Definitions) to read as follows:
          202 FLAMMABLE GAS. A material that is a gas at 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 pounds per
          square inch atmosphere (psia) (101 kPa) of pressure [a material that has a boiling
          point of 68°F (20°C) or less at 14.7 psia (101 kPa)], which also meets one of the
          following subdivided as follows:
             1. Category 1A.
                1. A gas that is ignitable at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) when in a mixture of 13 percent
          or less by volume with air.
                2. A gas with a flammable range at 14.7 psia (101 kPa) with air of at least 12
202       percent, regardless of the lower limit, unless data show compliance with Category 1B.
             2. Category 1B.
                A gas that meets the flammability criteria for Category 1A, is not pyrophoric or
          chemically unstable, and meets one or more of the following:
                   1. A lower flammability limit of more than 6 percent by volume in air; or
                   2. A fundamental burning velocity of less than 3.9 in/s (10 cm/s).
          The limits specified shall be determined at 14.7 psi (101 kPa) of pressure and a
          temperature of 68°F (20°C) in accordance with ASTM E681.
          Where not otherwise specified, the term "flammable gas" includes both Category 1A and
          Category 1B.
Table     Amend Table 307.1(1) to include the following:
307.1(1)  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/IMAGES/0-0-
          0-4620.gif]
          Amend Section 307.4 to read as follows:
          307.4 High hazard Group H-2. Buildings and structures containing materials that pose a
          deflagration hazard or a hazard from accelerated burning shall be classified as Group
          H-2. Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
              Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids that are used or stored in
          normally open containers or systems, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at
          more than 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103.4 kPa).
             Combustible dusts where manufactured, generated or used in such a manner that the
          concentration and conditions create a fire or explosion hazard based on information
          prepared in accordance with Section 414.1.3.
307.4        Cryogenic fluids, flammable.
             Category 1A Flammable gases.
             Category 1B Flammable gases having a burning velocity greater than 3.9 inches per
          second (10 cm/s).
             Organic peroxides, Class I.
             Oxidizers, Class III, that are used or stored in normally open containers or
          systems, or in closed containers or systems pressurized at more than 15 pounds per
          square inch gauge (103 kPa).
             Pyrophoric liquids, solids and gases, nondetonable.
             Unstable (reactive) materials, Class 3, nondetonable.
             Water reactive materials, Class III.
          Amend Section 307.5 to read as follows:
          307.5 High hazard Group H-3. Buildings and structures containing materials that readily
          support combustion or that pose a physical hazard shall be classified as Group H-3.
          Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
              Class I, II or IIIA flammable or combustible liquids that are used or stored in
          normally closed containers or systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge
          (103.4 kPa) or less.
             Combustible fibers, other than densely packed baled cotton, where manufactured,
          generated or used in such a manner that the concentration and conditions create a fire
          or explosion hazard based on information prepared in accordance with § 414.1.3.
307.5        Consumer fireworks, 1.4G (Class C, Common).
             Cryogenic fluids, oxidizing.
             Category 1B flammable gases having a burning velocity of 3.9 inches per second (10
          cm/s) or less.
             Flammable solids.
             Organic peroxides, Class II and III.
             Oxidizers, Class II.
             Oxidizers, Class III, that are used or stored in normally closed containers or
          systems pressurized at 15 pounds per square inch gauge (103 kPa) or less.
             Oxidizing gases.
             Unstable (reactive) materials, Class II.
             Water reactive materials, Class II.
          Amend Section 414.2.5 to read as follows:
414.2.5   414.2.5 Hazardous materials in Group M display and storage areas and in Group S storage
          areas. Hazardous materials located in Group M and Group S occupancies shall be in
          accordance with §§ 414.2.5.1 through 414.2.5.4.
          Amend to include Section 414.2.5.4 as a new subsection that reads as follows:
          414.2.5.4 Flammable gas. The aggregate quantity of Category 1B flammable gas having a
          burning velocity of 3.9 in/s (10 cm/s) or less stored and displayed within a single
          control area of a Group M occupancy or stored in a single control area of a Group S
414.2.5.4 occupancy is allowed to exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area
          specified in Table 307.1(1) without classifying the building or use as a Group H
          occupancy, provided the materials are stored and displayed in accordance with the
          International Fire Code and quantities do not exceed the amounts specified in Table
          414.2.5(3).
Table     Amend Table 414.2.5(3) to include the following:
414.2.5   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/IMAGES/0-0-
(3)       0-4622.gif]
Table     Amend Table 414.5.1 to include the following:
414.5.1   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/IMAGES/0-0-
          0-4624.gif]
          Add the following sentence to the end of Section 903.2:
903.2     A fire hydrant must be located within 100 feet of the Fire Department connection, and
          Fire Department standpipe valves shall not be spaced greater than 120 feet apart.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.1 903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout stories
          containing Group A-1 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group A-
          1 occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge serving that occupancy.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.2 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout stories
          containing Group A-2 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group A-
          1 occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge serving that occupancy.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.3 903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout stories
          containing Group A-3 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group A-
          3 occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge serving that occupancy.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.4 903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout stories
          containing Group A-2 occupancies and throughout all stories from the Group A-
          4 occupancy to and including the levels of exit discharge serving that occupancy.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.5 903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all enclosed
          Group A-5 accessory use areas.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.6 903.2.1.6. Where an occupied roof has an assembly occupancy, all floors between the
          occupied roof and the level of exit discharge shall be equipped with an automatic
          sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.7 903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided where
          multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access
          components.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.2   903.2.2 Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
          throughout the entire building containing an ambulatory care facility occupancy.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.3   903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E
          occupancies.
          Substitute the following for the Conditions:
903.2.4      1. A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 0 square feet.
             3. The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any
          mezzanines, exceeds 0 square feet.
          Amend to read as follows:
903.2.4.1 An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire
          areas that contain woodworking operations.
          Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
1015.2    1015.2 Where required. Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces,
          including decks, mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps and landings.
          Guards shall be adequate in strength and attachment in accordance with § 1607.9.
          Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
          1015.3 Height. Required guards shall not be less than the following:
             1.   For elevated walking surfaces at least eight inches but less than 30 inches
          above the floor or grade the guard shall be at least 36 inches high as measured from
          the walking surface, on stairways and stepped aisles measure from the line connecting
          the leading edges of the tread nosing, or on ramps and ramped aisles measured from the
          ramp surface at the guard.
             2.   For elevated walking surfaces at least 30 inches above the floor or grade the
          guard shall be least 42 inches high as measured from the walking surface, on stairways
          and stepped aisles measure from the line connecting the leading edges of the tread
          nosing, or on ramps and ramped aisles measured from the ramp surface at the guard.
          Exceptions:
             1.   For occupancies in Group R-3 not more than three stories above grade in height
          and within individual dwelling units in occupancies in Group R-2 not more than three
          stories above grade in height with separate means of egress, required guards shall be
          not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in height measured vertically above the adjacent
          walking surfaces.
             2.   For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual dwelling units in
1015.3    occupancies in Group R-2, guards on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not
          less than 34 inches (864 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading
          edges of the treads.
             3.   For occupancies in Group R-3, and within individual dwelling units in
          occupancies in Group R-2, where the top of the guard serves as a handrail on the open
          sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not
          more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading
          edges of the treads.
             4.   The guard height in assembly seating areas shall comply with Section 1030.17 as
          applicable.
             5.   Along alternating tread devices and ships ladders, guards where the top rail
          serves as a handrail shall have height not less than 30 inches (762 mm) and not more
          than 34 inches (864 mm), measured vertically from the leading edge of the device tread
          nosing.
             6.   In Group F occupancies where exit access stairways serve fewer than three
          stories and such stairways are not open to the public, and where the top of the guard
          also serves as a handrail, the top of the guard shall be not less than 34 inches (864
          mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the
          leading edges of the treads.
1025.4    Delete the Section without substitution.
          Chapter 35 - Referenced Standards. Revise ICC referenced standards to delete the use of
          the International Energy Conservation Code and the International Plumbing Code. Replace
          with the Illinois Energy Conservation Code and the Illinois Plumbing Code.
             CONSTRUCTION OF FALLOUT SHELTERS. Buildings or sections of buildings designed and
          intended for use as shelters against radiation from radioactive fallout shall be
          designed and proportioned in accordance with standard structural practice to withstand
          all stresses to which they would be subject under normal conditions and shall either be
Chapter   certified as accepted by the United States government or shall comply with the
35        applicable provisions of booklet, MP-15, entitled The Family Fallout Shelter and of
          Guide NP-10-2, entitled Guide for Architects and Engineers, with any amendment thereto
          and with any other bulletin, instruction, rule, regulation now or hereafter issued by
          the United States government in respect to such fallout shelters. The issuance of a
          building permit for a fallout shelter shall not be deemed to constitute any approval or
          warranty on the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof as to the
          effectiveness of such a shelter for its intended purpose. Fallout shelters shall be
          constructed to meet current federal standards.
 
 
2021
International Addition, Deletion, or Modification
Existing
Building Code
Passim        Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
              they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim        Wherever the phrase “building official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to
              the Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
              Delete the entire Section and substitute with the following new Section:
              112.1 Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an action taken, order issued, or
              determination made pursuant to this Code, may appeal to the Development Services
112           Director for reconsideration.
              112.2 Court review. Any person aggrieved following an appeal as provided in
              Section 112.1 may petition the Cook County Circuit Court in the manner provided
              by law for administrative review.
              Revise to read as follows:
              113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code or
              fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who repairs or alters or
113.4         changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the approved
              construction documents or directive of the code official or of a permit or
              certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to a civil
              fine as set forth in the Village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
 
2021 International Residential Code
2021 IRC Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
2021 International Residential Code
2021 IRC Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim   Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
         they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim   Wherever the phrase “building official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to
         the Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
         Whenever exterior claddings with E.I.F.S. (exterior insulation and finishing
         systems, a/k/a “dryvit”) is proposed for use in connection with any permitted
Passim   activities, permit applicants may be required to provide certifications in a form
         established by the building code official regarding the installation and
         performance of such materials.
         Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, the perimeter for all
         foundations of any principal building shall be 42 inches minimum below grade, 6
         inches minimum above grade continuous, and uninterrupted, except for any portion
Passim   of a principal building in which there is not a roof. This requirement shall apply
         to any wood deck with a roof. The perimeter foundation wall and footing is
         required to be poured-in-place concrete. A concrete slush coat is required for all
         crawl spaces.
         Add the following new Section:
         R102.8 Continuation of unlawful use. The continuation of occupancy or use of a
R102.8   building or structure, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this Code,
         shall be deemed a violation and be subject to the penalties prescribed in §
         R113.4.
         Add the following new Section:
         R102.9 Other regulations. When the provisions herein specified for health, safety,
         and welfare are more restrictive than other regulations, this Code shall control;
         but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either the building code or other
R102.9   regulations shall apply wherever a conflict exists. Nothing herein shall be
         construed as authorizing any use or construction not authorized by the zoning,
         subdivision, and other applicable ordinances of the Village and the mention of
         uses and building types, sizes, or configurations in the Code which are not
         permitted by other ordinances of the Village shall not be given any force, effect,
         or meaning in the Village.
         Revise to read as follows:
         The Building Official shall make the required inspections, or the Building Officer
         shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
         individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a
R104.4   responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The
         Building Official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary
         to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
         appointing authority. All fees or costs incurred for such expert opinions shall be
         paid by the applicant.
         Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
R104.6   R104.6 Right of entry. The right of entry shall be provided according to the
         provision of §
         9-3 of the Village Code.
R104.8   Delete the Section without substitution.
         Add the following new sentence at the end of this Section:
R105.1   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, improvements referenced in
         §
         9-9 of the Village Code require a permit.
         Add the following new Section:
         R105.1.1 Historic preservation. In addition to and notwithstanding any requirement
         or exception in § R105.1, a building permit shall be required to enlarge, alter,
R105.1.1 demolish, or change any feature in the exterior architectural appearance of a
         building, structure, object, or site that has been identified in an ordinance
         designating a certified landmark or a certified historic district pursuant to
         Chapter 26A of the Glencoe Village Code. No fee shall be required for any permit
         that is required solely by virtue of this Section.
         Add the following new Section:
R105.1.2 R105.1.2 Notice to adjoining owners. Notice to adjoining owners shall be provided
         according to the provision of § 9-13 of the Village Code.
R105.2   Delete the Section without substitution.
         Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
         R108.4 Application and permit fees. All fees for any application and permit
R108.4   pursuant to this Code are set forth in the Village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
         Schedule. Violations shall be subject to fee and fines pursuant to § 9-9 of the
         Village Code.
         Delete entire Section and substitute the following new Section:
         R112.1 Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an action taken, order issued, or
         determination made pursuant to this Code, may appeal to the Development Services
R112     Director for reconsideration.
         R112.2 Court review. Any person aggrieved following an appeal as provided in §
         R112.1 may petition the Cook County Circuit Court in the manner provided by law
         for administrative review.
         Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
         R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code
         or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
         construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
         plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued
         under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth
         in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule; provided, however, that the
         Building Official or that person’s designee may elect to prosecute any such
         violation as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $750, or by
R113.4   imprisonment not exceeding 6 months, or both fine and imprisonment for each
         provision of this code violated; provided further that any such misdemeanor shall
         be punishable solely by a fine as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
         Fine Schedule with respect to any violation as to which service of summons is made
         by certified mail, return receipt requested, pursuant to § 1-2-9.1 of the Illinois
         Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1. Each day that a violation continues shall be
         deemed a separate offense. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the
         contrary, wherever any statute or public act of the General Assembly shall limit
         the amount of any fine or penalty, the fine or penalty imposed by this Code shall
         be maximum amount permitted by such statute or public act.
         Add the following new Section:
         R113.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed
         shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting
R113.5   appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct, or
         abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or
         premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct business, or occupancy of a building
         or structure on or about any premises.
         Add the following new Section:
         R114.3 Stop order fee. Where any project has been issued a stop work order, the
R114.3   general contractor will be required, in addition to other corrective requirements,
         to pay a fee as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for
         the stop work order to be lifted.
         Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
         R114.4 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue to work in or about the
R114.4   structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as he
         is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
         to punishment as provided in § R113.4 of this Code.
         Revise to add Table R301.2:
R301.2   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/IMAGES/
         0-0-0-4626.gif]
         Revise this section to read as follows:
         Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, each habitable room shall
         have a minimum ceiling height of at least 7.5 feet for at least 50% of the floor
         area of such room.
         Minimum height. Habitable space, hallways and portions of basements containing
         these spaces shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches (2286
         mm). Bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not
         less than 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).
            Exceptions:
            1.   For rooms with sloped ceilings, the required floor area of the room shall
         have a ceiling height of not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) and not less than 50
R305.1   percent of the required floor area shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7
         feet 6 inches (2286 mm).
            2.   The ceiling height above bathroom and toilet room fixtures shall be such
         that the fixture is capable of being used for its intended purpose. A shower or
         tub equipped with a showerhead shall have a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet
         8 inches (2032 mm) above an area of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) by 30 inches
         (762 mm) at the showerhead.
            3.   Beams, girders, ducts or other obstructions in basements containing
         habitable space shall be permitted to project to within 6 feet 4 inches (1931 mm)
         of the finished floor.
            4.   Beams and girders spaced apart not less than 36 inches (914 mm) in clear
         finished width shall project not more than 78 inches (1981 mm) from the finished
         floor.
         Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
         R310.4.4 Window wells. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, with
         respect to dwelling units, all window wells are to be covered with metal safety
         grills; except that basement bedroom (and rooms that can be used in such manner)
         escape window wells shall be provided with a railing with dividers under four
         inches apart and at least 36 inches above grade with a gate at the ladder and an
         escape ladder providing egress from the window well on the side of such window
R310.4.4 well or by safety grills capable of being easily opened from below per the review
         and approval of the Public Safety Director. Basement escape window wells shall
         have an interior clear horizontal opening of at least three feet by three feet on
         the exterior of such basement window. Every new dwelling unit basement will be
         required to have at least one such egress window well and egress window in each
         bedroom or anticipated bedroom area, even if such bedroom is not provided at the
         beginning stage of construction. Existing dwelling unit basements are required to
         provide an egress window well and egress window meeting the above specifications
         if a bedroom and/or bathroom is to be constructed.
         Revise to read as follows without exceptions:
         Height. Required guards at open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, porches,
         balconies or landings, shall be measured vertically above the adjacent walking
         surface or the line connecting the leading edges of the treads. The height of the
         guards shall be determined by the height of the walking surface above the adjacent
         floor or finished grade, in compliance with the following:
            1.   For elevated walking surfaces at least eight inches but less than 30
R312.1.2 inches above the floor or grade the guard shall be at least 36 inches high as
         measured from the walking surface, on stairways and stepped aisles measure from
         the line connecting the leading edges of the tread nosing, or on ramps and ramped
         aisles measured from the ramp surface at the guard.
            2.   For elevated walking surfaces at least 30 inches above the floor or grade
         the guard shall be least 42 inches high as measured from the walking surface, on
         stairways and stepped aisles measure from the line connecting the leading edges of
         the tread nosing, or on ramps and ramped aisles measured from the ramp surface at
         the guard.
         Revise this section to read as follows:
         Design and installation. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed and
         installed in accordance with NFPA 13D.
         Part IV – Energy Efficiency
         Delete Part IV, which includes Chapter 11 in its entirety. Replace with the
         following:
         Compliance with the requirements for energy efficiency shall be in compliance with
         the Illinois Energy Conversation Code.
R313.2.1 Part VII - Plumbing
         Delete Part VII, which includes Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, and 33 in
         its entirety. Replace with the following:
            All plumbing systems shall be designed and installed in compliance with the
         Illinois State Plumbing Code.
         Chapter 44 – Referenced Standards
         Revise ICC referenced standards to delete the use of the International Energy
         Conservation Code and the International Plumbing Code. Replace with the Illinois
         Energy Conservation Code and the Illinois Plumbing Code.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340; Ord. No. 2013-21-3351; Ord. No.
2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2023-24-
3569; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18a ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE, 2023 EDITION.
   The National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, Inc. (hereafter referred to as the “Electrical
Code”), is hereby adopted, subject to the additions, deletions and
modifications hereinafter set forth, as criteria for regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of electrical systems in the village. The additions, deletions and
modifications to the Electrical Code as applicable to the village are as
follows:
 
Electrical
Code       Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim     Wherever the word “jurisdiction” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
           Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim     Wherever the phrase “building official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to
           the Building Officer or his or her designated representative.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18b ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The International Mechanical Code, 2021 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. (hereafter referred to as the “Mechanical
Code”), is hereby adopted, subject to the additions, deletions and
modifications hereinafter set forth, as criteria for regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems in the village. The additions, deletions and
modifications to the Mechanical Code as applicable in the village are as
follows:
 
Mechanical
Code       Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim     Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
           they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim     Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
           Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
           Add the following new sentence at the end of the Section:
306.3      If any heating or cooling mechanical equipment is located in an attic, then a
           drop-down stair access is required.
           Amend to add Section 1101.2.1 that shall read as follows:
1101.2.1   Section 1101.2.1 Group A2L, A2, A3 and B1 high probability equipment. High-
           probability equipment using Group A2L, A2, A3, or B1 refrigerant shall comply
           with UL 484, UL/CSA 60335-2-40, or UL/CSA 60335-2-89.
Table      Amend Table 1103.1 to read as follows:
1103.1
 
Table 1103.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4628.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4630.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4632.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4634.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4636.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4638.png]
 
 
Mechanical
Code       Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
           Amend to read as follows:
           1104.3.1 Air conditioning for human comfort. High-probability systems used for
           human comfort shall use Group A1 or A2L refrigerant.
              Exceptions:
1104.3.1      1. Equipment listed for and used in residential occupancies containing a
           maximum of 6.6 pounds (3 kg) of refrigerant.
              2. Equipment listed for and used in commercial occupancies containing a
           maximum of 22 pounds (10 kg) of refrigerant.
              3. Industrial occupancies.
           Amend to read as follows:
1106.3     1106.3 Class 2 and 3 refrigerants. Where refrigerants of Groups A2, A3, B2 and
           B3 are used, the machinery room shall conform to the Class I, Division 2,
           hazardous location classification requirements of NFPA 70.
           Amend to read as follows:
1106.4     1106.4 Group A2L and B2L refrigerant. Machinery rooms for Group A2L and B2L
           refrigerant shall comply with § § 1106.4.1 through 1106.4.3.
           Amend to read as follows:
1106.4.1   1106.4.1 Elevated temperatures. Open flame-producing devices or continuously
           operating hot surfaces over 1290°F (700°C) shall not be permanently installed
           in the room.
           Amend to read as follows:
1106.4.2   1106.4.2 Refrigerant detector. In addition to the requirements of § 1105.3,
           refrigerant detectors shall signal an alarm and activate the ventilation system
           in accordance with the response time specified in Table 1106.4.2.
Table      Amend Table 1106.4.2 to read as follows:
1106.4.2
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4640.gif]
 
 
Mechanical Code Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
                        Amend to read as follows:
1106.4.3                1106.4.3 Mechanical ventilation. The machinery room
                        shall have a mechanical ventilation system complying
                        with ASHRAE 15.
Table 1107.4            Amend Table 1107.4 to read as follows:
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4642.gif]
 
 
Mechanical Code Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
Table 1107.5            Amend Table 1107.5 to read as follows:
 
     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/IMAGES/0-0-0-4644.gif]
 
Mechanical Code Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
Mechanical
Code       Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
           Amend Section 1106.4.3 to read as follows:
           1107.7 Flexible connectors, expansion and vibration compensators. Flexible
1107.7     connectors and expansion and vibration control devices shall be listed and labeled
           for use in refrigerant systems and pressures for which the components are
           installed.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.2.2 Refrigerant pipe enclosure. Refrigerant piping shall be protected by
           locating it within the building elements or within protective enclosures.
              Exception: Piping protection within the building elements or protective
           enclosure shall not be required in any of the following locations:
              1. Where installed without ready access or located more than 7 feet 3 inches
           (2210 mm) above the finished floor.
1109.2.2      2. Where located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the refrigerant unit or appliance.
              3. Where located in a machinery room complying with Section 1105.
              4. Outside the building:
                 4.1 Protected from damage from the weather, including, but not limited to,
           hail, ice, and snow loads; and
                 4.2 Protected from damage within the expected foot or traffic path; or
                 4.3 Outside, underground, installed not less than 8 inches (200 mm) below
           finished grade and protected against corrosion.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.2.3 Prohibited locations. Refrigerant piping shall not be installed in any of
           the following locations:
1109.2.3      1. Exposed within a fire resistance rated exit access corridor.
              2. Exposed within an interior exit stairway.
              3. Within an interior exit ramp.
              4. Within an exit passageway.
              5. Within an elevator, dumbwaiter or other shaft containing a moving object.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.2.6 Exposed piping surface temperature. Exposed piping with ready access to
1109.2.6   non-authorized personnel having surface temperatures greater than 120°F (49°C) or
           less than 5°F (-15°C) shall be protected from contact or shall have thermal
           insulation that limits the exposed insulation surface temperature to a range of
           5°F (-15°C) to 120°F (49°C).
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.2.7 Pipe identification. Refrigerant pipe located in areas other than the
           room or space where the refrigerating equipment is located shall be identified.
           The pipe identification shall be located at intervals not exceeding 20 feet (6096
           mm) on the refrigerant piping or pipe insulation. The minimum height of lettering
           of the identification label shall be 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). The identification shall
1109.2.7   indicate the refrigerant designation and safety group classification of
           refrigerant used in the piping system. For Group A2L and B2L refrigerants, the
           identification shall also include the following statement: "WARNING – Risk of
           Fire. Flammable Refrigerant." For Group A2, A3, B2 and B3 refrigerants, the
           identification shall also include the following statement: "DANGER—Risk of Fire or
           Explosion. Flammable Refrigerant." For any Group B refrigerant, the identification
           shall also include the following statement: "DANGER—Toxic Refrigerant."
           Amend to read as follows:
1109.3     1109.3 Installation requirements for Group A2L, A2, A3, B2L, or B3 refrigerant.
           Piping systems using Group A2L, A2, A3, B2L or B3 refrigerant shall comply with
           the requirements of §§ 1109.3.1 and 1109.3.2.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.3.1 Pipe protection. In addition to the requirements of Section 305.5,
           aluminum, copper and steel tube used for Group A2, A3, B2L, B2, and B3
           refrigerants and located in concealed locations where tubing is installed in
1109.3.1   studs, joists, rafters or similar member spaces, and located less than 1 1/
           2 inches (38 mm) from the nearest edge of the member, shall be continuously
           protected by shield plates. Protective steel shield plates having a minimum
           thickness of 0.0575 inch (1.46 mm) (No. 16 gage) shall cover the area of the tube
           plus the area extending not less than 2 inches (51 mm) beyond both sides of the
           tube.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1109.3.2 Shaft ventilation. Refrigerant pipe shafts with systems using Group A2L
           or B2L refrigerant shall be naturally or mechanically ventilated. Refrigerant pipe
           shafts with one or more systems using any Group A2, A3, B2, or B3 refrigerant
           shall be continuously mechanically ventilated and shall include a refrigerant
           detector. The shaft ventilation exhaust outlet shall comply with Section 501.3.1.
           Naturally ventilated shafts shall have a pipe, duct or conduit not less than 4
           inches (102 mm) in diameter that connects to the lowest point of the shaft and
1109.3.2   extends to the outdoors. The pipe, duct or conduit shall be level or pitched
           downward to the outdoors. Mechanically ventilated shafts shall have a minimum
           airflow velocity in accordance with Table 1109.3.2. The mechanical ventilation
           shall be continuously operated or activated by a refrigerant detector. Systems
           utilizing a refrigerant detector shall activate the mechanical ventilation at a
           maximum refrigerant concentration of 25 percent of the lower flammable limit of
           the refrigerant. The detector, or a sampling tube that draws air to the detector,
           shall be located in an area where refrigerant from a leak will concentrate. The
           shaft shall not be required to be ventilated for double wall refrigerant pipe
           where the interstitial space of the double wall pipe is vented to the outdoors.
1109.4     Delete Section 1109.4 in its entirety without substitution.
1109.4.1   Delete Section 1109.4.1 in its entirety without substitution.
1109.4.2   Delete Section 1109.4.2 in its entirety without substitution.
1109.7     Delete Section 1109.7 in its entirety without substitution.
           Amend section to read as follows:
           1110.3 Test gases. The medium used for pressure testing the refrigerant system
1110.3     shall be one of the following inert gases: oxygen free nitrogen, helium, argon or
           premixed nonflammable oxygen free nitrogen with a tracer gas of hydrogen or
           helium. For R-744 refrigerant systems, carbon dioxide shall be allowed as the test
           medium. For R-718 refrigerant systems, water shall be allowed as the test medium.
           Amend Subsection 1110.3.1 to read as follows:
1110.3.1   1110.3.1 Test gases not permitted. Oxygen, air, refrigerants other than those
           identified in Section 1110.3, combustible gases and mixtures containing such gases
           shall not be used as the pressure test medium.
           Amend to read as follows:
           1110.5 Piping system strength test. Refrigerating system components and
           refrigerant piping shall be tested in accordance with ASME B31.5 or this section.
           Separate tests for isolated portions of the system are permitted provided that all
           required portions are tested at least once. Pressurize with test gas for a minimum
           of 10 minutes to not less than the lower of: (a) the lowest design pressure for
1110.5     any system component; or (b) the lowest value of set pressure for any pressure
           relief devices in the system. The design pressures for determination of test
           pressure shall be the pressure identified on the label nameplate of the condensing
           unit, compressor, compressor unit, pressure vessel, or other system component with
           a nameplate. A passing test result shall have no rupture or structural failure of
           any system component or refrigerant piping. Refrigerant piping and tubing greater
           than 3/4 inches in diameter shall be tested in accordance with ASHRAE 15.
1110.5.1   Delete Section 1110.5.1 in its entirety without substitution.
1110.5.2   Delete Section 1110.5.2 in its entirety without substitution.
1110.6     Delete Section 1110.6 in its entirety without substitution.
1110.7     Delete Section 1110.7 in its entirety without substitution.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4646.gif]
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18c ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   (a)   The Illinois State Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890), as
promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health, and any subsequent
amendments adopted by the Department thereto, is hereby adopted for the purpose
of establishing rules and regulations for the materials, construction,
alteration and inspection of all plumbing placed in or in connection with any
building within the village. The same is adopted in its entirety, save and
except such portions as are hereinafter amended, and is, together with such
amendments, incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall
control in the installation and maintenance of plumbing systems within the
village. The Plumbing Code, as modified and amended, may be referred to for all
purposes as the “Glencoe Plumbing Code” or the “Plumbing Code.” Violations of
the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890) shall be referred to the
Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (b)   The additions, deletions and modifications to the Plumbing Code as
applicable in the village are as follows:
 
Plumbing
Code     Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim   Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
         they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim   Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
         Building Official or such official’s duly designated agent or agents.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2015-15-3387, § 4)
§ 9-18c.1 WATER SAVING DEVICE REQUIRED.
   In all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of plumbing
fixtures or trim, only fixtures and trim labeled WaterSense product, as
specified by the USEPA, shall be installed.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18c.2 FAUCETS IN PUBLIC REST ROOMS.
   In addition to the requirements in § 9-18c above, in all new construction
and in all repairs or replacement of fixtures in lavatories intended for public
use, the faucets of such lavatories located in rest rooms intended for public
use shall be of metering or self-closing type.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18c.3 RECYCLING OF WATER IN CAR WASHES.
   In all new construction or replacement of fixtures in car wash facilities,
car wash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling system.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18d ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. (hereafter referred to as the “Fuel Gas
Code”), is hereby adopted, subject to the additions, deletions, and
modifications hereinafter set forth, as criteria for regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of fuel gas systems in the village. The additions, deletions, and
modifications to the Fuel Gas Code as applicable in the village are as follows:
 
Fuel
Gas     Addition, Deletion or Modification
Code
Section
Passim  Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
        they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim  Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
        Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18e ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (a)   The Illinois Energy Conservation Code (71 Ill. Admin. Code 600), as
promulgated by the Illinois Capital Development Board, and any subsequent
amendments adopted by the Capital Development Board thereto, is hereby adopted
in its entirety, save and except such portions as are hereinafter amended, and
is, together with such amendments, incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein.
   (b)   The additions, deletions, and modifications to the Energy Conservation
Code as applicable in the village are as follows:
 
Conservation Addition, Deletion or Modification
Code Section
Passim       Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
             they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim       Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
             Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
 
(Ord. No. 2017-6-3414)
§ 9-18f ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   (a)   The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., (hereafter
referred to as the “2021 IPMC”), is hereby adopted, subject to the additions,
deletions, and modifications hereinafter set forth, as criteria for the
issuance and reissuance of building permits.
   (b)   The additions, deletions, and modifications to the 2021 IPMC as
applicable to the Village are as follows:
2021 IPMC Section Addition, Deletion or Modification
2021 IPMC  Addition, Deletion or Modification
Section
Passim     Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
           they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim     Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
           Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
           Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
           102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a
102.3      structure, or change of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures
           and provisions of the Glencoe Village Code. Nothing in this code shall be
           construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Glencoe Zoning Code.
           Delete the Section in its entirety and substitute the following new section:
104        104.1 Fees. All fees or costs incurred by the village in carrying out its
           responsibilities under this Code shall be as indicated in the village’s
           Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and § 9-9 of the Village Code.
           Delete this Section in its entirety and substitute the following new Section:
107        107 Appeals. Appeals shall be made in accordance with the provisions of § 9-8 of
           the Village Code.
108        Delete this Section (Board of Appeals) in its entirety without substitution.
           Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
           109.4 Violation penalties. Any person or property owner who shall violate a
109.4      provisions of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
           requirements thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in the village’s
           Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and § 9-9 of the Village Code.
           Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
           201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and
201.3      are defined elsewhere in Chapter 9 of the Glencoe Village Code, such terms shall
           have the meanings ascribed to them in those portions of Chapter 9 of the Glencoe
           Village Code.
           Delete the Section and substitute the following new Section:
           302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
302.1      clean, safe, and sanitary condition. The occupant and/or owner, jointly and
           severally, shall keep and be responsible and liable for keeping that part of the
           exterior property in a clean and sanitary condition.
302.4      Revise Section to provide the following within 8 inches.
           Revise to provide the following new section 302.9.1:
           302.9.1 Graffiti Removal. All exterior surfaces visible to the public or from
           private property must be kept clean and free of graffiti. Surfaces that have been
           marred by graffiti must be cleaned, painted, or in some manner covered so as to
           effect the complete removal of the graffiti from the surface and to return the
302.9.1    surface to a clean condition. For purposes of this Section 302.9.1, the word
           “graffiti” shall mean any sign, symbol, marking, name, initial, word, diagram,
           sketch, picture or letter that is inscribed, engraved, drawn or otherwise placed
           on the surface of any building, structure, wall, or pavement (including, without
           limitation, driveways, sidewalks, and pathways) without the consent of the owner
           thereof.
           Add the following new section 302.10:
           302.10 Maintenance of landscaping. Owners of properties are required to ensure the
           proper maintenance of all landscaping. This shall include the cutting or removal
           of all weeds, grasses, and/or bushes. The landscape shall comply with the
302.10     following:
              1. Unmanaged ground cover, weeds, grasses and bushes, shall not be allowed to
           grow more than eight inches on all property within the Village.
              2. The Village may require the property owner to cut weeds, grass, trim trees
           or bushes or remove bushes, trees, buckthorn, teasel and garlic mustard which
           constitute a public nuisance or threat to public health, safety or welfare.
           Revise this Code Section to insert the following with the area identified as
602.3      (DATE):
           “October 15 to May 15"
           Revise this section to read as follows:
           602.4 Occupied work spaces. Indoor occupiable work space shall be supplied with
           heat during the period from October 15 to May 15 to maintain a minimum temperature
           of 68°F (20°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
602.4      Exceptions:
              1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
           temperature conditions.
              2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
           activities.
Chapter 8  Revise ICC referenced standards to delete the use of the International Energy
-          Conservation Code and the International Plumbing Code. Replace with the Illinois
Referenced Energy Conservation Code and the Illinois Plumbing Code.
Standards
 
(Ord. No. 2018-10-3441; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18f ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS STATE ACCESSIBILITY CODE.
   (a)   The Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Admin. Code 400), as
promulgated by the Illinois Capital Development Board, and any subsequent
amendments adopted by the Capital Development Board thereto, is hereby adopted
in its entirety, save and except such portions as are hereinafter amended, and
is, together with such amendments, incorporated as full as if set out at length
herein.
   (b)   The additions, deletions, and modifications to the Illinois
Accessibility Code as applicable in the Village are as follows:
 
Conservation Addition, Deletion or Modification
Code Section
Passim       Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appear,
             they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim       Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
             building officer or his or her duly designated representative.
 
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18.1 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 9-18.2 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§ 9-18.3 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18.4 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18.5 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-18.6 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-19 CHANGE OF CLASSIFICATION OF BUILDINGS.
   If buildings erected for, or converted to, the uses of any classification
mentioned in this chapter, are to be applied to the uses of any other class for
which a better system of construction is required by this chapter, the
construction and equipment of such buildings shall first be made to conform to
the requirements of this chapter, as specified for their intended use. It shall
be unlawful to use any such building for a new or different purpose from that
to which its structure and equipment adapt it under this chapter, unless the
requirements of this chapter and the requirements of chapter for such new or
different use shall first have been complied with.
§ 9-20 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   In construing the regulations established by this chapter, such regulations
shall not be construed as requiring alterations in the construction or
equipment of buildings or structures in existence at the time of passage of
this code, unless specific provision is made to the contrary, or unless the
provision is expressly made retroactive, or unless such buildings shall not
have sufficient or adequate means of egress therefrom or ingress thereto, by
reason of insufficient or inadequate doors, stairways, fire escapes, windows or
other means of egress or ingress.
§ 9-21 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-22 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
ARTICLE IV. OCCUPATION OF STREETS AND STREET OPENINGS
§ 9-23 STREET OCCUPATION PERMIT - REQUIRED.
      It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store upon the street,
parkway or sidewalk abutting upon or adjacent to the lot or tract upon which
any building or structure is being erected, constructed, altered or repaired,
or upon any street, parkway or sidewalk within the village, any building
materials, tools, apparatus or structure designed or intended to be used in the
erection, construction, alteration or repair of buildings, unless a street
occupation permit is first obtained from the development services director.
Unless such street occupation permit is obtained, all such building materials,
tools, apparatus or structures, when first delivered, shall be placed entirely
within the boundary lines of such lot or tract, and shall so remain until the
completion of such building or structure or until finally removed from such lot
or tract.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-24 SAME - APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   All applications for street occupation permits shall describe the location
of the street, parkway or sidewalk proposed to be occupied, the use to be made
of same and the length of time of such intended occupation. Such permit shall
be issued subject to the conditions of this article upon payment of the fee
required to the village; provided, that the applicant has complied with all the
provisions of this chapter in connection with such permit.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-25 SAME - LIMIT OF OCCUPATION AS TO TIME.
   The permission to occupy streets, sidewalks and parkways for the purposes of
building is intended only for imperative use in connection with the actual
erection, repair, alteration or removal of buildings, and shall terminate with
the completion of such operation and at as much earlier time as shall be
feasible, at which time the person to whom the occupation permit has been
issued shall remove all material and equipment and shall place the street,
sidewalk and parkway in as neat and serviceable condition as prior to the
occupancy thereof.
§ 9-26 SAME - LIMIT OF OCCUPATION AS TO SPACE.
   The occupation of a street for the storage of building materials shall never
be to a a greater extent than is authorized by the street occupation permit.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-27 SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   During the progress of building operations, a sidewalk not less than
five feet in width, or an equal width of a clean, hard, paved roadway, made
available and safe for a footway, and with adequate guard railings, shall at
all times be kept open, clean and unobstructed for the purpose and uses of a
passageway in front of such lot.
   (b)   It is not intended by any of the provisions of this article to
prohibit the maintenance of a safe driveway for the delivery of material across
a sidewalk from the curb line to the building site; provided, however, that
such curb and sidewalk across which such driveway shall extend shall be
protected with wooden planks in a manner satisfactory to the public works
director.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-28 STREET, ETC., TO BE KEPT CLEAR.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, the person to whom a
building permit is issued shall, at all times during the life of the permit,
maintain that portion of the street, parkway and sidewalk abutting upon and
adjacent to the lot or tract upon which such building is being erected, in a
safe condition and clear of all building materials, rubbish, dirt or snow. He
or she shall at no time obstruct the gutter or waterway of any street so as to
prevent the free passage of water along the same, and if the gutter shall be
shaded or covered so that ice accumulates therein, he or she shall clear the
gutter so as to allow water to pass freely at all times.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to mix mortar, concrete or any other building
material upon the surface of any sidewalk or pavement in the village.
§ 9-29 BARRICADES.
   (a)   Any person to whom a building or street occupation permit is issued
shall erect and maintain such substantial and suitable fences, railings or
barricades to guard all excavations, embankments or obstructions along the
street, parkway or sidewalk abutting upon or adjacent to such lot or tract as
the director of public works deems necessary for the protection of the lives
and limbs of the public. He or she shall place and maintain proper and
sufficient illumination to protect the public using such street or sidewalk
from 7:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. throughout the months of April to September,
inclusive, and from 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. throughout the months of October to
March, inclusive. Such lights shall be placed at each end of every such
obstruction or excavation and at intervals of at least 75 feet along the same.
   (b)   Any person who maliciously or wantonly, and without legal cause,
removes, extinguishes, diminishes or disturbs such lights or removes or
disturbs such barricades, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-30 FEES FOR STREET OCCUPATION AND DEPOSIT FOR RESTORATION OF STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS.
   (a)   The village may require fees for the issuance of a street occupation
permit of an amount determined by the village to be appropriate.
   (b)   The person to whom a building or street occupation permit is issued
shall make a deposit of an amount to be determined by the village to insure the
maintenance of the street in a safe condition and to insure its complete
restoration after completion of the building; provided, that such deposit shall
not be less than $500. Whenever any pavement, curb, parkway, sidewalk or other
public structure is damaged by the erection or alteration of any building
abutting thereon by reason of the construction thereof, the same shall be
restored by, or at the expense of, the owner of the building involved, or his
or her contractor, to a condition as good and serviceable as prior to the
beginning of the work.
   (c)   Upon the restoration as herein before-mentioned, if any, so much of
such deposit as shall have been expended by the village for such restoration or
for any other work done by the village and occasioned by the construction,
shall be retained by the village and the remainder of such deposit shall then
be returned to the depositor; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall preclude the village from maintaining an action against the person to
recover the damage done to any pavement, curb, parkway, sidewalk or other
public structure.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-31 STREET OPENINGS.
   No person shall injure or disturb any street, pavement, sidewalk or
crosswalk, or any part thereof, without first having complied with the
provisions of §§
30-28 to
30-39.
§ 9-32 DRIVEWAYS; TREE PRESERVATION.
   No driveways shall be constructed across any public parkway except in
compliance with
chapter 34, article III of this code.
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092)
§§ 9-33 - 9-36 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 86-2-1723; Ord. No. 2000-10-2092)
ARTICLE V. SEWERS
§ 9-37 CONNECTIONS GENERALLY.
   (a)   The connection between any building sanitary sewer service pipe or any
building storm sewer service pipe extending to a public sewer shall be
constructed with Schedule 40 or SDR 26 PVC pipe or other material as approved
by the director of public works. Any building sanitary sewer service pipe
outside a building shall have a diameter of not less than four inches, and any
building storm sewer service pipe outside a building shall have a diameter of
not less than six inches.
   (b)   All work in the construction of any building sanitary sewer service
pipe and all work in the construction of those parts of any building storm
sewer service pipe lying within the public streets shall be done by a plumber,
licensed by the state and bonded.
   (c)   Wherever practicable, a building sewer service pipe shall connect with
the public sewer by means of “Y” junctions in the public sewer left for such
purpose. If such a “Y” junction is not available, a core cut may be made in the
public sewer for the building sewer service pipe connection using a saddle
connection in a manner satisfactory to the director of public works.
   (d)   Direct connection of a building sewer service pipe to a manhole or
catch basin on the public sewer is prohibited, unless the written permission of
the director of public works is first obtained.
   (e)   In every case, connections of any kind with the public sewer shall be
made in conformity with chapter 21A of this code and under the supervision of,
and in a manner satisfactory to, the public works director.
(Ord. No. 91-13-1854; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-38 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 86-2-1723)
§ 9-39 MANHOLES AT ANGLES; MANHOLE, ETC., CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY.
   (a)   Where it is necessary to make a change in direction of the building
sewer service pipe between the building and the public sewer, such change of
direction shall be made by means of a manhole to be constructed as the public
works director shall direct.
   (b)   All manholes shall be constructed as per specification, approved by
the public works director. They shall be circular in section, with an interior
diameter of three feet; except that the top shall be drawn into two feet
beginning at the point three feet below the top, so as to fit and support the
cover. Each manhole shall be provided with a six-inch concrete floor with the
invert, if any, molded smoothly in the concrete or formed of sections of pipe
imbedded in the concrete. Each such manhole shall be provided with a cast iron
cover and cast iron frame.
(Ord. No. 91-13-1854; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-40 SEWER PIPE - MATERIAL.
   All building sewer service pipes shall be constructed with Schedule 40 or
SDR 26 PVC pipe or other material as provided by the director of public works.
§ 9-41 SAME - SIZES.
   Any pipe for a building sanitary sewer service shall be at least four inches
in diameter, and any pipe for a building storm sewer service pipe shall be at
least six inches in diameter. Where larger capacity is required, building sewer
service pipes shall be of a size approved by the public works director.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-42 SAME - HOW LAID GENERALLY.
   Building sewer service pipes shall be laid on solid ground or supported so
as to prevent settlement or breakage in a manner satisfactory to the public
works director. In no case shall such building sewer service pipes be laid on
loose fill or on soft, wet ground.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-43 SAME - JOINTS.
   All plastic building sewer service pipes shall have glued joints as per
manufacturer recommendations.
§ 9-44 SAME - GRADE.
   Building sewer service pipes shall be laid with a fall toward the public
sewer of not less than one-quarter inch per running foot where practicable. In
cases where it is found necessary to deviate from such grade, the manner of
construction shall be subject to the approval of the public works director.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-45 GARAGE DRAINAGE.
   Floor drains of garages shall be connected with the building sanitary sewer
service pipe system.
§ 9-45A MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SEWER SERVICE PIPES.
   Every owner of a building with a sanitary or storm sewer service pipe is
required, at his or her own cost and expense, to keep in repair all service
pipes leading from the public sanitary or storm sewer to the building.
ARTICLE VII. SIGNS
§§ 9-48 - 9-48.5 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
§§ 9-49 - 9-49.9 REPEALED.
(Ord. No. 92-33-1899)
ARTICLE VIII. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 9-50 DEEMED A NUISANCE.
   Any building or part thereof, or any structure of like nature, in a
condition dangerous to the occupants, or those passing, or to any adjacent
buildings by reason of bad condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective
heating apparatus, vibrations from machinery, defective flues, confined or
cramped stairways, insufficient exits, narrow or dark passageways, or which is
unsafe or dangerous for the purpose for which it is used or intended to be
used, or is in danger of being set on fire from any defect in its construction,
or is especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of its dilapidated
condition or defective construction, or from other causes, or which may be
prejudicial to the public health or the health of the inhabitants of the
neighborhood, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Cross-reference:
   As to abatement of nuisances generally, see §
24-39
§ 9-51 REPORT TO BOARD OF TRUSTEES; INVESTIGATION; NOTICE TO OWNER, ETC., TO
ABATE NUISANCE; ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE ON FAILURE OF OWNER, ETC.
   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the development services
director, or other building officers, or complaint shall be made to them or any
of them in writing, that any building, wall or structure within the village is
in such dangerous condition as described in the preceding section, the village
manager shall forthwith report the same to the board of trustees. If it shall
appear to the board of trustees, after due investigation of such report, that
such building, wall or structure is in such dangerous condition as aforesaid,
and the owner or his or her agent, or the lessee or occupant thereof, if within
his or her power or duty to do so, shall fail within a reasonable time, to be
fixed by the board of trustees, and after notice thereof in writing served on
such owner or his or her agent, or upon such lessee or occupant, by such
officer of the village as the board of trustees shall direct, specifying
wherein such building is unsafe, defective or unlawful, to make the same safe,
in such way as the board of trustees may direct, such building, wall or
structure shall, upon the order of the board of trustees, be torn down and
removed by the development services director, as the board of trustees may
instruct, or made safe as the board of trustees may order.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
Cross-reference:
   As to abatement of nuisances generally, see §
24-39
§ 9-52 POSTING NOTICE ON BUILDING; REMOVAL, ETC., OF SUCH NOTICE.
   Every building which shall appear to the public safety director to be
especially dangerous in case of fire by reason of bad conditions of walls,
overloaded floors, defective construction, decay or other causes, shall be held
to be an unsafe building, and the public safety director, in addition to
proceeding as provided in § 9-51, shall also affix a notice of the dangerous
character of the building in a conspicuous place on the exterior wall thereof,
and any person removing, defacing or disturbing such notice so affixed shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-53 ACCOUNT AND RECOVERY OF COSTS WHEN STRUCTURE REMOVED, ETC., BY VILLAGE.
   An itemized account of the expense of tearing down and removing any
structure, when such structure is removed by the village, pursuant to this
article, or of putting the same into a safe condition shall be kept by the
village, and shall be presented to the owner of such structure, or his or her
agent, or to the lessee or occupant for payment, and in case such owner, lessee
or occupant, as the case may be, shall fail or refuse, upon demand, to pay the
same, then the same may be recovered from such owner, lessee or occupant in an
action of debt in the name of the village.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-54 INSPECTIONS AND RECORDS THEREOF; RIGHT OF ENTRY OF CERTAIN VILLAGE
OFFICERS.
   The development services director or other building officers shall inspect
or cause to be inspected all buildings reported unsafe, and shall make or cause
to be made and preserved records of all such inspections. For the purpose of
making such inspections, such officers shall have the right to visit, enter and
inspect from time to time, and at all reasonable hours, any building or
structure in the village which any such officer has reason to believe is in a
dangerous or defective condition in regard to its construction or through
damage by fire, accident, lack of repair or decay.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-55 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   (a)   In case the director of public works or other building officer finds
any building or part of a building in such condition as to endanger life, or
liable to cause serious accident, and that such danger may be averted by the
immediate application of precautionary measures, such officers, or any of them,
shall have and exercise the power, without the preliminary direction of the
board of trustees, to take such precautionary measures as in his or her or
their opinion may be necessary to render any building or part thereof safe;
provided, that the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of such building refuses or
neglects to take such precautionary measures after being notified to do so by
such officers or any of them.
   (b)   The decision and order of the officers or any of them shall be
absolute and final.
§ 9-56 CLOSING DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; SUSPENSION OF OCCUPANT'S BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (a)   The development services director, public safety director, or other
building officers may order that no person shall be permitted to enter, occupy
or use a dangerous building or any portion thereof until the same shall have
been made safe, and may post such order in a conspicuous place on the exterior
wall of such building. No persons shall enter, occupy or use, except for the
purpose of repairing and making the same safe, any building or portion thereof
after the posting of such notice until such building or portion thereof shall
have been made safe.
   (b)   If the building or portion thereof found dangerous shall be devoted to
any purpose requiring a license, the village manager may suspend the license
pending the period of making repairs, and he or she may revoke the license in
case of failure on the part of the owner or party having an interest in such
unsafe building or portion thereof to make same safe without delay and at their
expense.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-57 REMEDY OF UNSANITARY CONDITIONS PREREQUISITE TO OCCUPANCY; REFUSAL OF
BUILDINGS PERMIT PENDING RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to occupy for human habitation any building which
is declared by the health officer to be unfit for such habitation by reason of
defective sanitary conditions, until such conditions have been remedied and the
premises approved by the health officer as fit for occupancy.
   (b)   If work has been done and expense incurred by the village in
connection with dangerous buildings, a bill of the cost thereof shall be
rendered by the village to the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the
property.
   (c)   The village may refuse to issue a permit for the reconstruction,
alteration or repair of any building or portion thereof on the property
involved until the expenditure incurred by the village on account of the work
and material supplied has been repaid.
ARTICLE IX. MOVING BUILDINGS
§ 9-58 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   No person shall move any building on, through or over any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place in the village without having obtained a permit
therefor from the development services director.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 9-59 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Application for permits required by §
9-58 shall be made on a form to be used for such purpose, which shall include
thereon the description of the building (including dimensions and number of
rooms) proposed to be moved; where located; place to which it is proposed to
move the same; proposed route; time likely to be required for such moving;
height of the building above ground when on wheels during the move; list of
wires, trees, branches, signs, bushes and other items and structures that would
have to be moved, relocated or removed, together with their location; plans for
sanitary sewer and water connections; and such other data the director of
public works may deem necessary.
§ 9-60 SAME - ISSUANCE; FEE.
   Permits for the removal or transportation of buildings or structures may be
issued by the development services director upon application of any person and
payment of a fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Upon
receipt of the fee required under such application and compliance with the
other provisions of this code, a permit shall be issued by the development
services director for the removal or transportation of such building or
structure over and along such streets or thoroughfares or routes as shall be
determined to be proper and requisite in such case by the development services
director.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-61 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   Every person applying for a permit to move a building shall submit with the
application a bond in the sum of no less than $10,000 with good and sufficient
sureties to be approved by the director of public works to indemnify and insure
the village for any loss it may incur or damage done to public or other
property, or persons, or for any cost that might be incurred under §
9-65, because of the moving of the building in question, and public liability
insurance in limits of no less than $100,000 for one person and no less than
$300,000 for two or more persons, insuring the village against claims for
bodily injury in a responsible insurance company approved by the director of
public works.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-62 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE AND ORDINANCES, ETC.
   No person shall be permitted to move any building unless the development
services director determines that the work proposed to be done is in accordance
with this code and all ordinances of the village in force at the time of the
moving of the building; that the bond and public liability insurance has been
furnished in accordance with §
9-61; that the necessary building permits for the new foundation and other
building improvements for the building when located at the new site have been
applied for and issued, and further that the work proposed to be done will not
be detrimental to public safety and welfare or damaging to village property or
private property.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-63 APPEAL OF DECISION OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR REGARDING MOVING
BUILDINGS.
   If the development services director refuses to issue a permit for moving a
building on the grounds that the move would be detrimental to public safety and
welfare or damaging to village property or private property, an appeal may be
made from his or her decision to the village president and board of trustees,
which may review the director of public works’ decision. The decision then made
by the village president and board of trustees will be final.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-64 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-65 VILLAGE CONTROL.
   In case during the progress of any work under any permit issued under this
article the terms thereof are not fully complied with, the development services
director shall have the authority to stop such work and direct and supervise
the completion thereof in accordance with the terms of such permit or make such
changes as shall be necessary to comply with any existing emergency at that
time, all of which shall be at the permittee’s cost.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-66 LIGHTS AND WARNINGS.
   Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a building that is being moved,
warnings to that effect shall be placed by the movers so as to warn vehicles
and persons from entering that portion of the street so blocked. On each night
while a building being moved, pursuant to this article, remains on the public
streets of the village, from dusk to sunrise, the person to whom such permit is
issued shall place and cause to be maintained on such building red lights
sufficient in number and so located as to adequately protect the public, which
lights shall be plainly visible for 100 yards during the period above
mentioned.
ARTICLE X. PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
§ 9-67 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, a PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL shall mean a human-
made rigid or semi-rigid receptacle for water having a depth at any point
greater than 18 inches, used or intended to be used for swimming, wading or
bathing and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground, and
which is used exclusively by the owner or occupant of the lot or premises in
the village on which it is located, his or her family and his or her guests.
This definition shall not include installations commonly known as "hot tubs"
having a surface area of not greater than 42 square feet and which are not used
for swimming; provided, however, that any such hot tub shall either:
   (a)   Be completely surrounded by a fence or other structure not less than
four feet in height having no gaps or apertures (other than doors or gates)
with any dimension greater than four inches, provided that such fence or other
structure shall be in addition to any fence that may be in place around the
perimeter or the premises on which such hot tub is located; or
   (b)   Be completely and securely covered with a covering that will:
      (1)   Support a weight of at least 300 pounds per square foot; and
      (2)   Be securely fastened at all times that it is not attended and
supervised by a responsible person.
(Ord. No. 88-16-1783)
§ 9-68 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION - REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a private swimming pool
with a capacity of 2,500 gallons or more on any lot or premises within the
village without first obtaining a building permit.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 9-69 SAME - FEES.
   The fee for a permit to construct a private swimming poolshall be set forth
in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-70 SANITATION GENERALLY.
   Every private swimming pool located within the village shall be so designed
and constructed as to facilitate cleaning and shall be maintained and operated
in such a manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times.
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 9-71 ENCLOSURES.
   (a)   Every owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or licensee of a
lot or premises upon which a private swimming pool is situated shall maintain
at all times on such lot or premises a fence or other structure designed to
completely surround such pool or yard area. Such fence or other structure shall
be not less than four feet in height, with no gaps, openings or apertures
(other than doors or gates), that will not allow the passage of a sphere with a
diameter equal to or greater than four inches.
(Ord. No. 2002-13-3058)
   (b)   All gates or doors opening through a fence or enclosure maintained in
accordance with this section shall be equipped with a self-closing or self-
latching device placed at the top of such gates or doors and made inaccessible
to small children. Such devices shall be so designed as to be capable of
keeping such doors or gates securely closed at all times when not in actual
use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling forming a part of the
enclosure need not be so equipped.
§ 9-72 WATER SUPPLY, FILTER SYSTEM, ETC.
   Every person in possession of a lot or premises in the village on which a
private swimming pool is located shall have such pool conform with the
following regulations.
   (a)   The water supply shall be from a connection to a public water supply
and shall consist of a permanent rigid system of piping having an air-gap
delivery connection located not less than six inches vertically above the flood
rim of the pool.
   (b)   No private swimming pool in excess of 2,500 gallons' capacity shall be
installed or used without a re-circulating and filtering system having a
minimum hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight. Sufficient
filter areas shall be provided to filter the entire pool volume in 18 hours at
a rate not exceeding three gallons per square foot of filter area per minute.
   (c)   Contractors must submit a pool pumping compliance form for each
address where they have pumped water from a pool. Pool water discharged to
storm sewers must have a chlorine concentration of 0 ppm and contain a pH value
of 6.5 to 8.5. Pool water discharge must be placed in the storm sewers.
Discharge into sanitary sewers is not permitted. The director of public works
shall have available for public inspection at all reasonable times maps and
information sufficient to indicate storm sewers. Every person discharging water
from a swimming pool into any sewer in the village shall be deemed to have
knowledge of such maps and information.
(Ord. No. 2015-10-3382, § 2)
§ 9-72.1 PERMIT FOR DISCHARGE OF WATER FROM SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 9-72.1(a) COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into any sewer system
within the village water from any swimming pool in amounts exceeding 35 gallons
per minute without having first obtained a permit therefor.
§ 9-72.1(b) DEFINITIONS.
   PERSON within the meaning of this section shall include any individual,
firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any organization of any
kind.
§ 9-72.1(c) PERMITS - INFORMATION AND FEES.
   Applications for the village permit herein required shall be made on forms
supplied by the village. The permit application shall set forth the location
and size of the pool to be drained, the name of the person who is doing the
work of draining the pool, the size and type of pumps and other equipment to be
used and any other details or description of the work as may be required by the
village staff. The permit application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
permit application fee of an amount to be determined by the village.
(Ord. No. 93-28-1933; Ord. No. 2012-08-3309; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-72.1(d) APPROVAL OF APPLICATION - PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Such application shall be submitted to the development services director for
his or her approval. It is a condition of all applications and permits issued
under this section that the work undertaken pursuant to the permit shall be
done only upon directions and specifications that have the approval of the
village.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-72.1(e) BOND.
   (a)   (1)   Each person applying for a discharge permit pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall also deliver to the village cash or other
security as may be acceptable to the village. Such cash security shall be
delivered to the director of public works not less than seven days before the
commencement of the work shall begin. Within 30 days after the conclusion of
the work, the director of public works shall determine whether the applicant
performed all work in accordance with the directions and specifications of the
village, with due care and skill, and in conformity with any other terms or
conditions of the discharge permit.
      (2)   The village may retain that portion of the security necessary to
compensate the village for any loss or claim resulting from such failure to the
extent that the development services director determines that the applicant or
its agents failed to perform the work in accordance with:
         A.   The requirements of the village;
         B.   The terms of the permit; and
         C.   Due care and skill.
      (3)   Should the amount of the cash security prove to be inadequate for
the village to recover its total losses or to satisfy all claims against it in
connection with the discharge permit, the applicant shall remain liable to the
village for the entire amount of the losses. To the extent that the cash
security exceeds the amount of the losses of or claims against the village (if
any) that the development services director determines to have arisen out of an
applicant’s work pursuant to a discharge permit, the excess shall be returned
to the applicant.
   (b)   The applicant further agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
village and its officers, officials, employees, agents, attorneys and
representatives for any loss, damage, expense, claim or cost of every nature
and kind arising out of, or in connection with the work to be performed, when
such loss, damage, expense, claim or cost is due to the negligence of the
applicant or its agents. In addition, the return of any portion or all of the
cash security by the village shall not release the applicant from any of its
obligations or liabilities under the discharge permit.
(Ord. No. 91-19-1860; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-73 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE; RIGHT OF ENTRY; PENALTIES.
   (a)   The development services director is hereby charged with the duty of
enforcing this article. For this purpose he or she and his or her inspectors
are hereby authorized to enter any premises within the village to inspect any
private swimming pool at any reasonable hour.
   (b)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
punished as provided in §
16-1 of this code. In addition, the village manager may revoke any permit
issued under this article to such person.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
ARTICLE XI. FENCES
§ 9-74 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   The terms used in this chapter shall have the definitions or meanings
that such terms have in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 71-1-1481, § 1; Ord. No. 91-10-1851)
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection
9-74(a) hereof, any dedicated but unimproved street or right-of-way shall not
be deemed a street for purposes of regulating a fence if the owner of such
fence has executed, recorded against the affected property, and delivered to
the village a declaration of covenants in a form acceptable to the village that
requires the owner to remove any nonconforming fence immediately upon the
improvement of such street or right-of-way.
§ 9-75 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection
9-75(a)(7) below, no portion of a fence, wall, retaining wall, or similar
structure shall be built, installed or erected to a height greater than the
most restrictive applicable provision of the following:
      (1)   Two and one-half feet within that area of any corner lot bounded by
the street lines and a line drawn between points on the street line 12 feet
from the corner;
      (2)   Four feet within that part of a corner lot bounded by the street
lines and the front yard line;
      (3)   Four feet between the street line and the front yard line of any
interior lot;
      (4)   Five feet within that part of a corner lot bounded by the street
lines and the corner side yard line;
      (5)   Six feet, wherever located, except that a fence attached to and
constructed of the same materials as a building and fully complying with the
yard and setback requirements for the building as established in the zoning
ordinance will be subject to the height regulations of the zoning ordinance;
      (6)   Six feet, to the extent that the area enclosed or partially
enclosed by any fence, wall or similar structure greater than six feet in
height pursuant to subsection
9-75(a)(5) of this section, together with the building and its accessory
buildings, occupies in excess of 30% of the area of an interior lot or in
excess of 35% of the area of a corner lot; and
      (7)   In reviewing plans and issuing permits for fences, the development
services director may permit certain elements of a fence (including without
limitation fence caps and fence post finials) to exceed the prescribed height
limits to the extent that the director determines that such elements are
intended to protect the durability and functionality of the fence in question.
In issuing a fence permit, the director may also authorize a fence to exceed
the prescribed height limits to allow for gaps between the bottom of a fence
and the ground level if the director determines that such gap is appropriate
for the proper installation or maintenance of such fence. In no event may the
total adjustments authorized by the director under this subsection
9-75(a)(7) exceed six inches.
   (b)   (1)   Notwithstanding any more restrictive provision of this §
9-75 or §
9-76, an existing fence lying between a public street and an existing ravine
(as determined by the director of public works) with a height in excess of four
feet may be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, and thereafter maintained, at
a height not more than the lesser of:
         A.   Its existing height; or
         B.   Five and one-half feet; provided that the director of public
works determines that such fence will protect the ravine area or enhance the
public safety.
      (2)   The height of such fence may exceed four feet for the distance that
the fence runs along the ravine area, plus a transition distance of not greater
than 100 lineal feet from the limits of the ravine area. Prior to the repair,
replacement or reconstruction of such a fence, plans and surveys therefor shall
be submitted to provide the director of public works with sufficient
information to determine that such fence will be in furtherance of the public
safety or the protection of the ravine area. In authorizing the repair,
replacement or reconstruction of such fence, the development services director
may impose appropriate conditions on approval to ensure that the purposes of
this subsection are achieved.
(Ord. No. 2008-09-3220)
   (c)   (1)   Notwithstanding any more restrictive provision in this section,
any lot located within 750 feet of a golf course may install a temporary fence
made of netting or similar materials having a non-obtrusive color and design of
any height that is determined by the village manager to provide reasonable
screening to protect such lot from stray golf shots. A permit shall be required
for any such fence, which permit shall be issued without fee or charge and may
be granted to allow multiple seasonal installations of the fence.
      (2)   In reviewing any application for a permit under this subsection
9-75(c), the village manager shall consider:
         A.   The proximity of the golf course and adjacent lots;
         B.   The proposed fence materials;
         C.   The proposed height, location and construction details for the
installation of the fence in light of the objective to provide for protection
of persons and property;
         D.   The impact of the proposed fence, if any on neighboring
properties; and
         E.   Minimizing visual obstructions resulting from the fence.
      (3)   Any denial of a fence permit by the village manager may be appealed
to the fence board of appeals in accordance with §
9-78 of this article.
   (d)   Retaining walls shall be subject to the same height restrictions as
fences and walls.
      (1)   Retaining wall height shall be measured perpendicularly from the
top of the wall to the bottom of the wall, regardless of the “grade” of the lot
as defined in the zoning code.
      (2)   For the purposes of determining height, terraced wall sections
shall be considered a single wall unless the face of each wall section is
separated by a distance of no less the height of the highest of the wall
sections.
(Ord. No. 2009-14-3247; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-75.1 MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT ALONG A STREET LINE; OTHER LOCATIONS.
   The height of any fence along a street line shall be measured from the
sidewalk level or its equivalent established grade as determined by the
director of public works. The height of a fence at any other location shall be
measured from ground level as determined by the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 2008-09-3220)
§ 9-76 DENSITY RESTRICTION.
   No fence, wall or similar structure having a density greater than 25% shall
be built, installed or erected:
   (a)   Within 20 feet of the intersection of street lines; or
   (b)   Between the street line and the building line of a corner lot if such
fence is greater than four feet in height.
(Ord. No. 71-1-1481, § 1)
§ 9-76.1 MEASUREMENT OF DENSITY.
   The density of any fence shall be measured by viewing a front elevation of a
representative section thereof.
(Ord. No. 71-1-1481)
§ 9-77 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No fence, wall or similar structure shall be built, installed or erected
without first obtaining a building permit in the manner provided by this
chapter for building permits for other structures.
§ 9-77.1 FINISHED SIDES OF FENCES.
   Fences must be erected so that a smooth or finished side of the fence faces
the street or adjoining property, and any rough or unfinished side of the
fence, including the posts and all other supporting members of the fence, faces
the fence owner's property. This section will not apply to a fence on a lot in
a residential district located on a lot line that separates the residential lot
from a lot in a business district or from a railroad right-of-way. In addition,
the director of public works may waive this requirement upon a determination
that there would be no adverse impact on adjoining property.
(Ord. 2008-03-3214)
§ 9-78 FENCE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (a)   There is hereby created a fence board of appeals consisting of those
persons who are from time to time the members of the zoning board of appeals.
The chairperson of the zoning board of appeals shall serve as the chairperson
of the fence board of appeals.
(Ord. No. 70-10-1479)
   (b)   Meetings of the fence board of appeals shall be held at the call of
the chairperson. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records of
its examinations and other official actions. A majority of the members of the
board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business and the board may
act by a majority of those present at a meeting at which a quorum is present.
The chairperson shall have the power to vote. The board may adopt its own rules
of procedure not inconsistent with this article.
   (c)   The fence board of appeals shall, after public notice and hearing,
have the authority to finally grant or deny all requests for variations in the
height or density of any fence or wall filed pursuant to §
9-79 of this article.
   (d)   The fence board of appeals shall consider appeals of denials of fence
permits pursuant to §
9-75(c) of this article. In considering any such appeal, the fence board may
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the village manager upon finding that
the manifest weight of the evidence requires a different result based on the
objectives of providing for protection of persons and property while minimizing
visual obstructions resulting from the fence.
(Ord. No. 2009-14-3247)
§ 9-79 ISSUANCE OF VARIATIONS.
   (a)   Any person may request a variation from the provisions of this
article. Except as otherwise provided in subsection
9-79(d) hereof, variation requests shall be filed with the village manager, who
shall promptly refer them to the fence board of appeals for public hearing and
decision.
   (b)   The fence board of appeals shall grant a variation to a public utility
or any unit of local government when such variation is sought for the purpose
of enclosing premises used for public utility or municipal purposes and upon a
finding that such variation is reasonably necessary for the public convenience
or welfare. The fence board of appeals may grant a variation with respect to
other property concerning which it is found that:
      (1)   The variation if granted will not alter the essential character of
the locality;
      (2)   The variation will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the fence ordinance;
      (3)   The variation will set no unfavorable precedent either to the
immediate neighborhood or to the village as a whole; and
      (4)   The variation will not affect public safety.
   (c)   Any action taken by the fence board of appeals with respect to any
request for variation shall be subject to judicial review under the
Administrative Review Act.
   (d)   In addition to variations granted by the fence board of appeals, the
board of trustees may grant variations for fences on property owned by a unit
of local government when such variation is in the public interest.
(Ord. No. 70-10-1479; Ord. No. 83-4-1664; Ord. No. 91-20-1861)
§ 9-80 NONCONFORMING FENCES, ETC. - NOTICE TO OWNER, ETC.
   In all cases where a fence or wall shall hereafter be erected contrary to
the provisions of this section, the director of public works shall forthwith
notify the owner or agent or lessee of the land on which same is located, or
the contractor engaged in erecting same, and shall specify briefly in such
notice in what manner such fence or wall violates the provisions of this
article, and the director of public works shall require the person so notified
to forthwith make such fence or wall conform to and comply with the provisions
of this article, specifying in such notice the time within which such work
shall be done.
§ 9-81 SAME - DEMOLITION BY VILLAGE.
   If at the expiration of the time set in the notice provided for in the
preceding section the person so notified shall have refused, neglected or
failed to comply with the request made in such notice and shall not have torn
down or changed the fence or wall so as to conform to and comply with the
provisions of this article, the director of public works shall have authority
and it shall be his or her duty to proceed forthwith to tear down, or cause to
be torn down, such fence or wall or so much thereof as is being maintained or
shall have been erected and constructed in violation of the provisions of this
article, and the cost of such tearing down shall be charged to and recovered
from the owner of such fence or wall or from the person for whom such fence or
wall has been or is being erected.
ARTICLE XII. STORM WATER RUNOFF RESTRICTIONS
(Ord. No. 2007-19-3196)
§ 9-82 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this article XII is to preserve the landscaped character of
the village, promote effective storm water management, and avoid
overdevelopment on single-family residential lots. This article XII applies
only to lots in the single-family residential districts of the village, as
defined in the Glencoe zoning code.
§ 9-83 REGULATION.
   (a)   No adverse impact. No single-family development of a lot shall be
permitted that materially and adversely impacts storm water runoff or drainage
on:
      (1)   The subject property or other properties; or
      (2)   On any storm water facility or system, as determined by the public
works director or designee, in his or her discretion, consistent with this
article XII and customary engineering practices and the village’s Engineering
and Specifications Manual.
   (b)   Determination of compliance.
      (1)   A.   In furtherance of the public works director or designee’s
determination pursuant to subsection
9-83(a), an applicant for single-family development of a lot shall submit
detailed storm water plans and other engineering documentation, including
without limitation a calculation of the C-Factor for the lot as proposed to be
developed. For purposes of this subsection 9-83(b), C-FACTOR is calculated
using the following formula:
   (.95 X Impervious Surface on a Lot) + (.5 X Pervious Surface on a Lot)
               Total Lot Area
         B.   The determination of whether a particular surface is pervious or
impervious (or the degree to which a surface may be calculated as pervious)
shall be in the director of public work's or designee's discretion, consistent
with customary engineering practices and the village's Engineering and
Specifications Manual.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
9-83(b)(4), the director of public works or designee shall conclude that a
proposed development complies with the general regulation set forth in
subsection
9-83(a) if such development does not exceed the greater of the following
subsections
9-83(b)(2)A. and B.:
         A.   The C-Factor set forth in the following table:
 
Lot Area                                                               C-Factor
i.   Lots equal to or less than 10,000 sq. ft                       .67
ii.   Lots greater than 10,000 sq. ft. but not more than 20,000 sq. .65
ft.
iii.   Lots greater than 20,000 sq. ft.                             .62
 
            or
         B.   The C-Factor existing on a lot that is developed with a single-
family dwelling as of the effective date of this article XII of
chapter 9, being August 16, 2007; provided, however, that this subsection
9-83(b)(2)B. shall not apply if the single-family dwelling is demolished,
damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50% of the cost
of replacement.
      (3)   If the director determines that a lot does not meet the general
regulation set forth in subsection
9-83(A) or the C-Factor standards set forth in subsection
9-83(b)(2), the owner may only proceed with the development of the lot if the
owner installs and maintains an alternative engineered solution that is
acceptable to the director of public works or designee, in his or her
discretion and consistent with the following:
         A.   The proposed alternative engineered solution shall be designed to
provide storm water detention for the lot in a manner that is equivalent to, or
results in a lower offsite storm water impact than, the applicable C-Factor for
the lot pursuant to subsection
9-83(b)(2)A. or B.;
         B.   Any proposed alternative engineered solution shall be designed
consistent with customary engineering standards for storm water drainage and
shall comply with the standards for acceptable alternative engineered
solutions, as set forth in the village's Engineering and Specifications Manual.
In addition, the alternative engineered solution shall be consistent with all
village codes, ordinances, regulations and policies, including without
limitation the purposes of the village's comprehensive plan, the village's tree
preservation ordinance contained in article II of
chapter 34 of this code, and the village's grading regulations contained in
article XIV of this
chapter 9; and
         C.   The alternative engineered solution shall be designed,
constructed and maintained at all times in a safe condition to protect persons
and property from injury and damage.
      (4)   If the director determines that exceptional circumstances exist on
or in connection with a lot, its development, or its environs that result or
will likely result in a material and adverse storm water runoff or drainage
effects notwithstanding the satisfaction of the C-Factor standards set forth in
subsection
9-83(b)(2), then the owner of such lot may be required to install and maintain
an alternative engineered solution in connection with the development of such
lot. The nature and extent of such alternative engineered solution shall be
determined by the director in the manner provided in subsection
9-83(b)(3).
      (5)   Prior to any certificate of occupancy being issued for a lot for
which an alternative engineered solution has been required pursuant to
subsection
9-83(b)(3) or subsection
9-83(b)(4), the owner shall execute and record a declaration of covenants and
restrictions to ensure maintenance and preservation of such alternative
engineered solution, which declaration shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village attorney. The declaration shall provide that the
ownership and maintenance of the alternative engineered solution shall be the
responsibility of the owner. The declaration shall further provide the village
with the right, but not the obligation, to inspect and, if necessary, repair,
replace, maintain, or otherwise care for the alternative engineered solution,
and the village shall have the right to assess its costs in connection with any
such actions against the owner of the lot.
(Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§§ 9-84 - 9-87 REPEALED.
ARTICLE XIII. LAND GRADES
§ 9-87A GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   No person, firm or corporation shall alter or cause or permit the alteration
of any existing land grade or contour if such alteration will:
   (a)   Cause surface water to be unreasonably diverted onto or detained on
abutting or nearby property;
   (b)   Unreasonably alter natural or existing drainage patterns; or
   (c)   Unreasonably increase or concentrate runoff of storm water onto
abutting or nearby property.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616)
§ 9-88 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in §
9-91, no person, firm or corporation shall:
   (a)   Alter or cause or permit the alteration of any existing land grade or
contour by more than six inches; or
   (b)   Alter or cause or permit the alteration of any existing land grade or
contour in conjunction with any construction for which a building permit is
required by the provisions of article II of this chapter without first
obtaining a grade change permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616)
§ 9-89 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Each applicant for a grade change permit shall submit to the village a
completed application in such form and number as the development services
director shall from time to time determine are necessary. Such application
shall include drawings and plans, at a scale of not less than one-eighth of an
inch to the foot, showing existing grades and proposed grade alterations and a
report from a licensed engineer stating that the proposed grade change will not
violate the provisions of §
9-87A. An application for a grade change permit may be filed in conjunction
with any application for building permit required by article II of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-90 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The village shall issue a grade change permit only if it determines that the
proposed grade change will not violate the provisions of §
9-87A or otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
Issuance of a grade change permit pursuant to this section shall not relieve
the applicant of the obligation of obtaining any other permit required by any
other provision of the village code and of complying with all other applicable
requirements of the village code. In addition, issuance of a grade change
permit shall not be deemed to authorize any grade change in violation of any
applicable statutory or common law pertaining to drainage rights and the
village, by issuing a grade change permit, assumes no liability for any damages
whatsoever that may be proximately caused by any grade change made pursuant to
such permit.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-91 EXEMPTIONS.
   The village may from time to time designate specific classes of grade
changes that do not threaten to adversely affect surface water drainage
patterns. No grade change permit shall be required for such classes of grade
changes. The village shall maintain a list of such exempted classes of grade
changes and make such lists available for inspection. The village also may
waive, in writing, the requirement of a grade change permit with respect to any
specific proposed grade change if it finds that the proposed grade change will
not affect existing surface water drainage onto or off of the subject property.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-92 FEES.
   All applications for a grade change permit shall be accompanied by a permit
fee in such amount as the village manager shall from time to time determine is
necessary to defray the actual costs of processing such applications.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-93 ABATEMENT; LIEN.
   Any change or alteration of any existing grade or contour undertaken, caused
or allowed in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the village manager shall, upon discovery of any such nuisance
take all appropriate steps to cause its abatement. To that end, the village
manager shall have authority, after written notice to the owner of the subject
property, to authorize village employees and contractors to go upon the subject
property for the purpose of abating the nuisance and to charge the cost of such
work to such owner. In the event of non-payment by the owner, such charges
shall be a lien upon the subject property to be recorded, enforced and
foreclosed as provided in § 11-20-13 of the Illinois Municipal Code, Ill. Rev.
Stat. ch. 24, § 11-20-13, pertaining to the removal of debris from private
property.
(Ord. No. 80-16-1616)
ARTICLE XIV. FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS.
(Ord. No. 2008-16-3227)
§ 9-94 PURPOSE.
   This article XIV is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
Village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this article XIV is to maintain this village’s eligibility in
the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to
periodic flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare;
and for the following specific purposes:
   (a)   To meet the requirements of the Act and other applicable laws and
regulations;
   (b)   To assure that new development or redevelopment does not increase
flood or drainage hazards to others or create unstable conditions susceptible
to erosion;
   (c)   To protect new buildings and improvements to existing buildings from
flood damage;
   (d)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (e)   To lessen the burden on taxpayers for flood control projects, repairs
to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations; and
   (f)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   (g)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits, and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. No. 2008-16-3227; Ord. No. 2021-16-3512)
§ 9-95 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article XIV, the following definitions are adopted.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. For the purposes of this article, an ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE shall be defined as a non-habitable building, used only for parking
of vehicles or storage, that is on the same parcel of property as the principal
building and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal
building. This definition shall not apply to references to ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
in the village’s zoning code.
   ACT. “An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the State of Illinois,” 615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed structure used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or uses in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock,
including aquatic organisms. Structures that house tools or equipment used in
connection with these purposes or uses are also considered to have agricultural
purposes or uses.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency that submits an
application to the village.
   APPROPRIATE USE. A use of the regulatory floodway that is permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD also is known as the 100-year frequency flood
event.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The height in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of the crest of
the base flood. Application of the BFE at any location is as defined in Section
9-97 of this article XIC.
   BASEMENT. For the purposes of this article, a BASEMENT shall be defined as
any area of the building, including any sunken room or sunken portion of a
room, having its floor below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. This
definition shall not apply to references to BASEMENT in the village’s zoning
code.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed building, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes and
prefabricated buildings. The term also includes recreational vehicles and
travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The development services director of the village or
their designee.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.
straightening).
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. A coastal high hazard area is identified on a community's FIRM by the
designation of Zone VE.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity
when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this article XIV, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or regulatory floodways as shown on a FIRM for flood boundary and
floodway map (“FBFM”), once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. DAM does not include underground storage
tanks.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally
depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing
base flood discharge with no more than a 0.1-foot increase in stage due to the
loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in
velocities. Designated floodways may also be referred to herein as regulatory
floodways.
      (1)   The floodways are designated for on the countywide FIRM of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008 and September 10, 2021. When
two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more recent effective floodway
limit shall prevail.
      (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed
into the village are designated on the countywide FIRM of Cook County prepared
by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
      (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the FIRM map and located on a
site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is
needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate, including, without
limitation:
         A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a building
or any addition to a building;
         B.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparation of a
site for manufactured home or installation of a travel trailer on a site for
more than 180 days;
         C.   Drilling, mining, installation of utilities, construction of
roads or bridges, or similar projects;
         D.   Demolition of a building or redevelopment of a site;
         E.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
         F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving or other non-
agricultural alterations of the ground surface; or storage of materials;
         G.   Any other human activity that might change the direction, height
or velocity of flood or surface water; and
         H.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as re-roofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations that are exempt from this article XIV
pursuant to Illinois statutory law.
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44
C.F.R. §§ 59 through 79, effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation
does not include any later editions or amendments.
   FIRM. Flood insurance rate map, which is a map prepared by FEMA that depicts
the SFHA’s within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and
floodplains, and may or may not depict regulatory floodways.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waters, or from the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood also includes the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood
or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of a Zone A or Zone AE floodplain that is outside
of the floodway.
   FLOODPLAIN. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood elevation. FLOODPLAINS also may
include detached SFHAs, ponding areas and the like. The FLOODPLAIN also is
known as the SFHA and includes the regulatory floodway and flood fringe.
      (1)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of
the village are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 17031C0093J,
17031COQ94K, 17031C01131K, 17031C0231J, 17031C0232J and 17031C0251K for Cook
County as prepared by the FEMA and dated August 19, 2008 and September 10,
2021.
      (2)   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village and that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
Floodplains are generally identified as such on panel numbers(s) 17031C0093J
and 17031C0232J of the countywide FIRM for Cook County by the FEMA and dated
August 19, 2008.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The village engineer of the Village of Glencoe.
   FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry flood
proofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood plus a minimum
of one foot of freeboard at any given location in the SFHA.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. An engineering analysis that
determines the expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
   IDNR /OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM. IDNR/OWR has jurisdiction over any stream
serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more in an urban or urbanizing area,
or in the floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 6,400 acres or
more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from the
IDNR/OWR (17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3700 or Part 3708). The IDNR/OWR may grant
approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide permit or
a regional permit.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific building, area of land or a parcel of land, where there has not been
any alteration of the topography since the date of the first NFIP map showing
the property within the floodplain, was inadvertently included within the
floodplain and that the building, area of land or a parcel of land is removed
from the floodplain.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION. A letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
regulatory floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA). A line shown on a FIRM to indicate
the inland limit of the 1.5-foot breaking wave height during the base flood.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the building in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this article XIV.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and may be used with or without a foundation
when connected to required utilities. MANUFACTURED HOME includes park trailers
and travel trailers or similar recreational vehicles placed on a site for more
than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MODERATE WAVE ACTION AREA (MoWA). A special flood hazard area subject to the
potential for breaking wave heights of greater than or equal to one and one-
half feet, but less than three feet, where the primary source of flooding is
astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches, and/or tsunamis. A MoWA is an area
within zone AE on a FIRM that is between the inland limit of zone VE and a
LiMWA, where identified. (Also known as "Coastal A Zone").
   NAVD 88. The National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes
the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NVGD).
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. New construction means buildings for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such buildings.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is continuous so as to leave a distinctive
mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristics.
   OWR. The Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources
(IDNR/OWR), formerly acting as the Illinois Department of Transportation,
Division of Water Resources.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS. All streams and lakes capable of being navigated
by watercraft.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects
which are considered minor projects that are permissible per Ill. Adm. Code
Part 3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois Designated Floodways. A complete
listing of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained
from the IDNR/OWR website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act of 1989, 225
ILCS 325.
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE. Those development activities that do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a building on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the building before the damaged occurred.
   RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN. Any floodplain subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system, or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   SFHA. The SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA, which is any base flood area subject to
flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other
identified channel or ponding, and shown on a FBFM or a FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-
30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M or E.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the
first placement of permanent construction of a building on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, including the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects
that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a human-made change to the land constructed on or
below the ground, including without limitation the construction, reconstruction
or placement of a building or any addition to a building, installing a
manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or
installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a building whereby
cost to repair the building to its before damaged condition equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the building before the damage occurred, regardless
of actual repair work performed. The term includes flood related damages
sustained by a building on two separate occasions in a ten-year period, in
which the cost of the repairs, on average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the building at the time of each such flood event.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, taking
place during a ten-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure either:
         A.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing code specifications that are necessary solely to assure safe living
conditions; or
         B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or regulatory floodway where water
flows from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer under the employ or
contract of the village. The village engineer is designated as the floodplain
administrator for the village.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this article XIV.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2021-17-3513; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-96 ADMINISTRATION; DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The floodplain administrator shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this article XIV, which enforcement shall
include the following:
   (a)   Determining the floodplain designation. Check all new development
sites to determine whether they are in an SFHA. If the site is in a floodplain,
determine whether the site in a coastal high hazard area, moderate wave action
area, floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has
not been conducted.
      (1)   If the site within a flood fringe, require that the minimum
requirements of §§
9-98 and
9-101 be met.
      (2)   If the site within a floodway, require that the minimum
requirements of §§
9-99 and
9-101 be met.
      (3)   If the site is located within a floodplain for which no detailed
study has been completed and approved, require that the minimum requirements of
§§
9-100 and
9-101 be met.
      (4)   If the site is within a coastal high hazard area (or moderate wave
action area), require that the minimum requirements of §
9-101 be met.
   (b)   Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a
regulatory floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be
referred to the village engineer for review to ensure that the development
meets the requirements of §
9-99 . In the case of an appropriate use, the village engineer shall state in
writing that the development meets the requirements of §
9-99 ;
   (c)   Permits for dams may be required from IDNR/OWR. The floodplain
administrator shall contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required and
for application details. Any work involving the construction, modification, or
removal of a dam, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of
Dams), shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the issuing a local permit.;
   (d)   Ensure any and all required federal, state, and local permits are
received prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit, including,
but not limited to, permits pertaining to the Clean Water Act, Public Water
Supply, Endangered Species Act, and Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act;
   (e)   Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this article XIV and issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this article XIV and other regulations of the
village when the development meets the conditions of this article XIV;
   (f)   Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to ensure proper evaluation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this article XIV;
   (g)   Elevation and flood proofing certificates. Maintain in the permit
files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or non-residential building or the
elevation to which a non-residential building has been flood proofed, using a
flood proofing certificate, for all buildings subject to §
9-101 . The floodplain administrator or his or her designee shall make
elevation and flood proofing certificates available for public inspection and
shall provide copies of same;
   (h)   Certification of structural design and methods of construction for VE
zone construction as required by §
9-101;
   (i)   Certification of breakaway wall design, when applicable, as provided
in §
9-101;
   (j)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variation documentation, conditional
letters of map revisions, letters of map revisions, letters of a map amendment,
and as built elevation and flood proofing or elevation and flood proofing
certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this article XIV;
   (k)   State permits and delegation of authority. Ensure that construction
authorization has been granted by OWR for all development projects subject to
§§
9-99  and
9-100 ; provided, however, that upon approval of this article XIV by OWR and
FEMA, and upon receipt of written notification from OWR that the responsibility
for issuing permits for construction in regulatory floodways and floodplains
where the regulatory floodways have not been identified has been delegated to
the village pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code § 3708, the village shall be
authorized to issue construction permits for all development projects subject
to §§ 9-99 and 9-100; provided further, however, that the following review
approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits
from OWR:
      (1)   Exempt organizations;
      (2)   Illinois Department of Transportation projects, dams or impoundment
structures and all other federal, state or local unit of government projects,
including projects of the village and Cook County, except for those projects
meeting the requirements of §
9-99(n);
      (3)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile made pursuant to §
9-99(g)(5);
      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile made pursuant to §
9-99(g)(4);
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §§
9-99(g)(1),
9-99(g)(2) and
9-99(g)(8);
      (6)   Structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and
streams;
      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or regulatory floodway
locations; and
      (8)   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
   (l)   Floodway permits. For all development projects in a floodway, ensure
that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR or a delegated
community, or written documentation is provided stating that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq. Floodway permit
requirements are specified in §§
9-99  and
9-100 of this article XIV.
   (m)   Establish procedures for administering and documenting determinations,
as outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial damage made
pursuant to §
9-101.
      (1)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building,
including the cost of volunteer labor and donated materials must be included.
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the village and this
article IV is required.
   (n)   Cooperation with agencies. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain
management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and
regulatory floodway data and to improve the administration of this article XIV;
submit data to OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory floodway
map; submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and
notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this article XIV.
   (o)   Notify IDNR/OWR and adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to
the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
   (p)   If a variance is to be granted, the floodplain administrator shall
review the requirements of §
9-103 to make sure they are met. In addition, the floodplain administrator
shall complete all notifications requirements, prepare a staff report and
recommendations.
   (q)   Enforce the provisions of this article XIV, investigate violations,
issue notices of violation or stop work orders, and require corrective action,
as outlined in §
9-105.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512)
§ 9-96.1 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit is required prior to the commencement of any
development activity within, partially within or in contact with the
floodplains.
   (a)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence any
development activities, including new construction, substantial improvements,
and alterations of a watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact
with the floodplains until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the
floodplain administrator. No permit shall be issued by the floodplain
administrator until the requirements of this article XIV have been met.
   (b)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body shall commence a
development of a critical facility on land below the 0.2% annual chance flood
elevation, without first obtaining a development permit from the floodplain
administrator.
   (c)   A local floodplain development permit shall not be issued by the
floodplain administrator for development in a floodway without the applicant
first obtaining a state floodway permit from IDNR/OWR except as noted in §
9-99.
   (d)   The floodplain administrator shall review all proposed development by
comparing field surveyed topography of the site to the FIRM and shall make
interpretations, where needed, as to the location of the floodplain boundaries,
floodway boundaries, and BFE.
      (1)   Any development that is located on land below the BFE, located in
the mapped floodway, or associated with a Zone AO or VE is subject to the
requirements of this section. A LOMA-Floodway (LOMR-FW) shall be required
before issuing a floodplain development permit for land higher than the BFE if
located within a mapped floodway.
      (2)   Any development located on land below the BFE that was filled after
the date of the site's first floodplain designation on a flood map is subject
to the requirements of this article XIV.
      (3)   Any development located on land below the BFE that is that is
hydraulically connected to the floodplain, but not shown on the current FIRM,
is subject to the provisions of this article XIV.
      (4)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain documentation of the
preexisting ground elevation at the site and, if applicable, certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first FIRM
identification in the floodplain.
   (e)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted, the floodplain development
permit shall be referred to a P.E. under the employ or contract of the village
for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of this
article XIV.
   (f)   (1)   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid
unless the actual start of construction, for work authorized by such permit, is
commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences.
      (2)   The floodplain administrator shall ensure that all development
activities happen in a timely manner. All permitted work shall be completed
within 15 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire. Time extensions, of not more than 180 days each, may be granted, in
writing, by the floodplain administrator. Time extensions shall be granted only
if the original permit is compliant with this article XIV and the FIRM and FIS
in effect at the time the extension is granted.
   (g)   Letters of map revision.
      (1)   The floodplain administrator shall require a CLOMR prior to
issuance of a development permit for proposed floodway encroachments that will
cause an increase in the BFE: and proposed development which will increase the
BFE by more than 0.1 feet in riverine area where FEMA has provided a BFE but no
floodway.
      (2)   Once a CLOMR has been issued, the development permit may be issued
for site grading and structures necessary in the area of the map change to
achieve the final LOMR. Upon completion, the applicant shall submit as-built
certifications, as required by FEMA, to achieve a final LOMR prior to the
release of final development permits. Review §
9-101 for the construction of buildings in any floodplain issued a LOMR based
on fill.
   (h)   Application. An application for a floodplain development permit shall
be made on a form provided by the floodplain administrator.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a registered P.E. licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; existing grade elevations, using the NAVD 88, and all proposed
changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings, additions to buildings,
sewage disposal and water supply facilities; floodplain limits based on
elevation or depth, as applicable; floodway limits, as applicable; location and
dimensions of all structures, including but not limited to fences, culverts,
decks, gazebos, agricultural structures, and accessory structures.
      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §
9-101 of this article XIV.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2021-17-3513; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-97 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (a)   Standards. The standards for flood protection established in this
article XIV are based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base
flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois
State Water Survey’s Floodplain Information Repository. When a party disagrees
with the best available data, such party may finance the detailed engineering
study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit it to OWR and
FEMA.
   (b)   Base flood: Skokie River. The base flood evaluation for the SFHAs of
the Skokie River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide Flood Insurance Study for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated
August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may
be prepared from time to time.
   (c)   Base flood: unincorporated property. The base flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those part of unincorporated Cook County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide
Flood Insurance Study for Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19,
2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
   (d)   Base flood: AH or AO Zones. The BFE for each floodplain delineated as
an AH Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth) indicated on the
countywide FIRM of Cook County and dated August 19, 2008 and September 10,
2021, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time. For any AH zone with an elevation specified in a
table of still water elevations in the FIS, the BFE shall be the elevation
specified in the table of still water elevations.
   (e)   Base flood: other zones. The BFE for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an A Zone on the countywide FIRM of Cook County shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state, or other
sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by
the applicant to determine BFEs. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models
shall be obtained from an accepted hydrologic model, based on current industry
standards, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the
United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
   (f)   No base flood elevation. When no BFE exists, the BFE for a riverine
floodplain shall be determined from an accepted hydraulic model, based on
current industry standards. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall
be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20 or HIP, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows shall be
based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as determined
from adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining
more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to OWR for
approval. Once approved, any such analysis must be submitted to the Illinois
State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository for filing.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512)
§ 9-98 OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   (a)   Permitted development. Development in or the filling of the flood
fringe shall be permitted only if protection is provided against the base flood
by proper elevation and compensatory storage and if the other provisions of
this article XIV are met. No use shall be permitted that adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the
requirements of §
9-101.
   (b)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit therefor from the building commissioner.
   (c)   Application. Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building commissioner. The applicant shall submit a
completed application to the building commissioner and shall forward a copy of
such application to the village engineer. The application shall include
drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and
legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect
or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in NAVD 88, and all changes in
grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be
shown on the submitted plans, and the development shall be subject to the
requirements of §
9-101. The building commissioner shall determine, and the applicant shall
submit, an appropriate application fee, taking into account the village
engineer’s cost of review and other village expenses incurred in issuing the
development permit.
   (d)   Site elevation. Upon receipt of a development permit application, the
floodplain administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land
that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the
site’s first FIRM identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject
to the requirements of this article XIV. The floodplain administrator shall
forward to the building commissioner documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first FIRM identification.
   (e)   Other permit requirements. The applicant shall provide to the building
commissioner and to the floodplain administrator copies of all other federal,
state and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that are
required for this type of activity. The building commissioner shall be
responsible for obtaining from the applicant all other federal, state and local
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that are required for this
type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue a permit unless all
other federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
   (f)   No public health threat. No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
   (g)   Removal from floodplain. If fill is being used to elevate a site above
the base flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data to FEMA
and obtain a letter of map revision therefrom for the purpose of removing the
site from the floodplain. See §
9-101 for additional requirements.
   (h)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space that will be occupied by the authorized
fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the base flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one
and one-half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below
the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-
year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512)
§ 9-99 OCCUPATION AND USE OF REGULATORY FLOODWAYS.
   (a)   Permitted development. This section applies to proposed development,
redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory
floodway. The regulatory floodway for the Skokie River shall be as delineated
on the regulatory floodway maps designated by OWR. Only those uses and
structures that meet the criteria in this section shall be permitted. All
regulatory floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish
the purpose of the project. The development also shall meet all applicable
requirements of §
9-101.
   (b)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a regulatory
floodway without first obtaining a development permit therefor from the
building commissioner.
   (c)   Application. Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building commissioner. The applicant shall submit a
completed application to the building commissioner and shall forward a copy of
such application to the village engineer. The building commissioner shall
determine, and the applicant shall submit, an appropriate application fee,
taking into account the village engineer’s cost of review and other village
expenses incurred in issuing the permit. The application shall include the
following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
      (4)   Description of proposed activity;
      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
      (8)   Signature of applicant or the applicant’s agent;
      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form;
      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the
name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
         A.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
         B.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in NAVD 88, adjacent property lines and
ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between the proposed
activity and navigation channels (when the proposed construction is near a
commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow and a graphic or
numerical scale;
         C.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions, including without limitation
principal dimensions of the work as shown in plain view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-
year frequency flood elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and
vertical); and
         D.   A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the regulatory floodway location;
      (13)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development;
      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection 9-99
(g) below;
      (15)   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100 year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until OWR has indicated conditional
approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA; and
      (16)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits, sealed by a
registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
9-101.
   (d)   Other permit requirements. The applicant shall provide to the building
commissioner and to the village engineer copies of all other federal, state and
local permits and approvals that are required for this type of activity. The
building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant all
other federal, state and local permits and approvals that are required for this
type of activity. The building commissioner shall not issue the development
permit unless all required federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
   (e)   Review of floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall
review and approve applications submitted under this §
9-99.
   (f)   Preventing increased damages; appropriates uses. The only development
in a regulatory floodway that shall be allowed are appropriate uses, which
shall not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and which shall not create
a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be
a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 92 Ill. Admin. Code § 708.70 shall be allowed. Appropriate uses do
not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, fencing, landscaping or planting designed to
act as a fence, and storage of material except as specifically defined above as
an appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of or requiring access
to the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treating facilities, and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping, and other functionally water dependent uses;
      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;
      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from anyone
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not block
flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable accessory
structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block
flood flows, nor reduce regulatory floodway storage;
      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modifications thereto;
      (8)   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding
at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed one foot, and aircraft
parking aprons built at or below ground elevation);
      (9)   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a watercourse;
      (10)   Flood proofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures, including without limitation the construction of water tight window
wells, elevating structures or floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures, when the outside toe of the floodwall is no
more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure and
which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
      (11)   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or
repairs made to a building that are valued at less than 50% of the market value
of the building before it was damaged or replaced and do not increase the
outside dimensions of the building;
      (12)   Additions to existing buildings above the base flood elevation
that do not increase a building’s footprint and are valued at less than 50% of
the market value of the building; and
      (13)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of
any new buildings, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
   (g)   Engineering and mitigation criteria. Within the regulatory floodway as
identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by OWR, the construction
of an appropriate use will be considered permissible provided that the proposed
project meets the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so
stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered
professional engineer, and provided further that any structure meets the
protection requirements of § 9-101.
      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance so as not to increase flood stages
upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on-
stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost
shall be replaced for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the
following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         A.   Regulatory floodway conveyance.
   “K” = 1.486 AR 2/3
      n
   where “n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective area of the
cross-section and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
         B.   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
         C.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length;
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used;
            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory floodway
delineation on adjacent properties; and
            5.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      (2)   Preservation of regulatory floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be at least equal to one and
one-half times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created
storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be
required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be
placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year
flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing ten-
year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All excavations described in this subsection
9-99(g)(2) shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, then the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate to OWR through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. There shall be no reduction
in regulatory floodway surface area as a result of a regulatory floodway
modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at
existing structures.
      (3)   Preservation of regulatory floodway velocities so as not to
increase stream erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses, except
bridges or culverts or on-stream structures, the proposed work shall not result
in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or
stage for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency flood
event. In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the
purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
flood event; or the upstream flood stage increases shall be contained within
the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot, then the developer must
contact OWR, Dam Safety Section, for a dam safety permit or waiver.
         A.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages shall be
calculated using the flood study flows and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
9-97. Culverts must be analyzed using the United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Chart for the
Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the United States
Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of
Bridge Waterways calculation procedures.
         B.   Lost regulatory floodway storage must be compensated pursuant to
the requirements of subsection
9-99(g)(2).
         C.   Velocity increases must be mitigated pursuant to the requirements
of subsection
9-99(g)(3).
         D.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an Illinois Department of Transportation
permit must be received.
         E.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to OWR for concurrence that a conditional letter of map revision from
FEMA is not required by this subsection
9-99(g).
         F.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed pursuant to the requirements of subsection
9-99(g)(8).
      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts and
approach roads.
         A.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than a one-tenth foot increase
in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to
and including the 100-year frequency flood event, if the existing structure is
not a source of flood damage.
         B.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
then the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         C.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with 17 Ill. Admin. Code §§ 3708 et seq. and submitted to the OWR for review
and concurrence before a permit is issued.
      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water. Any
increase in upstream flood stages over existing conditions for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency flood event shall be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel
banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood
walls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or permit-not-required
letter must be obtained from OWR, Dam Safety Section, for a dam safety permit
or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures defined
in §
9-95 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Admin. Code §§ 3708 et
seq.
      (7)   Flood proofing of commercial structures. If construction is
required beyond the outside dimensions of the existing building, the outside
perimeter of the flood proofing construction shall be placed no further than
ten feet from the outside of the building. Compensation of lost storage and
conveyance will not be required for flood proofing activities.
      (8)   Excavation in the regulatory floodway. When excavation is proposed
in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including without limitation the
modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures or
to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition
sections shall be provided for the excavation. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
         A.   When water is flowing from a narrower section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every four feet of the flood stream’s length;
         B.   When water is flowing from a wider section to a narrower section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
         C.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used; and
         D.   Erosion and scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
      (9)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
regulatory floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the
applicant.
      (10)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this §
9-99 shall be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to OWR through
hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project shall not
singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the
project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including the
100-year frequency event.
      (11)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
         A.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory
floodway study referenced in §
9-97 must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, OWR shall be contacted for
approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
         B.   If the base flood elevation at the site of the proposed
construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a
larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the
requirements of this §
9-99 for the base flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and
conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         C.   If the applicant learns from OWR, local governments, or a private
owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed or modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this § 9-99 for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
   (h)   Conditional letter of map revision. If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to OWR and to FEMA all
the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from OWR a conditional
approval of the regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued; provided,
however, that the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by OWR
until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and accepted by FEMA and
OWR. In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in incorporated
areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed
conditional regulatory floodway map revision before OWR approval can be given.
No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a
conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take
place until a final letter of map revision is issued by FEMA and OWR.
   (i)   Professional engineer supervision. All engineering analyses shall be
performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
   (j)   Construction activity. After receipt of conditional approval of the
regulatory floodway map change and issuance of a permit and a conditional
letter of map revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory
floodway designation may proceed; provided, however, that no buildings or
structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed
in that area until the regulatory floodway map is changed and a final letter of
map revision is received. The regulatory floodway map shall be revised upon
acceptance and concurrence by OWR and FEMA of the as-built plans.
   (k)   State review. For those projects listed below located in a regulatory
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to OWR for their review and
concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
      (1)   OWR shall review an engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to
a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection
9-99(g)(4);
      (2)   OWR shall review an engineer’s determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection
9-99(g)(5);
      (3)   OWR shall review alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent storage pursuant to subsections
9-99(g)(1),
9-99(g)(2) and
9-99(g)(8); and
      (4)   OWR shall review and approve prior to the start of construction any
Illinois Department of Transportation projects, dams and all other federal,
state or local units of government projects, including projects of the village.
   (l)   Other permits. In addition to the requirements of this article XIV, a
development permit for a site located in a regulatory floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required, from OWR, issued pursuant to the Act. No permit
from OWR shall be required if OWR has delegated this responsibility to the
village.
   (m)   Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a dam defined in §
9-95 shall obtain an OWR dam safety permit pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code §§
3702 et seq. prior to the start of such construction, modification or removal.
If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have an OWR permit, the
building commissioner shall immediately notify the Dam Safety Section of OWR.
If the building commissioner finds a dam that is believed to be in an unsafe
condition, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the
dam, if known, OWR, the Dam Safety Section in Springfield, Illinois and the
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA).
   (n)   Activities that do not require a registered professional engineer’s
review. The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer’s review; provided, however, that such activities shall
meet the other requirements of this article XIV, including the mitigation
requirements.
      (1)   Underground and overhead utilities:
         A.   That do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations;
         B.   That do not require the placement of aboveground structures in
the regulatory floodway;
         C.   When, in the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing stream
bed; and
         D.   When, in the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
      (2)   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
         A.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope;
         B.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
         C.   Are so designed as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
      (3)   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios built at grade.
      (4)   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection:
         A.   That does not exceed 1,000 feet in length;
         B.   When materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank; or
         C.   When materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional
area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
      (5)   Temporary stream crossings in which:
         A.   The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above natural
grade;
         B.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert;
         C.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet below the top of the lowest bank;
         D.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized
as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction;
and
         E.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-100 OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE REGULATORY FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED.
   (a)   Permitted development. In SFHAs or floodplains where no regulatory
floodways have been identified and no base flood elevations have been
established by FEMA, and including SFHAs or floodplains that drain more than
one square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect
of the development proposal, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood
elevation.
   (b)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a SFHA or
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit therefor from the
building commissioner.
   (c)   Application. Application for a development permit shall be made on a
form provided by the building commissioner. The applicant shall submit a
completed application to the building commissioner and forward a copy of such
application to the village engineer. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions,
existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of §
9-101. The building commissioner shall determine, and the applicant shall
submit, an appropriate application fee, taking into account the village
engineer's cost of review and other village expenses incurred in issuing the
development permit. The application shall also include the following
information:
      (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and
intended use;
      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
         A.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
         B.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions, including without limitation principal
dimensions of the structure or work, elevations in NAVD 88, adjacent property
lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between
proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is
near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow and a graphical or numerical scale;
and
         C.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
      (5)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of this §
9-100; and
      (6)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
   (d)   Comparison of elevations. Based on the best available existing data
according to the Illinois State Water Survey's Floodplain Information
Repository, the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation pursuant to the requirements
of §
9-97(f). Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher
than the base flood elevation as of the site's first FIRM identification is not
in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this article
XIV. The village engineer shall forward to the building commissioner
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first FIRM identification.
   (e)   Other permit requirements. The applicant shall provide to the building
commissioner and to the village engineer copies of all other federal, state and
local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that are required for
this type of activity. The building commissioner shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant all other federal, state and local permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that are required for this type of
activity. The building commissioner shall not issue a development permit unless
all other federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
   (f)   No public health threat. No development in the SFHA, when a regulatory
floodway has not been determined, shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or otherwise threaten the public
health, safety or welfare.
   (g)   Standards. Within all riverine SFHAs, when the regulatory floodway has
not been determined, the following standards shall apply.
      (1)   Calculation of regulatory floodway. The developer shall have a
registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting
plans, calculations and data that the project meets the engineering
requirements of §§
9-99(g)(1) through
9-99(g)(10) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of §§
9-97(e) and (f). As an alternative, the developer may have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to OWR for
acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of such regulatory
floodway by OWR, the developer then shall demonstrate that the project meets
the requirements of §
9-99 for the regulatory floodway as defined in §
9-95.
      (2)   OWR permit. No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required,
from OWR; provided, however, that no permit from OWR shall be required if OWR
has delegated permit responsibility to the village pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin.
Code § 3708 for regulatory floodways, pursuant to OWR’s statewide permit
entitled “Construction in Floodplains with No Designated Floodways in
Northeastern Illinois.”
      (3)   Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction,
modification or removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as
defined in §
9-95 shall obtain an OWR dam safety permit or as defined in §
9-95 a permit-not-required letter prior to the start of such construction,
modification or removal. If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not
have an OWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the Dam
Safety Section of OWR. If the building commissioner finds a dam that is
believed to be in an unsafe condition, the building commissioner shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam, if known, OWR, the Dam Safety Section
of OWR and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA).
      (4)   No review required. The following activities may be permitted
without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base
flood elevation and regulatory floodway; provided, however, that such
activities shall meet the other requirements of this article XIV:
         A.   Underground and overhead utilities:
            1.   That do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations;
            2.   That do not require the placement of aboveground structures in
the floodway;
            3.   When, in the case of underground stream crossings, the top of
the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing
stream bed; and
            4.   When, in the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers
are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to
catch debris.
         B.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
            1.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope;
            2.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
            3.   Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the
outfall location.
         C.   Construction of shoreline and streambed protection:
            1.   That does not exceed 1,000 feet in length or two cubic yards
per lineal foot of stream bed;
            2.   When materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank; or
            3.   When materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-
sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%.
         D.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
            1.   The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above natural
grade;
            2.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert;
            3.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least
two feet below the top of the lowest bank;
            4.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction; and
            5.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization.
         E.   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;
         F.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces that are built at grade;
         G.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or below existing
grade that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters;
         H.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size and ten feet in any one dimension;
         I.   The construction of additions to existing buildings that do not
increase the first floor area by more than 20%, that are located on the
upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and that do not extend
beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow of
flood waters; and
         J.   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel when:
            1.   The affected length of stream is less than 1,000 feet;
            2.   The work is confined to re-establishing flows in natural
stream channels; or
            3.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
      (5)   Flood carrying capacity. The flood carrying capacity within any
altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
   (h)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space that will be occupied by the authorized
fill or structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the base flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one
and one-half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below
the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-
year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-101 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
9-98,
9-99 and
9-100 for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA or
floodplains when no regulatory floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH,
AE, A1-A30, A99, VO, V1-V30, VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall
be met.
   (a)   Public health standards.
      (1)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation.
      (2)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted, provided that all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the flood protection
elevation are water tight.
      (3)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (4)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (5)   All other activities, defined as development, such as pools,
fences, filling, paving, etc., shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows
or increase potential flood damages, nonstructural fill within a coastal high
hazard area (zone V, V1-30, or VE) or within a moderate wave action area shall
be permitted only if an engineering report demonstrates that the fill will not
cause wave runup, ramping, or deflection of floodwaters that cause damage to
buildings.
      (6)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings within a
coastal high hazard area (zone V, V1-30, or VE) or within a moderate wave
action area is prohibited.
      (7)   Man-made alterations of sand dunes within a coastal high hazard
area (zone V, V1-30, or VE) or within a moderate wave action area are
prohibited unless an engineering report documents that the alterations will not
increase potential flood damage by reducing the wave and flow dissipation
characteristics of the sand dunes.
      (8)   Within a coastal high hazard area or within a moderate wave action
area, bulkheads, seawalls, revetments, and other erosion control structures
shall not be connected to the foundation or superstructure of a building, and
shall be designed and constructed so as not to direct floodwaters or increase
flood forces or erosion impacts on the foundation or superstructure of any
building.
   (b)   Carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel
modification, fill or stream maintenance (including without limitation levees),
the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In
addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing within 30
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
   (c)   Protecting buildings.
      (1)   All buildings located within zones A, AO, AH, and AE shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. Existing
buildings located within a regulatory floodway also shall meet the more
restrictive appropriate use standards included in §
9-99. These building protection criteria shall apply to the following
situations:
         A.   Construction or placement of a new building;
         B.   A structural alteration to an existing building that either
increases the first floor area by more than 20% or the building’s market value
by more than 50%;
         C.   Substantial improvements, made to any existing building. If
substantially improved, both the existing building and any addition must meet
the flood protection standards of this section.
         D.   Substantially damaged building under repair. Substantial damage
shall be figured cumulatively during a ten-year period by comparing the cost to
repair the building to its pre- damage condition with the market value of the
building immediately prior to the damage, for each event in which the building
sustains damage, and adding the percentages of damage for each event. If
substantially damaged, the entire building must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
         E.   Installation of a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement
does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied
before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
         F.   Installation of a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days.
         G.   Repetitive loss to an existing building.
      (2)   Residential buildings. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest
floor, including basement of new construction of residential buildings, and
substantially improved residential buildings, must be elevated to the FPE, and
are subject to the more specific additional requirements below.
         A.   If fill, including grading to redistribute onsite material to
alter existing topographv, is used as a means of elevation:
            1.   The fill shall be placed in lavers no greater than six inches
before compaction and must extend at least 20 feet beyond the foundation before
sloping below the FPE in lieu of a geotechnical report.
            2.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
            3.   The fill shall be composed of clean rock or soil and not
include debris or refuse material.
            4.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
         B.   If the building's lowest floor is elevated above ground level
with an enclosed or unenclosed area below the lowest floor:
            1.   The building shall be elevated on piles, walls, columns, or
other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters.
            2.   All enclosed areas below the FPE shall provide for
equalization of hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. A minimum of two permanent openings shall be provided on at
least two walls located below the BFE and no more than one foot above finished
grade. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, or the
design must be certified by a registered P.E. as providing the equivalent
performance in accordance with accented standards of practice. Refer to FEMA
TB1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, for additional
guidance.
            3.   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures must
be located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by applicable
building or life-safety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or fixtures
required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below the FPE
shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged submersion.
            4.   The building, foundation, and supporting members shall be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
building resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy, and be designed so as to minimize exposure to current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
            5.   All building components below the FPE shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage.
            6.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the FPE
provided they are waterproofed.
            7.   The area below the FPE shall be used solely for parking,
storage, or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable
space.
      (3)   Nonresidential buildings. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, the lowest
floor (including basement) of new construction of nonresidential buildings, and
substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings, must either (1) be
elevated to or above the FPE, subject to the more specific additional
requirements of subsections
9-101(c)(2)(A) through
9-101(c)(2)(B) above; or (2) be structurally dry-floodproofed, provided a
registered P.E. or architect has developed and/or reviewed the structural
design, specifications, and plans for construction, and the registered P.E. or
architect submits a FEMA floodproofing certificate, certifying that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the requirements of ASCE 24 as adopted by reference within
the International Building Code, and the following conditions:
         A.   Below the FPE, the building and attendant utility and sanitary
facilities shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydraulic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
         B.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impact from debris and ice.
         C.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
         D.   The building, utility, and sanitary facilities' design and
construction will prevent the effect of sewer backup into the building.
         E.   Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this article XIV.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, all placement or
substantial improvement of manufactured homes and permanent installation of
travel trailers on site for more than 180 consecutive days, shall be:
         A.   Elevated with the lowest floor at or above the FPE using a
support and anchoring system, designed by a P.E. pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code
§ 870.110.
         B.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.220.
      (5)   Recreational vehicles. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, travel trailers
and recreational vehicles, on site for more than 180 consecutive days, shall
meet the elevation requirement and anchoring requirements of subsection
9-101(c)(4) unless the following conditions are met:
         A.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
         B.   The vehicle must not be attached to any permanent additions or
external structures, such as decks and porches.
         C.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
         D.   The vehicles having a total area not exceeding 400 square feet
when measured at the largest horizontal projection.
         E.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and have inflated
tires.
         F.   Any air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to
be safe for movement out of the floodplain.
         G.   The vehicle must be attached to a site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices. Utility connections include, but are not
limited to, propane tanks, electrical and sewage.
         H.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model, be entirely supported by jacks, or have a hitch jack permanently
mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be supported by block in a
manner that will allow the block to be easily removed by use of the jacks/hitch
jack.
      (6)   Accessory structures. In zones A, AO, AH, and AE, detached
accessory structures may be constructed with the lowest floor below the FPE
provided the following conditions are met:
         A.   The building must be non-habitable, must not include areas
intended or used for cooking, and must not include bathrooms, toilet rooms, or
shower rooms.
         B.   All areas below the BFE shall be constructed with flood-resistant
materials.
         C.   The building must be used only for the storage and parking and
cannot be modified later into another use.
         D.   The building shall be located outside of the designated floodway
unless the building can be constructed and placed on a building site so as not
to block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage (§
9-99). can also meet the appropriate use criteria of §
9-99, and all other applicable requirements of this article XIV.
         E.   All electrical lines, switches, receptacles, and fixtures must be
located above the FPE except to the minimum extent required by applicable
building or life-safety codes. Any switches, receptacles, and/or fixtures
required by applicable building or life-safety codes to extend below the FPE
shall be rated, or located in enclosures rated, for prolonged submersion.
         F.   No plumbing, heating, or air conditioning shall be permitted in
accessory structures allowed under this subsection to be wet floodproofed in
lieu of elevation.
         G.   The structure must have at least two permanent openings on at
least two walls not more than one foot above grade and below the BFE, with one
square inch of opening for every one square foot of floor area.
         H.   The structure must be no more than one story in height and no
more than 600 square feet in size.
         I.   The building shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
         J.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the FPE.
         K.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented, and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications of building with the lowest floor
below the BFE.
      (7)   In floodplain zones AD and AD, drainage paths shall be provided to
guide water around and away from the buildings.
      (8)   The repair, remodeling, or maintenance of existing buildings
located within a designated floodway, built before November 18, 1987, are
exempt from 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708, including the more restrictive
appropriate use standards. Such buildings are not exempt from subsection
9-101(c)(1). including substantial damage and substantial improvement
requirements, and if enlarged, replaced, or structurally altered must meet the
requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708.
      (9)   A.   New construction or substantial improvement of critical
facilities within the floodplain or the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation when
defined, shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
structurally dry floodproofed to the 0.2% annual chance flood elevation or
three feet above the BFE, whichever is greater. Adequate parking shall be
provided for staffing of the critical facilities at or above the BFE or 0.2%
chance flood, when defined. Access routes to all critical facilities should be
reviewed and considered when permitting. Access routes should be elevated to or
above the level of the BFE.
         B.   Floodproofing and sealing measures may also be used to provide
protection, as described in §
9-101(c)(7), and must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters.
      (10)   In a coastal high hazard area (zone VE) and in any area of zone AE
designated as a moderate wave action area, the building protection requirements
of this §
9-101 must be met according to the following criteria:
         A.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to or above the FPE, and the pile or column foundation and structure
attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all building components.
            1.   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood.
            2.   Wind loading values shall be those defined according to
American Society of Civil Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated
criteria for buildings and other structures, or other equivalent standard.
         B.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of §
9-101(c)(10)A.
         C.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with
non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect screening
intended to collapse without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
            1.   For the purpose of §
9-101(c)(10)C., a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of
not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.
            2.   Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading
resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or where so required
by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional
engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet all of the
following conditions:
               a.   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood;
               b.   The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-structural).
Water loading values shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind
loading values shall be those defined according to American Society of Civil
Engineers 7-16 Minimum design loads and associated criteria for buildings and
other structures, or equivalent standard; and
               c.   All space enclosed by breakaway walls, open wood lattice-
work, or insect screening below the lowest floor shall be used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
         D.   Placement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes must
comply with §§
9-101(c)(10)A. through
9-101(c)(10)C.
         E.   Recreational vehicles, including park models, must either be on
site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or be fully licensed and ready for
highway use; or comply with §§
9-101(c)(10)A. through
9-101(c)(10)C.
      (11)   When construction of a building following a LOMR based on fill is
requested, the condition where a site in the floodplain is removed due to the
use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, the applicant may not apply for
a permit from the village to construct the lowest floor of a building below the
BFE in the floodplain.
   (d)   Compensatory storage.
      (1)   Whenever any portion of a riverine floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by a
hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the BFE.
      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10% annual chance
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10% annual chance flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10% annual chance
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10% annual chance flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2021-17-3513; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-102 APPLICATION TO OTHER APPROVALS.
   (a)   Review required. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation
agreements and planned developments within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
9-98 through
9-101 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and planned developments shall include a
signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans
account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the
Plat Act, 765 ILCS 205.
   (b)   Required information. All proposals for new subdivisions, planned
developments, additions to manufactured home parks, and additions to
subdivisions shall include base flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
When this information is not available from an existing study filed with the
Illinois State Water Survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood elevation in accordance with §
9-97(e) and (f) and the floodway delineation as defined in §
9-95 and submitting it to the State Water Survey and OWR for review and
approval as best available regulatory data.
   (c)   Required layout. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds
shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize
natural streams and channels. Whenever possible, the floodplains shall be
included within parks or other public grounds.
   (d)   Board approval. The board of trustees shall not approve any planned
development or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless
such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this article
XIV.
§ 9-103 VARIATIONS.
   (a)   Authorization. No variations shall be granted to any development
located in a designated floodway as defined in §
9-95. When a development proposal is located outside of a designated floodway,
and whenever the standards of this article place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the zoning board of appeals
for a variation. The zoning board of appeals shall review the applicant’s
request for a variation and shall submit its recommendation to the board of
trustees, which may grant the variation by ordinance duly adopted. The village
board of trustees may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the flood protection intent of this article XVI.
   (b)   Standards. No variation shall be granted by the village board of
trustees unless the applicant demonstrates, and the zoning board of appeals
finds, that all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety,
destruction of beneficial stream uses and functions including, aquatic habitat,
creation of a nuisance, causation of fraud on or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
      (6)   The provisions of §§
9-98 and
9-100(e) shall be met;
      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      (8)   The circumstances of the property are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      (9)   The granting of the variation will not alter the essential
character of the area involved, including existing stream uses; and
      (10)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (c)   Notice to applicant. The village shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variation from the requirements of §
9-101 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building shall:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant shall acknowledge in writing that the applicant assumes
the risk and liability.
   (d)   The findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the zoning board
of appeals and the board of trustees according to §
9-103(b), the notifications required by §
9-103(c), and a record of hearings and evidence considered as justification for
the issuance of all variances from this article XIV shall be maintained by the
village in perpetuity.
   (e)   Historic structures. Variations requested in connection with
restoration of a site or building listed on the National Register of Historical
Places or documented as worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsections
9-103(a) and
9-103(b), subject to conditions that:
      (1)   The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the building; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's
continued designation as a historic structure.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
§ 9-104 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article XIV is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
article XIV does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the
SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This article XIV does not create
liability on the part of the village or any official, officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article XIV or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
§ 9-105 PENALTY.
   (a)   Violations. Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit for
development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the requirements of a
permit or conditions of a variation resolution shall be deemed to be a
violation of this article XIV. Upon due investigation, the building
commissioner may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this
article XIV exist. The building commissioner shall issue a notice of violation.
The notice of violation constitutes a suspension of the permit.
   (b)   Notice of violation. The notice of violation shall contain the address
or parcel identification number of the property, a brief description of the
violation; section of this article XIV violated; the requirement to stop all
work in violation of this article XIV, a statement informing the violator that
they may contest the notice in writing within ten days, correct the violation
in ten days, or apply for a permit; a warning that if the violator fails to
comply the village shall institute appropriate legal proceedings; and a
statement that article XIV authorizes fines of not less than $50 nor more than
$750 for each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (1)   Notification to the owner shall be in any of the following manners:
         A.   By personally delivering to the owner of the property involved;
or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work;
         B.   By posting a copy of the stop work order on the subject property
in a conspicuous place;
         C.   By personally delivering or mailing a copy of the notice of
violation to any adult who resides at, occupies, uses, leases, manages, or
maintains the property on which the violation is located; or
         D.   By personally delivering or mailing a copy of the notice of
violation to any owner in title to the property on which the violation is
located.
   (c)   Redress. If such owner fails after ten days’ written notice to correct
the violation, the village may make application to the Illinois Circuit Court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this article XIV or such other
order as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with this article XIV.
Any person who violates this article XIV shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
   (d)   Willful act. The building commissioner shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   (e)   Floodplain development permit suspension or revocation. No floodplain
development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is
held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee and shall state: (1) the grounds for complaint or
reasons for suspension or revocation: and (2) the time and place of the
hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
   (f)   Other action. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. No. 2021-16-3512)
§ 9-106 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This article XIV is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
and more restrictive easements, covenants or deed restrictions. When this
article XIV and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, the more stringent applicable restrictions shall apply.
This article XIV is intended to repeal the original ordinance adopted to meet
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to repeal
the resolution passed by the village in order to establish initial eligibility
for such program.
§ 9-107 SEPARABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this article XIV shall be deemed separable,
and the invalidity of any portion of this article XIV shall not affect the
validity of the remainder.
§§ 9-108 - 9-109 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2008-16-3227)
ARTICLE XV. STEEP SLOPE REGULATIONS
§ 9-110 INTRODUCTION.
   (a)   The topography of the Village of Glencoe is characterized by an
abundance of ravines and bluffs. These are valuable land resources that should
be protected. Bluffs and ravines play a central role in the management of storm
water throughout the village; they are also ecologically fragile and inherently
unstable. Their proper care and maintenance are important to avoid degradation
that could adversely affect the entire community.
   (b)   Steep slope areas may contain sediment, rock, and soils (1) that are
natural features subject to erosion, surface and subsurface movement of water,
and other destabilizing forces, and (2) whose stability is affected by the
quality and root structure of natural ground cover. Regulating proposed
development according to the natural characteristics of steep slope terrain,
such as degree of sloping, significant vegetation, soil stability, and existing
drainage patterns will allow for development on top of steep slope areas,
including bluffs and ravines, while minimizing the physical impact of such
development. The public interest will be served by protecting people and
property from the potentially hazardous geological and hydrological conditions
characteristic of ravine and bluff areas.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-111 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to regulate development along or near
steep slope areas to protect slope stability and overall drainage and water
management in the village. The purpose of this article is not to regulate for
aesthetic or habitat preservation purposes; rather, the purpose is to prevent
erosion of ravines and bluffs by regulating and managing steep slopes for
purposes of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. This article
protects people and property from the potentially hazardous geological and
hydrological conditions characteristic of ravine and bluff areas and further
recognizes that maintenance of stable ecological relationships minimizes
environmental degradation of the land and Lake Michigan. Due to improper and
unnecessary development within these sensitive areas, conditions are created
that jeopardize life, property, and the natural ecosystem. It is the intent of
this Article to establish appropriate controls. All land use and development
on, within, and adjacent to the steep slope is controlled by this article.
While this article provides for the reasonable use of steep slope areas and
related lands, it does so while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare by:
      (1)   Discouraging development that threatens the stability of steeply
sloped terrain.
      (2)   Encouraging appropriate engineering technology to result in stable
slopes during and subsequent to development;
      (3)   Encouraging building techniques that increase slope stability;
      (4)   Reducing uncontrolled storm water runoff, soil erosion, and mud
slides by minimizing grading, encouraging the preservation of trees and other
vegetation, and, where necessary, requiring revegetation;
      (5)   Permitting development that is compatible with the natural
characteristics of steep slope terrain, such as degree of sloping, soil
suitability, and existing natural and man-made drainage patterns;
      (6)   Preserving the ravine and bluff environment through the retention
of dominant steep slopes and ridges in their natural state; and
      (7)   Reducing the physical impact on steep slopes by encouraging
innovative site and architectural design, minimizing grading, and requiring
restoration of graded areas.
   (b)   Applicability: this article only applies to properties that include or
are adjacent to a bluff along Lake Michigan or a ravine.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-112 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   BLUFF. An elevated segment of the Lake Michigan shoreline above the beach
which normally has a precipitous front inclining steeply on the lakeward side.
   CANTILEVER. Any portion of a principal structure that extends laterally
beyond the foundation that supports it.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS OR DIRECTOR. The Village of Glencoe's Director of
Public Works or his/her appointed designee.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change (other than maintenance of existing
structures, paved areas, or utilities) to improved or unimproved real estate,
including without limitation the construction or installation of new, or
enlargement or demolition of existing, structures, paved areas, or utilities;
dredging, filling, drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavation operations;
and open storage of equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR. The Village of Glencoe’s director of
development services or his/her appointed designee.
   RAVINE. A deep gully or gorge worn by the flow of water to Lake Michigan.
   SLOPE IMPACT AREA. For a lot that includes or is adjacent to a bluff or
ravine, that portion of the lot lying between:
      (1)   The toe line of such bluff or ravine, and
      (2)   The line representing the intersection of the table land (or if no
such intersection, the table land extended) of such lot with a 22 degree slope
(2.5H:1V ratio) extending upward from the toe of bluff or ravine. For any lot
that lacks table land, for the purpose identifying the slope impact area, the
Director shall utilize the horizontal projection of the street line of the lot
as the table land. In addition, the slope impact area also includes the area of
the lot where the slope of the lot is steeper than 5.7 degrees (10H:1V ratio).
   SLOPE TRANSITION AREA. That portion of the slope impact area of a lot lying
outside the steep slope zone.
   STEEP SLOPE LINE. A line representing the intersection of the table land (or
if no such intersection exists, the table land extended) with a 27 degree slope
(2H: 1V) extended upward from the toe of a bluff or ravine. For any lot that
lacks table land, for the purpose identifying the steep slope line, the
Director shall utilize the horizontal projection of the street line of the lot
as the table land.
   STEEP SLOPE ZONE. That portion of the slope impact area of a lot that lies
between the steep slope line and the toe line.
   STREET LINE. The street line as defined in the zoning code.
   TABLE LAND. Land at the top of a bluff or ravine where the slope is less
than a 5.7 degree slope (10H:1V ratio)
   TOE OR TOE LINE OF BLUFF AND RAVINE. The toe of the ravine or bluff slope is
that point in the ravine or bluff where the slope is less than a 5.7 degree
slope (10H:1V) or where the slope reverses direction. On compound slopes where
there may be more than one possible toe location, the controlling point shall
be whichever toe that provides the greatest slope impact area. In plan view,
the toe of bluff or ravine is depicted as continuous line, and is referred to
as the toe line.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7cce8432922bb96b170b3fb015fdc50dc7889b3d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4392.jpg]
 
§ 9-113 DEVELOPMENT IN SLOPE TRANSITION AREA.
   (a)   Any development that is otherwise authorized under the codes,
ordinances, and regulations of the village may occur in the slope transition
area, but only upon the Director's review and approval of an application
therefor pursuant to this article. In addition, any structure or addition that
meets all applicable zoning requirements may be built in the Slope Transition
Area upon obtaining the necessary permits pursuant to Section
9-116 and provided that the structure and construction techniques adhere to the
Development Standards in Section
9-115.
   (b)   In addition, retaining walls and other structures which are necessary
for slope stabilization may be constructed in the slope transition area in the
manner approved by the Director of Public Works and in accordance with the
following additional standards:
      (1)   Retaining walls shall not be used to increase table land.
      (2)   Retaining walls shall not be used to create a shelf or other table
area within the slope transition area.
   (c)   Backfilling of a retaining wall is allowed only as necessary for slope
stabilization.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-114 DEVELOPMENT IN THE STEEP SLOPE ZONE.
   Any development that is otherwise authorized under the codes, ordinances,
and regulations of the village may occur in the steep slope zone, but only upon
the Director's review and approval of an application therefor pursuant to this
article; provided, however, that within the steep slope zone, only the
following structures may be constructed:
   (a)   Retaining walls and other structures that are necessary for slope
stabilization may be constructed in the steep slope zone in the manner approved
by the Director and in accordance with the following additional standards:
      (1)   Retaining walls shall not be used to increase table land.
      (2)   Retaining walls shall not be used to create a shelf or other table
area within the steep slope zone.
      (3)   Backfilling of a retaining wall is allowed only as necessary for
slope stabilization.
   (b)   Structures on the exact foundation of a previously existing structure
may be rebuilt, provided that the rebuilt or remodeled structure (i) does not
extend beyond the previous foundation within the steep slope zone, and (ii) is
undertaken pursuant to sealed plans of an architect or structural engineer
certifying that the existing foundation (with appropriate engineering
modifications, if any) will support the rebuilt or remodeled structure without
material adverse impact on the steep slope zone.
   (c)   Cantilevering of structures over the steep slope zone. Cantilevering
accessory building elements (such as second floor balconies) not exceeding four
feet horizontal over a steep slope zone is permitted unless otherwise limited
by code. In addition, such cantilevering cannot block natural sunlight or alter
natural stormwater drainage in such a way to jeopardize slope stability.
   (d)   Mechanical or electrical lifts, bridges, decks, walkways, steps, and/
or fences which do not obstruct the flow of light and water, and utility
service lines, provided that:
      (1)   Such structures conform to the provisions of this article; and
      (2)   Stairs constructed in the steep slope zone shall be no greater than
five feet in width. Stair landings constructed in the steep slope zone shall be
no larger than 50 square feet. Stair landings for the purpose of this article
are defined as an intermediate platform on a flight of stairs, greater than 10
square feet, constructed for the purpose of allowing a change in stair
direction down the steep slope zone and/or to break up ten or more stair steps.
   (e)   Decks can be no larger than 50 square feet unless applicant provides
exceptional engineering, including stormwater management and vegetation, so
that such deck will not jeopardize slope stability.
   (f)   Fences, provided that all fences must comply with all applicable
village codes, ordinances, and regulations, including without limitation
Chapter 9, Article 11 of the Village Code.
   (g)   Boat houses, provided that the Director has determined that the boat
house structure as proposed will not adversely impact the stability of the
property or adjacent property.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-115 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Any application for development in the slope impact area shall be
reviewed by the Director, who will consider such application in light of the
standards of this section relating to landscape planning, soil mechanics
engineering, hydrology, geology, environmental design, and architecture. It is
recognized, however, that each slope impact area has unique characteristics and
encounters different dynamics affecting its stability and preservation. As a
result, the Director may determine for any application that certain of the
following standards may not apply in whole or in part to such application so
long as the Director determines that the application for development in its
totality satisfies the purposes of this article to a substantial degree without
creating an economic hardship as provided in §
9-119 of this article.
   (b)   The standards applicable to development in a slope impact area are as
follows:
      (1)   Safety control of steep slopes.
         A.   The development will not jeopardize slope stability on the
subject site or neighboring properties.
         B.   Except as necessary for an approved development, no filling,
grading, and earth moving shall be occur in a slope impact area.
         C.   Whenever there is construction upon any property that includes or
is adjacent to a steep slope zone, a fence will be erected temporarily along
the top edge of the steep slope zone, during any construction and/or demolition
activity upon such property.
      (2)   Construction techniques. All proposed structures shall have
foundations designed in a manner consistent with sound engineering and
geological principles. In addition, the following techniques shall be employed
to enhance stabilization of the ravine or bluff:
         A.   Planning the development to recognize and fit the natural
topography, soils, geology, hydrology, and other existing conditions on the
proposed sites;
         B.   Orienting development so that filling, grading, and earth moving,
landscaping and other site preparation is kept to an absolute minimum;
         C.   Preserving and enhancing the landscape through minimized
disruption of natural terrain and existing vegetation;
         D.   Minimizing disruption or alteration of natural drainage ways;
         E.   Minimizing the time during which areas are bare and exposed;
         F.   Designing and properly locating structures so that structure's
weight does not negatively impact slope stability; and
         G.   Considering the effect of undercutting at the base of a slope
impact area caused by wave action, storm water flow, erosion, and/or channel
changes.
      (3)   Hydrological controls.
         A.   Natural channels. Natural drainage ways shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
         B.   Controlled runoff. Concentrated runoff from impervious surfaces
shall be collected and transported in a pipe or other approved manner to a
municipal storm sewer system, if available.
         C.   Water discharge into steep slope. Whenever stormwater is
transported across a property for discharge into a sleep slope zone, the
conveyance pipes shall be of non-segmented (continuous sections of minimum 100
ft.) pipe material, which shall be installed below ground by directional boring
where possible.
         D.   Trenching. No pipe shall be installed within a steep slope zone
by excavating a trench unless such trench is approved by the Director of Public
Works.
         E.   Pipe materials. Flexible corrugated pipes shall not be used
within a slope impact area unless directional boring is found to be infeasible
in the sole determination of the Director.
         F.   Interceptor ditches. When required by the Director pursuant to
sound professional engineering principles, interceptor ditches shall be
established above steep slopes in order that soil shall not become saturated
and the intercepted water shall be conveyed in a pipe or other approved manner
to a municipal storm sewer system, if available, or to the bottom of ravine or
bluff slopes in a manner designed to prevent erosion.
         G.   Discharge point stabilization. Natural drainage ways shall be
stabilized by landscape integration and rip-rap or other means consistent with
sound professional engineering practice, to a distance below drainage and
culvert discharge points sufficient to convey the discharge without channel
erosion and in such a manner as to dissipate the energy of the discharge as
approved by the Director of Public Works.
         H.   Energy dissipater. All outflow from a stormwater conveyance pipe
must discharge into an energy dissipater.
         I.   Early completion. The overall drainage system shall be completed
and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction, the
schedule of which shall be approved by the Director of Public Works.
         J.   Impact on adjacent property. The natural or usual flow of surface
or subsurface water shall not be altered or obstructed in any way by grade
changes that may adversely affect the property of another by contributing
either to pooling or collection of waters or to the concentration or
intensification of surface water discharge. However, development which might
otherwise be prohibited hereinabove may be allowed if such waters are properly
drained by a pipe or other approved manner to a municipal storm sewer system,
if available, or to the bottom of ravine or bluff slopes. All grade changes
shall comply with
Chapter 9, Article XIII of the Village Code.
      (4)   Vegetation and revegetation.
         A.   Natural vegetation. Every effort shall be made to maintain
natural vegetation in the slope impact area.
         B.   Smallest area. At all times, the smallest practical area of raw
soil shall be exposed for as short a duration of time as practical. When
required by the Director pursuant to sound professional engineering principles,
temporary vegetation or other acceptable cover shall be used to protect areas
of raw soil exposed during development and to prevent airborne or waterborne
transportation of soil.
         C.   Revegetation. A mixed planting of perennial and woody species is
recommended for use in the slope impact areas disturbed by development.
         D.   Erosion control mat. Temporary erosion control matting properly
staked and trenched shall be provided over raw soil areas until new vegetation
is established.
      (5)   Filling, grading, and earth moving.
         A.   Minimum alterations. Filling, grading, and earth moving shall be
limited to the minimum required for building foundations, driveways, drainage
control structures, and immediate yard areas. With the exception of restoration
efforts, substantial filling, grading, and earth moving shall not be permitted
and is prohibited.
         B.   Erosion control. All filling, grading, and earth moving shall be
accomplished in a manner that will create the lowest possible potential for
airborne or waterborne transportation of soil.
         C.   Soil fill in steep slope zone. All fill in steep slope zone is
prohibited, other than back-fill which is determined by the Director of Public
Works to be necessary for slope stabilization.
         D.   Soil fill on table land. In conformance with generally accepted
engineering standards, all fill on table land shall be stabilized to at least
90% of maximum dry density as determined in ASTM procedure D-1557 or
equivalent.
         E.   Prompt completion. All filling, grading, and earth moving shall
be accomplished in the shortest practical period of time, the schedule of which
shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. All excavated material shall
be removed from the slope impact area and no temporary or permanent material
storage shall be permitted within the slope impact area. No existing natural
vegetation shall be destroyed, removed or disturbed prior to the initiation of
development activities.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-116 REQUIRED PLANS AND PERMITS.
   (a)   Required plans. Any development or other activity in the slope impact
area requiring a permit pursuant to the Village Code and applicable regulations
shall be accompanied by the following plans and reports which must be submitted
to and approved by the Director of Public Works prior to issuance of any permit
or commencement of the proposed development.
      (1)   Means and methods of construction. Because work to be performed in
the slope impact area may have adverse impacts on steep slopes, all permit
applications shall contain a written description of the proposed means and
methods of accomplishing such work (including without limitation the sequencing
and timing of work, the equipment to be used, interim protective measures, and
activities to monitor potential adverse impacts on the slope impact area),
which means and methods shall be designed to minimize slope damage. Upon
approval of the permit by the Director, such approved written description shall
be the enforceable means and method of the authorized development activities.
      (2)   Professional engineering. All structures within slope impact areas
shall be designed by a licensed structural engineer or geotechnical engineer
and must bear the engineers license seal on submitted drawings and
specifications satisfying good engineering practices and the standards of this
article, unless the Director otherwise waives in writing this requirement.
      (3)   Subsoil investigation. Every application for a development permit
in the slope impact area shall be accompanied by a report, prepared by a
licensed professional civil engineer or structural engineer trained and
experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering, which report shall
include the following:
         A.   Soil types and subsurface materials. A description (the result of
a thorough subsurface investigation using techniques such as borings, test
pits, site tests, laboratory tests, or other procedures performed to a depth
sufficient to determine foundation conditions for the proposed construction) of
the soil and subsurface materials found on the subject site (with particular
emphasis on the area to be impacted by the proposed development) to a depth
extending below any proposed excavation as well as the engineering properties
of the subsurface soil materials.
         B.   Observations. A description of existing observable slide areas,
scarps, tension cracks, eroded areas, leaning trees, etc.
         C.   History. A historical review of bluff or ravine stability
considering owner photographs, previous reports and topographic surveys; air
photos, Corps of Engineers' studies, Village of Glencoe information, etc.
         D.   Drainage. A description of surface patterns of water flow and
seeps as well as indication of the presence or absence of permeable zones in
underlying soils.
         E.   Stability. A geotechnical stability analysis of the slope and
structure with factors of safety calculated for the existing and proposed
conditions by a method that satisfies both force and moment equilibrium for
long-term and short-term soil strength parameters.
         F.   External influences. A description of any existing or anticipated
problems from undercutting at the base of a slope impact area caused by wave
action, ravine flows, erosion, or channel changes.
         G.   Absence of special hazards. An opinion that the soil types, soil
stability, subsurface hydrology, and external influences affecting the site
will not cause any significant hazards for the proposed use; or if they may
cause such hazards, an opinion that such hazards can be overcome, together with
a reasonably detailed description of how it is proposed to overcome them.
      (4)   Grading plan. In addition to any other permit requirements, each
application for a permit involving development under this article shall be
accompanied by a grading plan, which plan shall include the following:
         A.   A topographic survey, showing property contours at one foot
intervals for tableland and five foot intervals for steep slopes, including
special notes and details of the existing terrain;
         B.   Proposed filling, grading, and earth moving details, including
the dimensions, elevations, and contours of any proposed filling, grading, and
earth moving;
         C.   A schedule of when each stage of the project will be completed,
including the estimated starting and completion dates; and
         D.   A provision requiring the placement of a temporary fence on the
table land at the top edge of steep slope zone until construction is completed.
      (5)   Hydrological control plan. Applications for any development permits
shall include a plan for intercepting and containing drainage at the site and
from the structure.
      (6)   Vegetation plan. A vegetation plan, subject to the tree removal
provisions of this Code (and particularly Article III of
Chapter 34), shall be submitted with each application for a development permit,
which plan shall include the following:
         A.   A description of proposed revegetation of disturbed areas,
specifying the materials to be used;
         B.   A written description detailing methods of slope stabilization
and revegetation, together with the rationale for selecting the plant materials
and planting techniques proposed to be used; and
         C.   A timetable and sequencing program for implementing the
vegetative plan.
      (7)   Additional submittals; waivers. The Director of Public Works may
require additional plans as needed for review. The Director of Public Works may
release an applicant from any element of the aforementioned plan submittals to
the extent that the Director determines that such element(s) will not
materially assist in the evaluation of the proposed action's impact on slope
stability.
   (b)   Permit issuance; terms. Each permit application for development shall
be made in compliance with the building code, the zoning ordinance, other
applicable codes, ordinances, or regulations, including this article. The seal
of an Illinois licensed structural or geotechnical engineer shall appear on all
plans and specifications included as part of a permit application. Upon the
Director determining that an application satisfies the requirements of this
article, the Director shall cause a permit to be issued for development within
the Slope Impact Area. The following provisions are to be imprinted upon each
permit issued for any development activities authorized by the administration
of this article and (whether so imprinted or not) shall be incorporated into
and made a part of any such permit:
      (1)   Limited obligation. Compliance with the procedures of this article
and the issuance of any related permits shall not be construed to impose any
legal or other obligation upon the Village of Glencoe or its elected or
appointed officials, employees, agents, attorneys, or representatives. Any
permit issued pursuant to this article is for the benefit of the public and not
for the benefit of any individual.
      (2)   Civil claims. Compliance with the procedures of this article and
the issuance of related permits shall not relieve the permittee and the
property owner from civil liability claims.
      (3)   Endorsement. Compliance with the procedures of this article and the
issuance of related permits do not imply approval of the need for, or the
benefit or efficacy of, the proposed development; nor does it constitute any
assertion that the proposed development will not result in damage to the
property in question or to adjoining property.
      (4)   Closing report. A licensed professional structural engineer or
geotechnical engineer must inspect all work in the steep slope zone while in
progress and, upon completion of the work, deliver to the director a written
report bearing the engineer's license seal, stating that all development is in
accordance with the approved plan and specifications for the project. Such a
report must be delivered prior to the village's final inspection, acceptance,
and closing of the project.
   (c)   Special terms. In connection with the issuance of a permit pursuant to
this article, the Director may impose special conditions as deemed necessary to
ensure the effectiveness of plans for development on a property, and to protect
the long-term stability of a bluff or ravine, or otherwise to notify future
owners of the bluff or ravine conditions of such property.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-117 STABILITY OF THE STEEP SLOPES.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   In order to provide for long-term slope stability and to prevent
failure of slope stability that may adversely impact neighboring properties,
all property owners whose property includes or is adjacent to a slope impact
area are required to comply with the provisions of this article.
      (2)   Any development within the slope impact area must meet all plan
submittal requirements in accordance with this article.
      (3)   Private storm drainage lines conveying storm water runoff either to
a public storm sewer or to the ravine channel or the toe of the bluff shall be
maintained by the owner thereof. Private drainage lines which leak water onto
the surface of a steep slope must be repaired within 30 days of notification by
the village.
      (4)   Intentional depositing of lawn waste or other natural or man-made
debris which may damage underlying vegetation or impede the free flow of water
through channels within a slope impact area shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Any tree removal within the slope impact area shall be in
accordance with the Article III of
Chapter 34 (Tree Preservation) of this Code and the provisions of this article.
      (6)   No swimming pool discharge (emptying) shall be directed toward or
directly discharged into a slope impact area.
   (b)   Maintenance and upkeep.
      (1)   Any authorized structure in the slope impact area may be repaired,
maintained, or altered but only in compliance with the Village Code and Zoning
Code.
      (2)   Landscape maintenance or routine arboreal activities may be
undertaken in the slope impact area.
   (c)   Restoration. All governmental entities, private property owners, and
all other private entities having authorized access to ravine or bluff steep
slopes and engaged in the maintenance, repair, or construction of utilities or
other structures within a slope impact area, or engaged in any modifications to
a steep slope, shall adhere to the applicable provisions of the Village Code,
including this article, utilizing best management practices.
   (d)   Emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall prevent the
village from permitting development activities on an emergency basis when
deemed necessary by the Director to remediate an unstable or insecure slope
that presents an immediate threat to health, safety, and welfare, or stability
of an authorized building.
      (1)   Emergency development activity (including installation or
construction of structures) shall only be permitted provided that the remedial
action involves the least possible disruption of the natural features of the
site as possible and is in conformance with the standards and policies of this
article.
      (2)   Emergency development activity (including installation or
construction of structures) shall only be permitted to provide remedial action
that is the most reasonable action to address the emergency situation under the
circumstances.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-118 TREE REMOVAL IN THE SLOPE IMPACT AREA.
   (a)   All trees removed in the slope impact area shall comply with
Chapter 34 of the Village Code.
   (b)   There may be cases when removal of a tree or tree stump may jeopardize
slope stability. The Village Arborist shall review each tree permit in the
slope impact area to determine whether the proposed removal of the tree will
jeopardize slope stability and whether the proposed removal of the tree is
consistent with good forestry practices.
   (c)   Tree replacement requirements shall be as set forth in Section
34-26 of the Village Code.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-119 APPEALS OF DIRECTOR'S DECISIONS.
   (a)   Any determination of the Director of Public Works under this article
may be appealed to the Village Manager by filing a request for review in
writing within 35 days after the Director issues his or her determination. Any
decision of the Village Manager may be further appealed to the Board of
Trustees of the village by filing a request for review in writing within 35
days after the Manager issues his or her decision. The decision of the Board of
Trustees will be final.
   (b)   In reviewing the determination of the Director, the Village Manager or
the Board of Trustees (as the case may be) will consider only whether the
determination of the Director in applying the regulations of this article
imposes an unreasonable and undue economic hardship that materially limits the
property owner from making reasonable use of such owner's property or otherwise
imposes requirements which are unreasonably burdensome to the property owner
given the benefits thereof to the village. After receiving written submittals
from the property owner and the Director (and after a hearing if the Manager or
Board of Trustees determines that such a hearing will be instructive), a
decision on such appeal must be issued in writing no more than 60 days after
the delivery of the final submittal by the owner or Director or after the close
of the hearing, whichever is later.
   (c)   In considering an appeal under this section, the Village Manager or
Board of Trustees may reverse, affirm, or modify the determination of the
Director, or remand the determination back to the Director for further
consideration, with or without instructions.
   (d)   The Village Manager or Board of Trustees may issue further procedural
rules governing appeals under this section.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-120 ZONING VARIATIONS.
   Nothing in this article is intended to limit the ability of an owner from
seeking a variation from the otherwise applicable zoning regulations affecting
such owner's property. To the extent that the regulations of this article
materially restrict the ability of a property to be developed or materially
increase the cost of such development, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
determine that the effects of this article can, in appropriate circumstances,
constitute a practical difficulty or unreasonable hardship.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-121 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   For any property affected by the provisions of this article, the
property owner, any developer, and their agents, employees, contractors,
subcontractors, licensees, and invitees are each jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with the terms of this article.
   (b)   In the event any violation of any provision of this article occurs,
the property owner shall be responsible for the violation, its correction, and
for otherwise bringing the property into compliance with the terms of this
article. Such compliance may require restoration of the site as closely as
possible to its original undisturbed condition, topography, and/or vegetation
in order to eliminate the violation.
   (c)   Whoever violates any provision of this article, or who shall interfere
with the enforcement of the same, shall be fined in an amount of not less than
$50 nor more than $750 per each violation of any section of this article. Every
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate punishable violation.
   (d)   The village shall have the right to issue a stop work order for any
work that is performed in the slope impact area either (i) without all permits
that are required to this article or (ii) in violation of the permits so
issued.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-122 CORRECTIVE MEASURES.
   In addition to the monetary penalties provided for herein, the village may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order against the parties
responsible to re-establish or restore the grade, slope, stability, vegetation,
and/or drainage systems of a slope impact area in order to eliminate and/or
prevent an adverse impact upon any adjacent or subservient property, and for
such other and further relief as may be appropriate in the circumstances.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-123 ADMINISTRATION; FEES; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, the Director is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare any necessary or desirable forms, practices, and procedures
in order to implement the provisions of this article.
   (b)   As part of any application, and as a condition of any permit, an
applicant shall be required to pay all fees and charges due under this article.
The Village Board may from time-to-time establish and publish application,
permit, and inspection fees in furtherance of the administration of this
article. To the extent that the village incurs third-party expenses in
connection with the administration of this article with respect to a particular
application, such third-party expenses shall be additional fees chargeable to
such application.
   (c)   To the extent that there are conflicting regulations in the village's
building code or elsewhere in the Village Code, the provisions of this article
shall control.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
§ 9-124 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Nothing in this article shall be applied to prevent the completion, in
accordance with previously issued permits or approvals, of any development that
has received all required permits and approvals prior to April 18, 2013,
provided that such development is completed in compliance with all such
permits, approvals, and other requirements of law.
(Ord. No. 2013-13-3343)
ARTICLE XVI. EXCAVATIONS
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869)
§ 9-125 EXCAVATIONS - WHEN ALLOWED; NUISANCES.
   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, excavations may be
undertaken and maintained only in connection with active construction, and in
the event that active construction in connection with any excavation ceases or
is otherwise abandoned for a period in excess of 30 days, the person
responsible for making or causing such excavations shall cause such excavations
to be filled with clean fill and shall compact such fill in such a manner as to
provide sufficient support and avoid all danger to life or limb. Any excavation
maintained in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall, in addition to being subject to the enforcement and penalty
provisions of this chapter, be subject to the abatement and penalty provisions
made applicable to nuisances pursuant to
chapter 24 of this code.
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869)
§ 9-126 EXCAVATIONS - BARRIERS AND OTHER SAFEGUARDS.
   All excavations shall be safeguarded and protected by the persons causing
the excavations to be made with sufficient barriers or fencing and warning
signals or lamps as may be necessary and appropriate under the circumstances to
avoid all danger to life or limb. No such excavation, barrier or fencing shall
prevent safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on adjacent public sidewalks
and streets. No such excavation, barrier or fencing shall obstruct any public
street, sidewalk or parkway unless a permit therefor is first obtained in
accordance with article IV of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869)
§ 9-127 EXCAVATIONS - STANDING WATER.
   Standing water shall not be permitted to accumulate or remain in
excavations, and the person responsible for making or causing such excavations
shall promptly cause all standing water to be pumped therefrom.
(Ord. No. 92-3-1869)
CHAPTER 9A: BURGLAR AND FIRE ALARMS
Section
   
9A-1   Purpose
   
9A-2   Definitions
   
9A-3   Requirement of valid alarm user permit
   
9A-4   Alarm system requirements
   
9A-5   Permit fees
   
9A-6   Connection agreement required
   
9A-7   Service charges
   
9A-8   Waiver of service charge/nullification alarm occurrence
   
9A-9   Revocation of alarm user permit
   
9A-10   Charges for failure to pay promptly
   
9A-11   Non-payment notice procedure
§ 9A-1 PURPOSE.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the imposition of fees
to be charged to that portion of the village resident and business population
that maintains mechanically or electronically activated alarm systems, and to
reduce the number of unnecessary responses by the department of public safety
to such alarms.
   (b)   The inherent difficulties and malfunctions associated with such
mechanically or electronically activated alarm systems result in unnecessary or
non-bona fide alarm activation and consequently require unnecessary responses
by the department of public safety. Such unnecessary responses severely impact
and endanger the safety and welfare of the residents of the village. In
addition to the significant cost involved in responding to such alarms and the
concurrent loss of manpower and ineffective utilization of equipment, such
alarms require emergency responses that may contribute to a high accident rate.
   (c)   A system of graduated fees for public safety department responses to
alarms serves the dual purpose of encouraging the cessation of non-bona fide
alarms and of charging the cost of such alarms to that portion of the
population wishing to use them.
§ 9A-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM OCCURRENCE. The activation of an alarm system for, or as a result of,
any reason whatsoever which notifies or causes to be notified the department of
public safety to respond to the premises at which the alarm system is
maintained.
   ALARM OFFICER. The member of the department of public safety designated by
the director of the department of public safety to perform the functions
specified in this chapter.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assemblage of mechanical or electrical equipment or
devices (or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly
into a 110-volt AC line) arranged to signal the presence of a fire, hazard,
occurrence of an unauthorized intrusion or other activity requiring urgent and
immediate attention. The term ALARM SYSTEM shall include, but shall not be
limited to, automatic holdup alarm systems, burglar alarm systems, holdup alarm
systems, direct dial systems, fire alarm systems, medical emergency alarm
systems, on premises alarm systems, oscillator systems, and outside ringers.
The following ALARM SYSTEMS are specifically excluded from the provisions of
this chapter: motor vehicle alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor
temperature, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the
detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises, an attempted robbery or
burglary at a premises, a fire or a medical emergency at a premises.
   ALARM USER. The person, family, household, firm, entity, partnership,
association, corporation, company, organization or state, or subdivision
thereof, in possession or control of any building, structure, facility or
property in the village where an alarm system is currently being maintained or
is hereafter maintained.
   ALARM USER PERMIT.
      (1)   A permit issued by the village for the privilege and ability to
operate an alarm system within the village.
      (2)   No person, entity or alarm user shall be issued an alarm user
permit unless:
         A.   An application therefor is completed and submitted in a form
satisfactory to the director of the department of public safety;
         B.   The applicable ALARM USER PERMIT fee referred to below is paid;
and
         C.   The alarm system complies with the alarm system requirements set
forth below. An ALARM USER PERMIT shall be valid for one-year time periods, and
may be renewed upon the payment of the renewal fee referred to below.
   DELAY MECHANISM. An electrical or mechanical feature of an alarm system
that:
      (1)   Provides a time delay between activation of the alarm system and
the annunciation of an audible alarm or, the transmitting of a message or
signal to the department of public safety; and
      (2)   Allows for deactivation of the alarm system prior to the
annunciation of an audible alarm or, the transmitting of a message or signal to
the department of public safety.
   DIRECT DIALER. A feature of an alarm system that utilizes a telephone device
or attachment to automatically select a telephone trunk line at the department
of public safety and then reproduces a pre-recorded message to report an alarm
occurrence.
   FALSE ALARM. Any alarm occurrence that is not caused by a criminal act,
unauthorized intrusion, fire or other emergency.
(Ord. No. 04-27-3116)
   OSCILLATOR SYSTEM. A feature of an alarm system that utilizes one telephone
line for the connection of both a burglar alarm and a fire alarm to the
department of public safety.
   OUTSIDE RINGER. A feature of an alarm system that, when activated, causes an
audible and/or visual device to activate in, on or near the premises within
which the alarm system is maintained.
   SERVICE CHARGE. The amount of money determined by the board of trustees to
be reasonable compensation for the services and liabilities assumed by the
village in responding to false alarms.
(Ord. No. 04-27-3116)
§ 9A-3 REQUIREMENT OF VALID ALARM USER PERMIT.
   (a)   No person, entity or alarm user shall, at any time after the effective
date of this ordinance, maintain or operate an alarm system in the village
without a valid and effective alarm user permit.
   (b)   The maintenance or operation of an alarm system without first applying
for and securing an alarm user permit or after the expiration or revocation of
an alarm user permit shall constitute an offense punishable in accordance with
the village code. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (c)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the director of the
department of public safety may, whenever he or she shall have knowledge of any
alarm system not operated or maintained in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, take all necessary steps, including an action at law or in
equity, to prevent the operation or effect the removal of such alarm system.
§ 9A-4 ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
   No alarm user permit shall be issued for any alarm system that:
   (a)   Consists, in whole or in part, of an oscillator system;
   (b)   Is not equipped with a delay mechanism on all ingress and egress
doorways that allows at least a 30-second delay before the annunciation of an
audible alarm or the transmitting of a message or signal to the department of
public safety; provided, however, that no delay mechanism shall be required for
any fire or medical emergency alarm component of an alarm system;
   (c)   Consists, in whole or in part, of a direct dialer unless such alarm
system includes:
      (1)   A line seizure mechanism capable of seizing the alarm user's
telephone line and dialing a specific, designated telephone trunk line at the
department of public safety; and
      (2)   An automatic cut-off mechanism that deactivates the system after a
signal or recorded message is communicated to the department of public safety
no more than three times for each alarm occurrence.
   (d)   Includes an outside ringer unless:
      (1)   Any audible sound emitting from such outside ringer is not similar
to emergency vehicles of the village or any other audible village alert system;
and
      (2)   Is equipped with an automatic cut-off mechanism that permits
deactivation within 15 minutes of the initial alarm.
§ 9A-5 PERMIT FEES.
   (a)   There shall be an initial alarm user permit fee as set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for all or any part of the first calendar
year in which the alarm system is in operation, payable to the Village of
Glencoe with submission of the alarm user permit application.
   (b)   There shall be an annual alarm user permit renewal fee as set forth in
the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, payable to the Village of Glencoe at
the beginning of each new calendar year.
   (c)   In addition to the initial and renewal alarm user permit fee, there
shall be a one-time connection fee as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule for all alarm systems connecting directly to the village’s alarm
panel at the village public safety communications room.
   (d)   Any resident who is 65 years of age or older shall be required to pay
only 50% of the fee amounts set forth in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this §
9A-5.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371)
§ 9A-6 CONNECTION AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   No alarm system shall be connected to the village's alarm panel at the
village public safety communications room unless and until the alarm user first
executes an agreement with the person, firm or entity under contract with the
village to provide and maintain such alarm panel.
§ 9A-7 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (a)   More than two false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm system
for which an alarm user permit has been issued shall result in the imposition
of service charges as set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   All service charges must be paid within 30 days of receipt of a
written notice from the department of public safety.
   (c)   Any unit of local government with authority to levy property taxes
will be exempt from service charges authorized in this section.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371)
§ 9A-8 WAIVER OF SERVICE CHARGE/NULLIFICATION ALARM OCCURRENCE.
   (a)   The alarm officer shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to
waive any service charge and/or nullify the existence of any false alarms only
after finding, based on evidence and testimony presented by the alarm user,
that one or more of the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   Evidence of utility outage conditions;
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868)
      (2)   Evidence of utility outage conditions lasting four hours or longer
and affecting a general neighborhood area;
      (3)   Evidence of a tornado, earthquake or other violent and extreme
conditions of nature or acts of God, excluding thunder, snow, ice and storms;
      (4)   False alarms during the 30-day period following installation of an
alarm system;
      (5)   Evidence, in a form satisfactory to the alarm officer that the
alarm system in question has been satisfactorily serviced or repaired at some
time after the false alarms in question. This circumstance shall not, however,
constitute grounds for waiver or nullification unless the alarm officer is
completely satisfied that the service or repair will reduce or eliminate false
alarms similar to the one in question; and
      (6)   Evidence that the alarm user of the alarm system in question has
implemented a training program, satisfactory to the alarm officer, to instruct
involved persons (family members, employees and/or contractual personnel) in
the proper use of the alarm system. This circumstance shall not, however,
constitute grounds for waiver or nullification unless the alarm officer is
completely satisfied that the training program will reduce or eliminate false
alarms similar to the one in question.
   (b)   Requests in writing for a waiver or nullification may be made by any
alarm user to the alarm officer. Within 14 days of receipt of such written
request, the alarm officer shall review the alarm user's request in accordance
with this subsection and shall issue a decision.
   (c)   Within 14 days of receipt of such decision, the alarm user may appeal
the alarm officer's decision to the director of the department of public
safety, whose determination in accordance with this subsection shall be final.
(Ord. No. 04-27-3116)
§ 9A-9 REVOCATION OF ALARM USER PERMIT.
   (a)   The director of the department of public safety shall have the
authority to revoke an alarm user permit for either of the following grounds:
      (1)   Failure to pay service charge. The failure to pay any service
charge imposed pursuant to and in the manner described in this §
9A-7 (and which payment has not been waived pursuant to §
9A-8 hereof); or
      (2)   Multiple alarm occurrences. Ten or more false alarms for one alarm
system in one calendar year (none of which having been nullified pursuant to §
9A-8 hereof, regardless of whether the service charge for any of the false
alarms has been paid).
(Ord. No. 04-27-3116)
   (b)   Notice and hearing prior to revocation.
      (1)   The director of the department of public safety shall, at least 15
days prior to the revocation of an alarm user permit, notify the alarm user in
writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police
service, of the grounds for revocation and of the village's intent to revoke
the alarm user permit. Notice of same shall also be delivered by the director
of the department of public safety to the village manager.
      (2)   Within ten days of receipt of such notice, the alarm user may
submit a written request to the village manager for a hearing before the
director of the department of public safety, setting forth the reasons the
alarm user permit should not be revoked. The submission of such request shall
suspend the revocation of the alarm user permit.
      (3)   If the alarm user fails to so submit a request for hearing within
the stated time period, the director of the department of public safety shall
issue a written statement of revocation, which written statement shall include
an explanation of the consequences of revocation. The written statement shall
be sent to the alarm user by certified mail, return receipt requested or by
direct police service. Revocation shall be effective immediately upon receipt
by the alarm user of the written statement.
      (4)   If a request for a hearing is submitted within the stated time
period, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on
the alarm user by the director of the department of public safety by first
class mail at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
      (5)   At the hearing, the alarm user, or his or her authorized
representative, shall have the right to confront and examine witnesses and to
present evidence on his or her own behalf. After the hearing, the director of
the department of public safety may either support revocation or cancel the
notice of revocation. In the event that the director of the department of
public safety supports revocation, he or she shall notify the alarm user, in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by direct police
service explaining the consequences of revocation. Revocation shall be
effective immediately upon receipt by the alarm user of the written notice.
(Ord. No. 88-21-1788)
§ 9A-10 CHARGES FOR FAILURE TO PAY PROMPTLY.
   If any bill for permit fees or service charges due under this chapter is not
paid within 30 days after the bill payment date, a late payment fee equal to
10% of the billed amount shall be assessed. Payment of any bills subject to a
late payment fee shall be applied first to the late payment fee, then to the
amount of the bill.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
§ 9A-11 NON-PAYMENT NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   If a bill for permit fees or service charges is not paid within 30 days
after the bill payment date, the village shall follow the notice and
enforcement procedures as set forth in
chapter 34A of this code.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
CHAPTER 10: CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
   
10-1   Civil defense organization - created; purpose
   
10-2   Same - composition
   
10-3   Same - compensation of members
   
10-4   Same - oath of members
   
10-5   Same - office space
   
10-6   Same - director - appointment and term
   
10-7   Same - same - responsibilities
   
10-8   Same - same - acting director in absence, resignation, death, etc., of
director
   
10-9   Purchases and expenditures generally
   
10-10   Procurement of services, supplies, etc., in event of disaster
   
10-11   Functions generally
   
10-12   Mobile support team - designation of members
   
10-13   Same - designation of leader
   
10-14   Same - compensation, duties, etc., of members while serving on call to
duty by governor, etc.
   
10-15   Mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations
   
10-16   Emergency action
   
10-17   Reimbursement by state for certain expenses
   
10-18   Appropriations; levy of taxes
   
10-19   Liability of village, officers and employees, etc.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to civil defense, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 127, §§ 269 to
288.1
§ 10-1 CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION - CREATED; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby created the village civil defense organization to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural disaster, in
accordance with "The Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951," as amended.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-2 SAME - COMPOSITION.
   The village civil defense organization shall consist of the director and
additional members to be selected by the director.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-3 SAME - COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the civil defense organization who are paid employees or officers
of the village, if called for training by the state director of civil defense,
shall receive for time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is
attached to the position held; members who are not such village employees or
officers shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be
established by the village board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-4 SAME - OATH OF MEMBERS.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village civil defense
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the director:
"I                                    of the civil defense organization of the
Village of Glencoe do solemnly affirm that I will support and defend and bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter, and I do further affirm that I do not advocate,
nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the
Glencoe civil defense organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of
any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this state by force or violence."
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-5 SAME - OFFICE SPACE.
   The village president is authorized to designate space in the village hall
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the village board of trustees for the
village civil defense organization as its office.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-6 SAME - DIRECTOR - APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   The director of the village civil defense organization shall be appointed by
the village president with the approval of the board of trustees and shall
serve until removed by the same.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-7 SAME - SAME - RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The director of the village civil defense organization shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of
the village civil defense organization, subject to the direction and control of
the village president, as provided by statute.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-8 SAME - SAME - ACTING DIRECTOR IN ABSENCE, RESIGNATION, DEATH, ETC., OF
DIRECTOR.
   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve of the
director of the village civil defense organization, the village president or
any person designated by him or her, shall be and act as director until a new
appointment is made as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-9 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES GENERALLY.
   The village board of trustees may, on recommendation of the village director
of civil defense, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the
village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public
health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims
in the case of such disaster, or from natural disaster.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
Cross-reference:
   As to village contracts, see §§
2-1 to
2-2
§ 10-10 PROCUREMENT OF SERVICES, SUPPLIES, ETC., IN EVENT OF DISASTER.
   In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the village director of
civil defense is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or
obligations, as authorized by "The Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951";
provided, that if the village board of trustees meets at such time, he or she
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-11 FUNCTIONS GENERALLY.
   The village civil defense organization shall perform such civil defense
functions within the village as shall be prescribed in and by the state civil
defense plan and program and such orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside
the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided by the "Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951," as
amended.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-12 MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM - DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS.
   All or any members of the village civil defense organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the State Director of
Civil Defense as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-13 SAME - DESIGNATION OF LEADER.
   The director of the village civil defense organization shall designate the
leader of the mobile support team created under the provisions of the preceding
section.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-14 SAME - COMPENSATION, DUTIES, ETC., OF MEMBERS WHILE SERVING ON CALL TO
DUTY BY GOVERNOR, ETC.
   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer
while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director of civil
defense, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from
the state compensation and expenses as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-15 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.
   The director of the village civil defense organization may negotiate mutual
aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of
the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved
by the village board of trustees and by the State Director of Civil Defense.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-16 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the governor declares that a civil defense emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action
or from natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the village civil defense
organization to cooperate fully with the state office of civil defense and with
the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-17 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE FOR CERTAIN EXPENSES.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the civil defense organization, compensation for services and
expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the village
in response to a call by the governor or state director of civil defense, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
civil defense activities, as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-18 APPROPRIATIONS; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The village board of trustees may have an appropriation for civil defense
purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for civil
defense purposes only, a tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value
of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by "The
Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951," as amended.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
§ 10-19 LIABILITY OF VILLAGE, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, ETC.
   This chapter is in exercise by the village of its governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the village,
its officers, agents, representatives or employees, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, or any of the
agents thereof, in good faith, carrying out, complying with or attempting to
comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for the death of or injury to
persons or damages to properties as the result of such activity.
(Ord. No. 1411, § 1)
CHAPTER 10A: DISCRIMINATION
Section
Article I. Real Estate Transactions
   
10A-1   Definitions
   
10A-2   Purpose of article
   
10A-3   Construction of article
   
10A-4   Real estate broker's license
   
10A-5   Prohibited acts - owners, real estate brokers and salesmen generally
   
10A-6   Same - real estate brokers' and salesmen's specifically
   
10A-7   Same - lending institutions
   
10A-8   Negotiation in good faith
   
10A-9   Written complaints
   
10A-10   Enforcement of article; hearings and conciliation conferences
Article II. Human Relations Ordinance
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031)
   
10A-11   General provisions
   
10A-12   No limitation on rights
   
10A-13   Welcoming and inclusive community
Division 3. Contracting Parties
   
10A-17   Provision statement of policy
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to real estate brokers and salesmen generally, see Ill.
Rev. Stat., ch. 114 ½, § 1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
§ 10A-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD or THE BOARD. The president and board of trustees
of the village.
   BUSINESS ACCOMMODATIONS. Any building or structure or portion thereof within
the village, which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied for the purpose of conducting any business, trade, industry
and commercial or professional enterprise and includes any vacant land within
the village upon which any such business accommodations may be constructed.
   DEVELOPER OF HOUSING. Any person who acquires or makes substantial
improvements in housing accommodations for the purpose of selling or leasing
such accommodations to others.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference in the terms of the sale,
lease or financing of housing or business accommodations to a person applying
for such sale, lease or financing, because of the race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status of such person.
   FINANCING. The lending of money and the obtaining, arranging, negotiating or
guaranteeing of loans for the acquisition, sale or lease of housing and
business accommodations.
   HOUSING or HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS. Any building or structure, or portion
thereof, within the village which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied as the home, residence or living quarters of
one or more individuals, groups or families, and includes any vacant land
within the village upon which such home, residence or living quarters may be
constructed.
   LEASE. Sublease, assignment and rental for any term and includes any
contract to do any of the foregoing.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans
or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or
selling loans or instruments or the payment of money, which loans or salesman
is authorized to seek a guarantee, are secured by title to or a security
interest in real estate.
   LISTING AND LISTING AGREEMENT. Any contract, arrangement or understanding,
verbal or written, between the owner, lessee or occupier of housing or business
accommodations and a real estate broker or a real estate salesman under which
such broker or salesman is authorized to seek a purchaser or lessee of such
accommodations.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any housing or business accommodations, or who holds
legal or equitable title to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any
real estate corporation or trust which owns any housing or business
accommodations.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, male or female, corporations, partnership,
association, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person licensed as a real estate broker in
accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 114 ½, or required
thereby to be so licensed.
   REAL ESTATE SALESMAN. Any person licensed as a real estate salesman in
accordance with the provisions of Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 114 ½.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any
housing or business accommodations and an option to do any of the foregoing.
   SALE. Any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or assign legal
or equitable title to or any beneficial interest in housing or business
accommodations.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. Any structure meant or intended to be occupied
exclusively as a home, residence or living quarters by not more than one family
group or any specific and easily designated portion of any structure meant or
intended to be so occupied by not more than one family group, such as an
apartment, townhouse or condominium unit.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 4; Ord. No. 75-4-1525, § 1)
§ 10A-2 PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose of
this article, in the exercise by the village of its police and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals, safety
and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the
village, to secure to all persons living or doing business or desiring to live
or do business in the village an opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy
housing and business accommodations without discrimination based on race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 1; Ord. No. 75-4-1525, § 1)
§ 10A-3 CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE.
   This article shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms
and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in §
10A-2 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 2; Ord. No. 75-5-1525)
§ 10A-4 REAL ESTATE BROKER'S LICENSE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, represent, hold
himself or herself out as, engage in the business of, maintain an office or act
in any manner as a real estate broker with respect to any real estate, improved
or vacant, located in the village without having first obtained an annual
village license for that purpose; provided, that no separate license shall be
required for a partnership if all partners thereof are so licensed.
   (b)   No such license shall be issued by the village to any person unless
the applicant has first qualified for and received and there is in full force
and effect for such applicant a certificate of registration as a real estate
broker issued by the state.
   (c)   Application for a license as a real estate broker shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this article upon forms supplied by the
village clerk and containing the name, residence address, business address,
date of birth, length of experience in dealing in real estate, the date and
number of applicant's current certificate or registration from the state and
such other pertinent information as such clerk shall require to carry out the
intent and purpose of this article, and shall be accompanied with satisfactory
evidence that a certificate of registration with the state is in full force and
effect.
   (d)   Licenses issued hereunder shall be for the period commencing for a one
year period corresponding to the Village’s fiscal year as set forth in Section
1-12 of this Code, and shall be subject to renewal annually during the month of
December.
   (e)   The annual fee for any license or renewal of license shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and shall accompany
the application for issuance or renewal of license.
   (f)   A real estate broker’s license or the renewal thereof may be refused
or an existing license suspended or revoked for any violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 5; Ord. No. 75-4-1525; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No.
2020-03-3469)
§ 10A-5 PROHIBITED ACTS - OWNERS, REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND SALESMEN GENERALLY.
   Subject to the limitation contained in §
10A-8, it shall be unlawful for any person, owner and real estate broker or
real estate salesman:
   (a)   To make any distinction, discrimination or restriction against any
person in the price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to
the sale, lease or occupancy of any real estate used for housing or business
accommodations or in the furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith, predicated upon the race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex or marital status of the prospective or actual buyer or tenant
thereof;
   (b)   To refuse to sell or lease, or, in the case of a real estate broker or
salesman, to refuse to transmit any bona fide offer for the sale or lease of
any real estate for housing or business accommodations because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status of the proposed
buyer or renter;
   (c)   To publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published,
circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign
or other writing of any kind relating to the sale or lease of any housing or
business accommodations which indicates or expresses any limitation or
discrimination in the sale or lease of such housing or business accommodations,
predicated upon the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or
marital status of any prospective buyer, lessee or renter of such property;
   (d)   To discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with
borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing or business
accommodations because of the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sex or marital status of the proposed borrower, buyer or renter;
   (e)   To cheat, exploit or overcharge any person for housing or business
accommodations because of the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
sex or marital status of the proposed buyer or renter;
   (f)   To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease, housing or
business accommodations on the ground of loss of value due to the presence or
prospective entry into any neighborhood or area of the village of any person or
persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex
or marital status;
   (g)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of housing or business accommodations
to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or prospective
change in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital
status of persons in the neighborhood or area in which the property is located;
   (h)   To deliberately or knowingly refuse examination of any listing of
housing or business accommodations to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status;
   (i)   To enter into a listing agreement that prohibits or restricts the sale
or lease of housing or business accommodations to any person because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status;
   (j)   To represent to any person that any housing or business accommodations
are not available for inspection, purchase, sale, lease or occupancy, when in
fact such accommodations are so available, or otherwise to withhold housing or
business accommodations from any person because of race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status;
   (k)   To aid, abet, incite or coerce a person, by one or more overt acts, to
engage in any act prohibited by this article;
   (l)   To willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise
of a power by the board of trustees or its duly authorized members or
representatives in the enforcement of this article;
   (m)   To willfully obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the
provisions of this article or an order issued thereunder;
   (n)   To encourage any person to attach or enforce any restrictions in the
listing, sale or lease of housing or business accommodations because of race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status; and
   (o)   To fail, within a reasonable time, to provide information properly
requested by the board of trustees or its duly authorized members or
representatives with respect to an alleged violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 6; Ord. No. 75-4-1525, § 1)
§ 10A-6 SAME - REAL ESTATE BROKERS' AND SALESMEN'S SPECIFICALLY.
   In addition to the prohibitions of §
10A-5, it shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or real estate salesman:
   (a)   To act or undertake to act with respect to any housing or business
accommodations the sale or lease of which is prohibited to any person because
of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status;
   (b)   To refuse or receive or transmit a bona fide offer for the purchase,
sale or lease of any housing or business accommodations because of the race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status of the
prospective purchaser or tenant; and
   (c)   To discriminate in the furnishing of any facilities or services with
respect to housing or business accommodations because of race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex or marital status.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 7; Ord. No. 75-4-1525, § 1)
§ 10A-7 SAME - LENDING INSTITUTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any lending institution:
   (a)   To make, agree to make, arrange or negotiate any loan or guaranty of
funds for the purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease,
rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any housing or business
accommodations that discriminate because of race, color, religion, national
origin, ancestry, sex or marital status;
   (b)   In connection with any such loan or guaranty, to offer, seek or agree
to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate because of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry sex or marital status; and
   (c)   To refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any agreement to
lend or guarantee the loan of funds for the purchase, sale, construction,
lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any housing or
business accommodations because of the race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, sex or marital status or any party to such agreement or any member of
the family of any such party.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 8; Ord. No. 75-4-1525, § 1)
§ 10A-8 NEGOTIATION IN GOOD FAITH.
   Nothing in this article shall require any person to offer housing or
business accommodations for sale or lease or to show such accommodations to any
person if such person is not negotiating for the purchase or lease thereof in
good faith.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 9; Ord. No. 75-4-1525)
§ 10A-9 WRITTEN COMPLAINTS.
   (a)   The person discriminated against by any violation of any provision of
this article may, not later than 60 days after the date of the alleged
violation, file a written complaint setting forth the grievance with the board
of trustees. The complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant
and that of the person against whom the complaint is brought, and shall also
state the facts claimed to constitute a violation of this article.
   (b)   The board of trustees, its public welfare committee, any member of the
board or person designated by the board for such purpose is authorized to
initiate a complaint of an alleged violation of this article. Any complaint so
initiated shall be in writing and shall fully set forth the circumstances of
the claimed violation and the source of all information upon which the
complaint is based, including names and addresses, and those of the persons
against whom the complaint is brought.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 10; Ord. No. 75-4-1525)
§ 10A-10 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE; HEARINGS AND CONCILIATION CONFERENCES.
   (a)   The board of trustees, its public welfare committee or any member or
members of the board or person or persons so designated by the board shall
investigate immediately every such complaint filed. If the investigating body
determines that the respondent has not engaged in any unlawful practice, it
shall state its findings of fact in writing and dismiss the complaint. If the
investigating body determines that probable cause exists for the enforcement of
the provisions of this article, it shall set a date for a conciliation
conference. At such conference the investigating body shall interview the
complainant or complainants and the person or persons against whom the
complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all
proper methods of conciliation and persuasion. At the conclusion of the
conference, the investigating body shall render a written report and
recommendations to the board of trustees, copies of which shall be served by
certified mail upon the complainant and the respondent.
   (b)   The board of trustees, its public welfare committee or any member or
members of the board or other person or persons so designated by the board to
conduct conciliation conferences or hearings pursuant to this article shall
have the power to administer oaths and the power to subpoena witnesses and
documents, which power may be enforced by the board by petition to the Circuit
Court of the county.
   (c)   If the board of trustees shall have determined that probable cause
exists for the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and if the
conciliation efforts shall not have resulted in a settlement of the complaint,
the board shall enforce the provisions of this article in one or more of the
following ways:
      (1)   Institution and prosecution of proceedings to impose the fine
provided for in §
16-1 upon any person found in violation of this article;
      (2)   Application to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order
restraining any person from violating any provision of this article and for
such other or further relief as may seem appropriate for the enforcement of
this article and the elimination of the violation hereof; and
      (3)   Institution of proceedings with the department of registration and
education of the state for the purpose of causing the department to revoke,
suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such department to any real
estate broker or real estate salesman found to have violated any provision of
this article. In the event of the revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of the
state license of any real estate broker, the village license issued pursuant to
this article shall be deemed similarly revoked, suspended or not renewed
without further action by the board of trustees.
   (d)   Where, in the judgment of the board of trustees, the foregoing
enforcement procedures are not adequately fulfilling the purposes of this
article, to suspend or revoke the village license of any real estate broker
found by it to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article
following a full hearing before it pursuant to at least 15 days' notice given
to such broker by certified mail directed to the address given in his or her
application for license.
(Ord. No. 68-13-1463, § 11; Ord. No. 75-4-1525)
ARTICLE II. HUMAN RELATIONS ORDINANCE
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031)
§ 10A-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Glencoe
Human Relations Ordinance".
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
§ 10A-12 NO LIMITATION ON RIGHTS.
   Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect
rights granted under the laws of the County of Cook, the State of Illinois or
the United States. Nothing in this ordinance shall create any private right of
action, nor shall this ordinance be deemed to create any obligation on the
village, except as expressly stated in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031; Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
§ 10A-13 CREATION.
   (a)   The village continually strives to be a welcoming and inclusive
community for all individuals. The village rejects any and all forms of
discrimination and acts of hate, whether based upon race, color, immigration or
refugee status, national origin, ancestry, religion or creed, gender, gender
identity, sexual orientation, age, cognitive or physical ability, veteran
status, marital status, parental status, socioeconomic status, source of
income, housing status, or any other identities, or otherwise. The village
rejects discourse that disrespects or degrades an individual's identity, needs,
status or beliefs. The village shall provide services to all individuals with
the highest level of professionalism, respect and ethics to provide for the
safety and wellbeing of all individuals.
   (b)   The village's policies, procedures and operational practices shall be
routinely reviewed by the Village Manager or designee to further promote
inclusion of all individuals and compliance with laws of the County of Cook,
the State of Illinois or the United States.
(Ord. No. 2021-15-3511)
Division 3. Contracting Parties
§ 10A-17 PROVISION STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   Each person, firm or entity with whom the village contracts shall be
provided with a written copy of the village's policy with respect to
discrimination and human relations, in substantially the following form:
   STATEMENT TO CONTRACTING PARTIES
   OF THE VILLAGE OF GLENCOE'S POLICY WITH RESPECT TO
   DISCRIMINATION AND HUMAN RELATIONS
The Village of Glencoe has a strong public policy against unlawful
discrimination, bigotry and bias, in all forms. The village recognizes the
existence of laws of the United States, the State of Illinois and the County of
Cook that prohibit discriminatory acts and practices and other specified
offensive behavior, and recognizes that those laws apply to certain conduct
within the village, including certain conduct of parties with whom the village
contracts. The village strongly supports the full and fair application and
enforcement of all such laws. In addition, the village has a strong public
policy that seeks to foster and promote intergroup harmony, understanding and
good will among all people who live, work, visit or do business in the village.
(Ord. No. 97-8-2031)
CHAPTER 11: DRAINS, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
   
11-1   Drain layers and sewer builders - license required; fee, etc.
   
11-2   Reserved
   
11-3   Same - compliance with ordinances, etc.
   
11-4   Reserved
   
11-5   Plumbers - compliance with ordinances, etc., generally
   
11-6   Same - compliance with regulations relating to excavations in streets
   
11-7 - 11-8   Reserved
Cross-reference:
   As to construction, etc., of sewers generally, see §§
9-32 to
9-45A
   As to disposal of human excrement, see §
21-17
   As to powers and duties of directors of public works in connection with
sewers and drains, see §
2-76
§ 11-1 DRAIN LAYERS AND SEWER BUILDERS-LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE, ETC.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of drain
layer or sewer builder in the village without first having secured a license
therefor.
   (b)   Applications for such licenses shall conform to the general provisions
of the chapter on licenses.
   (c)   No such license shall be transferred.
   (d)   The annual fee for such licenses shall be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(1929 Code, § 567a) (Ord. No. 1406, § 11; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-
3394)
§ 11-2 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-15-3387, § 2)
§ 11-3 SAME - COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES, ETC.
   It shall be the duty of every person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter to comply fully with the provisions of this code and other ordinances
of the village relating to connections with the sewer systems and making
excavations in streets, and to secure the permits required for these
operations.
(1929 Code, § 567c)
§ 11-4 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2015-15-3387, § 3)
§ 11-5 PLUMBERS - COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES, ETC., GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person doing business as a plumber within the
village to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of this code or
other village ordinance or any executive regulations relating to the
installation of plumbing.
(1929 Code, § 546)
§ 11-6 SAME - COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS RELATING TO EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.
   In making excavations in streets, plumbers shall comply with the provisions
of this code and other ordinances of the village relating to such excavations.
(1929 Code, § 547)
Cross-reference:
   As to excavations, etc., in streets, etc., see §§
30-28 to
30-39
§§ 11-7 - 11-8 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 86-2-1723)
CHAPTER 12: DRY CLEANERS AND LAUNDRIES
Section
Article I. Dry Cleaning Establishments
   
12-1   License - required; compliance with article etc.
   
12-2   Same - application
   
12-3   Same - investigation of premises
   
12-4   Same - fees
   
12-5   Frontage consents
   
12-6   Fire prevention - regulations
   
12-7   Same - inspection by fire chief and chief of police
   
12-8   Infectious, diseased persons not to be employed
Article II. Dry Cleaning Outlets
   
12-9   Defined; license fee
Article III. Laundries
   
12-10   License - required; exception
   
12-11   Same - application
   
12-12   Same - fee
   
12-13   Frontage consents
   
12-14   Sanitation
   
12-15   Infectious, diseased persons not to be employed
   
12-16   Inspections; reports of violations of article
Cross-reference:
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate, etc., laundries, etc.,
see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-8
ARTICLE I. DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 12-1 LICENSE - REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE ETC.
   No person shall conduct or operate a dry cleaning establishment in which
coal oil, benzene, turpentine, petroleum or any of the products thereof are
used without having a license therefor or without complying with the provisions
of this article and with all other provisions relating to inflammable liquids.
(1929 Code, § 504) (Ord. No. 1223)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 12-2 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses required by the preceding section shall be made in
writing to the village manager, and shall be referred to the fire chief.
(1929 Code, § 504) (Ord. No. 1223)
§ 12-3 SAME - INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES.
   The fire chief shall investigate the premises intended to be used by an
applicant under the preceding section, and report the result of this
investigation to the village manager before the issuance of the license applied
for.
(1929 Code, § 504) (Ord. No. 1223)
§ 12-4 SAME - FEES.
   The annual fee for the license required shall be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and license shall be issued under
this article without the payment of the fee prescribed by this section.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 12-5 FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or maintain a dry cleaning
establishment in any place in the village without complying with the provisions
of §
22-17 relating to frontage consents, and filing consents in the manner provided
there.
(1929 Code, § 507)
§ 12-6 FIRE PREVENTION - REGULATIONS.
   No dry cleaning establishment shall be operated in a frame building. Such
establishment shall be kept free from inflammable wastes so far as possible,
and it shall be unlawful to maintain or permit a stove or open flame of any
kind in the premises. Smoking in such premises is hereby prohibited.
(1929 Code, § 505)
Cross-reference:
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
§ 12-7 SAME - INSPECTION BY FIRE CHIEF AND CHIEF OF POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of the fire chief and the chief of police to make such
inspections of premises used as dry cleaning establishments as may be necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and all other
provisions of this code and other ordinances relating to the storage or
handling of flammable liquids.
(1929 Code, § 506)
§ 12-8 INFECTIOUS, DISEASED PERSONS NOT TO BE EMPLOYED.
   It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a venereal or any
other contagious disease in a dry cleaning establishment.
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
ARTICLE II. DRY CLEANING OUTLETS
§ 12-9 DEFINED; LICENSE FEE.
   A DRY CLEANING OUTLET is hereby defined as any person engaged in calling for
or delivering wearing apparel or other articles which are cleaned or renovated
in or from any store where the dry cleaning is not actually engaged in or
carried on in the premises in the village. The annual license fee for such
establishment shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
ARTICLE III. LAUNDRIES
§ 12-10 LICENSE - REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   No person shall operate or conduct a laundry in the village without having
obtained a license therefor; provided, that establishments licensed as dry
cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in addition to the
dry cleaning license.
(1929 Code, § 531)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 12-11 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses required by this article shall be made in writing
to the village manager and shall state thereon the location intended to be
occupied.
(1929 Code, § 531)
§ 12-12 SAME - FEE.
   The annual fee for laundry licenses shall be as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. No license shall be issued under this
article except upon the agreement of the fee prescribed by this section.
(1929 Code, § 532) (Ord. No. 1223; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 12-13 FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, conduct or operate any laundry
in any place in the village without filing frontage consents in the manner
provided in §
22-17.
(1929 Code, § 533)
§ 12-14 SANITATION.
   Premises used for laundries shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises, and
the premises shall be kept free from rats, mice and vermin.
(1929 Code, § 534)
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 12-15 INFECTIOUS, DISEASED PERSONS NOT TO BE EMPLOYED.
   It shall be unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a venereal or any
other contagious disease in a laundry.
(1929 Code, § 534)
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 12-16 INSPECTIONS; REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE.
   It shall be the duty of the health officer or some other official designated
by the village manager to inspect or cause to be inspected every establishment
licensed under this article at least once every six months. Any violations of
the terms of this article shall be reported to the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 535)
CHAPTER 13: ELECTRICAL CODE
Editor's note:
   The electrical regulations of the village are found in the building code
adopted by §
9-18.
CHAPTER 14: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
   
14-1   Definition
   
14-2   Certificate of registration - required; application, etc.
   
14-3   Same - fee; transferability
   
14-4   Installations
   
14-5   Out of town contractors
Cross-reference:
   As to buildings and construction generally, see
ch. 9
   As to electrical commission generally, see §§
2-130,
2-131
   As to powers and duties of director of public works in connection with the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, see §
2-76
§ 14-1 DEFINITION.
   The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR as used in this chapter is hereby defined as
and shall be construed to mean any person engaged in the business of installing
or altering by contract, equipment and electrical appliances for the
utilization of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, not including
radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and
not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by
public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction
of the state commerce commission for the use in their operation as public
utilities; but the term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR does not include employees
employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
(1929 Code, § 511)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law definition, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-33-
1
§ 14-2 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION - REQUIRED; APPLICATION, ETC.
   No person shall engage in the business of electrical contractor without
having first obtained a certificate of registration therefor. Applications for
such certificates shall be made to the village manager, and the village manager
shall give a list of all contractors registered to the chief electrical
inspector.
(1929 Code, § 509)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to require the registration of
electrical contractors, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-33-1
§ 14-3 SAME - FEE; TRANSFERABILITY.
   The annual fee for registering as an electrical contractor shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule; provided, that an
application made after the expiration of the first six months of the register
year shall be issued upon the payment of a fee as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. The register year shall correspond with
the license year provided in
chapter 22. No certificate of registration shall be transferred.
(1929 Code, § 510) (Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 14-4 INSTALLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person registered under the provisions of this
chapter to install any electrical appliances, wiring or fixtures without strict
compliance with the village electrical code and ordinances relating to such
fixtures. It shall be unlawful for any such person to do any such work without
having obtained such permits as may be required.
(1929 Code, § 512)
§ 14-5 OUT OF TOWN CONTRACTORS.
   Any electrical contractor who is registered as such in any other city of
village in the state shall not be required to pay a fee for being registered in
this village; but every person doing business in this village as an electrical
contractor shall secure a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall
be issued without charge to electrical contractors registered as such under the
ordinances of another city or village in this state.
(1929 Code, § 511)
CHAPTER 15: FILLING STATIONS AND PUBLIC GARAGES
Section
Article I. Filling Stations
   
15-1   "Filling station" defined
   
15-2   License - required
   
15-3   Same - application
   
15-4   Same - fee
   
15-5   Frontage consents
   
15-6   Proximity to theatres, schools or churches
   
15-7   Change of location
   
15-8   Inspections and reports of violations
   
15-9   Maintenance, etc., in accordance with code, etc.
Article II. Public Garages
   
15-10   License - required
   
15-11   Same - application
   
15-12   Same - fees
   
15-13   Same - revocation
   
15-14   Frontage consents required to establish, etc.
   
15-15   Maintenance in certain buildings prohibited
   
15-16   Sanitation; inflammable wastes on premises
   
15-17   Changing auto plates and engine numbers
   
15-18   Smoking
   
15-19   Inspections - generally
   
15-20   Same - police may view all cars; hindering police inspections
ARTICLE I. FILLING STATIONS
§ 15-1 "FILLING STATION" DEFINED.
   The term FILLING STATION as used in this article shall mean any building,
structure, premises, enclosure or other place within the city where a container
or tank, either portable or stationary, containing ether, carbon bisulfate,
gasoline, naphtha, benzene, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied petroleum gas,
acetone, kerosene, turpentine or other inflammable liquids, having a flash
point below 187°F, are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for
sale or distributing any such liquids from such container or tank; provided,
however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any place where
such inflammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only.
(1929 Code, § 465)
§ 15-2 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of a
filling station without first having obtained a license therefor.
(1929 Code, § 466)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 15-3 SAME - APPLICATION.
   The application for a license for the business of managing, conducting or
carrying on a filling station shall conform to the general provisions of this
code and the other ordinances of the village relating to applications for
licenses, and shall specify the location of the building, structure, premises,
enclosure or other place in which it is proposed to keep such filling station
and the capacities in gallons of the containers and tanks. Every such
application shall be made to the village manager, and shall be approved by the
fire chief before a license is issued.
(1929 Code, § 467)
§ 15-4 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for each filling station containing at least one pump
for the distribution of motor fuel shall be as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 15-5 FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   No person shall locate, build, construct or maintain any filling station in
the village without complying with the provisions of §
22-17 relative to frontage consents and filing consents in the manner therein
provided.
(Code 1929, § 471)
§ 15-6 PROXIMITY TO THEATRES, SCHOOLS OR CHURCHES.
   No filling station shall be constructed, located or operated within 300 feet
of any public theatre, or any building used exclusively for school or church
purposes.
(1929 Code, § 472)
§ 15-7 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   No license issued under the provisions of this article shall authorize the
maintenance of the business of a filling station at any but the location
specified therein; provided, that a duly licensed business may be conducted in
a changed location without a new license being necessary if notice of the
change of location is given to the village manager at least one week before the
actual change is made.
(1929 Code, § 470)
§ 15-8 INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS OF VIOLATIONS.
   Each filling station shall be inspected at least twice every year by the
fire chief or some person duly authorized by him or her to make such
inspection, who shall see that the premises are maintained in compliance with
this code and other ordinances of the village, and shall see that there is no
dangerous accumulation of waste or other combustible material on the premises,
and shall report to the village manager any violation of this code and other
ordinances which may be discovered during such inspections.
(1929 Code, § 469)
§ 15-9 MAINTENANCE, ETC., IN ACCORDANCE WITH CODE, ETC.
   Each filling station within the village shall be conducted and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the village
relative thereto.
(1929 Code, § 469)
ARTICLE II. PUBLIC GARAGES
§ 15-10 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or maintain a public garage in the village without
having first obtained a license therefor.
(1929 Code, § 482) (Ord. No. 1115; Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 15-11 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Applications for license under this article shall be made in writing to the
village clerk, and shall state the location of the garage and number of cars
that can be accommodated therein.
(1929 Code, § 482) (Ord. No. 1115; Ord. No. 1406)
§ 15-12 SAME - FEES.
   The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be as set forth
in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Such license shall
include a license to operate one pump for dispensing motor fuel without
additional charge. For each additional pump operated in connection with such
garage, an additional fee shall be charged as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. No license shall be issued until each fee
is paid.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1869; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 15-13 SAME - REVOCATION.
   Any garage license may be revoked upon the commission of a violation of any
provision of this article by a licensee or his or her employee, or for
permitting continual violations of any such provision.
(1929 Code, § 488)
§ 15-14 FRONTAGE CONSENTS REQUIRED TO ESTABLISH, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain, conduct or operate any public
garage in any place in the village without complying with the provisions of §
22-17 relating to frontage consents.
(1929 Code, § 483)
§ 15-15 MAINTENANCE IN CERTAIN BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain any public garage in a frame building, or
in any building used for church, school or theatre purposes.
(1929 Code, § 485)
§ 15-16 SANITATION; INFLAMMABLE WASTES ON PREMISES.
   The premises of every public garage shall be kept clean and as free as
possible from inflammable waste material.
(1929 Code, § 485)
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 15-17 CHANGING AUTO PLATES AND ENGINE NUMBERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change the identification marks on
the engine of any car or automobile in any public garage, and it shall be
unlawful to change the license tag on such cars except in accordance with the
register of motor vehicles kept by the Secretary of the State.
(1929 Code, § 486)
Cross-reference:
   As to removal, etc., of serial numbers and plates from bicycles, see §§
23-42,
23-43
§ 15-18 SMOKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a cigarette, pipe or
cigar in any public garage.
(1929 Code, § 484)
Cross-reference:
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
§ 15-19 INSPECTIONS - GENERALLY.
   The chief of police and fire chief shall see that every public garage is
inspected as frequently as may be necessary to insure the compliance with all
provisions of this code and other ordinances relating thereto.
(1929 Code, § 487)
§ 15-20 SAME - POLICE MAY VIEW ALL CARS; HINDERING POLICE INSPECTIONS.
   Any police officer shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to view every
car stored or kept in any public garage. It shall be unlawful to hinder any
such inspection or to conceal any car or motor vehicle from such inspection.
(1929 Code, § 487)
CHAPTER 16: FINES AND IMPRISONMENT
Section
   
16-1   General penalty; continuing violations
   
16-2   Election of provisions under which to prosecute
   
16-3   Village jail - establishment
   
16-4   Same - keeper
   
16-5   Same - communication with prisoners
   
16-6   Same - escape
   
16-7   Places of incarceration generally; working out
   
16-8   Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule authorized
   
16-9   Collection of fines, penalties, fees, and charges
Charter reference:
   As to marshal and police officers generally, etc., see char.,
art. III, § 7
   As to police, etc., constables, see char.,
art. III, § 9
   As to police magistrate generally, see char.,
art. III, § 8
   As to resisting arrest, etc., see char.,
art. III, § 7
§ 16-1 GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the village, or rule or
regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the village under
authority duly vested in him or her or it, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever in this code
or any ordinance or any such rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense
or misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof,
or is not otherwise set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule, the violation or any such provision of this code or of any such
ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $25 nor exceeding $750 for each such offense, provided that, if service of
summons is made by certified mail pursuant to Section 1-2-9.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1., the maximum fine shall not be less than $25
nor exceed $750 for each such offense.
   (b)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code, or of any such
ordinance, rule, regulation or order, shall continue shall constitute, except
where otherwise provided, a separate offense.
   (c)   In the construction and interpretation of this section, the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or penalty so as
to bar any other penalty being enforced. Notwithstanding any provision in this
code to the contrary, wherever any statute or public act of the General
Assembly shall limit the amount of any fine or penalty, the fine or penalty
imposed by this code shall be the maximum amount permitted by such statute or
public act.
(Ord. No. 79-21-1596; Ord. No. 89-12-1805; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No.
2016-04-3394)
Charter reference:
   As to establishment and regulation of village police, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 28
   As to payment of fines, etc., see char.,
art. VII, § 6
   As to powers of council with regard to providing for imprisonment,
punishment for violation of ordinances, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 32
§ 16-2 ELECTION OF PROVISIONS UNDER WHICH TO PROSECUTE.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code or other ordinances of the village,
the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.
(1929 Code, § 814)
§ 16-3 VILLAGE JAIL - ESTABLISHMENT.
   The place in the village hall established and used as the jail, or any other
place which may hereafter be established by the village manager for that
purpose, is hereby declared to be a village jail.
(1929 Code, § 150)
§ 16-4 SAME - KEEPER.
   The chief of police shall be keeper of the village jail and shall have
custody of all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining thereto.
(1929 Code, § 151)
§ 16-5 SAME - COMMUNICATION WITH PRISONERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in
the village jail without the permission of the keeper of the jail.
(1929 Code, § 155)
§ 16-6 SAME - ESCAPE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to escape, attempt to escape, or assist
any person to escape or attempt to escape from the village jail.
(1929 Code, § 154)
Cross-reference:
   As to assisting, etc., persons in custody, see §
24-45
§ 16-7 PLACES OF INCARCERATION GENERALLY; WORKING OUT.
   (a)   The village jail shall be used for the incarceration of all persons
arrested for violating any laws of the state, the United States or for
violating any provision of this code or other village ordinance until such
person shall be brought before a magistrate for a hearing or until such person
shall be lawfully transferred to some other place of incarceration.
   (b)   Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code or
other village ordinance and sentenced to the payment of a fine may be
imprisoned for the nonpayment of such fine. Such persons may be imprisoned in
either the village jail, or in the house of correction of the City of Chicago
or such other place of incarceration with which the board of trustees has made
the necessary arrangements for such transfer of prisoners. When so
incarcerated, prisoners shall be allowed to work out their fine at the rate
provided by statute.
(1929 Code, §§ 152, 153)
§ 16-8 COMPREHENSIVE FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE AUTHORIZED.
   In lieu of any fine, penalty, fee, or charge set forth in any provision of
the village code, the Village Board shall by ordinance annually adopt a
comprehensive schedule of fines, penalties, fees, and charges which shall be
referred to in this Code as the "Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule." To the
extent that a fine, penalty, fee, or charge is set forth in the Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule, then the fine, penalty, fee, or charge set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule shall control over any other fine, penalty,
fee, or charge provided for in the village code, notwithstanding any provision
in the village code to the contrary.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 16-9 COLLECTION OF FINES, PENALTIES, FEES, AND CHARGES.
   (a)   Whenever any fine, penalty, fee, charge, or payment (including without
limitation tax payments) is due pursuant to any provision in the village code
and is not paid within 30 days after the village delivers notice (unless a
different period is stated elsewhere in the village code) to the person
responsible for such fine, charge, or payment (the “responsible person”), the
village may transfer such fine, penalty, fee, charge, or payment to a
collection agency or attorney of the village’s choosing (the “collection
agency”). The collection agency shall, for purposes of collection of such fine,
penalty, fee, charge, or payment, be deemed an agent of the village. All costs
incurred by the village for the collection of any fine, penalty, fee, charge,
or payment by the collection agency shall be assessed against the responsible
person as an additional fine, penalty, fee, charge, or payment, subject to any
applicable statutory limits.
   (b)   Whenever any person shall make a payment to the village by check,
draft, or other negotiable instrument for an amount due pursuant to the village
code, or for an amount due as a result of any activities, services, or products
made available in accordance with this code, and such payment is dishonored or
otherwise returned to the village for lack of funds or any other reason, the
amount due to the village shall be increased by the greater of $25 or the
amount of any charges assessed upon the village as a result of the dishonor of
such payment.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
CHAPTER 17: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Article I. Fire Prevention Code
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
   
17-1   Adoption of the International Fire Code, 2021 Edition
Article II. Life Safety Code
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
   
17-2   Adoption of the Life Safety Code, 2024 Edition
Article III. Smoke Detectors
   
17-3   Definitions
   
17-4   Residential smoke detectors required
   
17-5   Application
   
17-6   Violation
ARTICLE I. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
§ 17-1 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The provisions of the International Fire Code, 2021 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc. (“Fire Code”), are hereby adopted, subject
to the additions, deletions and modifications hereinafter set forth. The
additions, deletions and/or modifications to the International Fire Code, 2021
Edition, as applicable in the village are as follows:
Fire Code Section Addition, Deletion, Modification
Fire Code  Addition, Deletion, Modification
Section
Passim     Wherever the phrase “[name of jurisdiction]” or the word “jurisdiction” appears,
           they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim     Wherever the phrase “fire code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
           village’s Director of Public Safety or his or her duly designated representative.
           Add the following new Section 102.13:
           102.13 Responsibility. Whenever in this code a duty or obligation is imposed upon
102.13     the owner, occupant, or other responsible person, such duty or obligation shall be
           deemed to be separately imposed on each of those persons; however, the full
           satisfaction of the duty or obligation by any one of the persons shall be deemed to
           satisfy the same duty or obligation imposed on each of the others.
           Add the following at the end of Section 104.9:
           The Director of Public Safety and the Development Services Director shall act as a
           committee to determine, specify, and issue, after giving affected persons an
104.9      opportunity to be heard, the regulations applicable under this code to any new
           materials, processes, or occupancies which may involve fire or other hazards to the
           public safety, in addition to those materials, processes, and occupancies that are
           already covered by this code.
           Add the following new Section 105.1.1.1:
105.1.1.1  105.1.1.1 Fees. No permit fee shall be required provided that an applicant has
           obtained all permits and licenses otherwise applicable to the applicant and required
           by the Village and has paid in full the fees and charges applicable thereto.
           Substitute the following for the second sentence of Section 105.3:
           Such permission shall be deemed to be conditioned upon full and strict compliance
           with this code and with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, or codes of
           the Village or of any other governmental authority with jurisdiction. The Director
105.3      of Public Safety may subject such permission to such other reasonable conditions as
           he or she may in his or her discretion prescribe, in order to further the health,
           safety, and welfare of the Village, its residents, and the general public. Such
           conditions shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, or set aside any
           of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance, regulation, or code of the
           Village.
           Substitute the following sections for the entirety of Section 108:
           108.1 Request to appeal. Any person affected by any determination of the Director of
           Public Safety shall have the right to appeal of that determination. A request to
           appeal, in writing and stating the grounds upon which the appeal is based, must be
           filed with the Village Clerk not more than ten days after the person has received
           notice of the adverse determination by the Director of Public Safety, or the right
           to appeal shall be deemed to have been waived.
           108.2 Hearing. The appeal shall be heard de novo and in open session by the Village
           Board or by a hearing officer designated by the Village Board. Such hearing shall be
           commenced within ten days after the filing of a request to appeal, provided that
           both the appellant and Director of Public Safety shall have received notice thereof
108        at least 48 hours before such hearing commences. Both the appellant and the Director
           of Public Safety shall be entitled to present evidence relating to the appeal. If
           the appeal is heard by a hearing officer, the hearing officer shall submit
           recommended findings to the Board.
           108.3 Decision. The Board, after reviewing the evidence, shall issue written
           findings along with its decision. If the appeal was heard by a hearing officer, the
           Board may adopt the hearing officer’s findings or make its own findings. The Board
           may modify or reverse the determination of the Director of Public Safety only if a
           quorum exists and only by a majority vote of the members present. The decision and
           findings of the Board shall be recorded in the form of a resolution, certified
           copies of which shall be furnished to the appellant and the Director of Public
           Safety. Both the appellant and the Director of Public Safety shall take immediate
           action in accordance with the decision of the Board.
           Delete and substitute the following new Section 112.3.1:
           112.3.1 Service of notices and orders. Any written notice of violation or order
           issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner or the owner’s duly
           authorized agent, the occupant, or such other person responsible for the conditions
           in violation. Such notice or order shall be served either by delivering a copy of
112.3.1    same to such person or persons by ordinary mail to the last known post office
           address, by delivering it in person, or by leaving it in the possession of any
           person in charge of the premises, or in case such person is not found upon the
           premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or
           avenue of access; and such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal
           notice.
           Substitute the following sentence for the first sentence in Section 112.3.3:
           If the notice of violation or order is not complied with within the time specified,
           the Director of Public Safety shall request the Village Attorney to institute and
           prosecute any and all appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct, or abate
112.3.3    such violation or such dangerous or hazardous conditions, to require or effect
           removal of dangerous or hazardous materials, to prevent or discontinue the unlawful
           use of the building or structure, or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this
           code or of any order or notice issued pursuant hereto, all in the manner provided by
           law.
           Substitute the following for Section 112.4:
           112.4 Penalty for violations.  Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code
           or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
           construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan
           or directive of the Director of Public Safety, or of a permit or certificate issued
           under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in
           the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule; provided, however, that the
           Director of Public Safety or the Director’s designee may elect to prosecute any such
           violation as a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
112.4      $750, or by imprisonment not exceeding 6 months, or both fine and imprisonment for
           each provision of this code violated; provided further that any such misdemeanor
           shall be punishable solely by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $750 with
           respect to any violation as to which service of summons is made by certified mail,
           return receipt requested, pursuant to Section 1-2-9.1 of the Illinois Municipal
           Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
           separate offense. Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary,
           wherever any statute or public act of the General Assembly shall limit the amount of
           any fine or penalty, the fine or penalty imposed by this Code shall be maximum
           amount permitted by such statute or public act.
           Substitute the following for Section 112.4.1:
112.4.1    109.4.1 Nuisance. Any act, conduct, condition, material, structure, or premises in
           violation of this code is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated in the
           manner provided by law.
           Substitute the following definition for “Lot” in Section 202.0:
           LOT. “Lot” shall have the same definition as provided by Subsection 8-302L of the
           Village of Glencoe Zoning Code, or any succeeding provision.
           Add the following defined term to Section 202 in correct alphabetical horror:
           SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
           (a)   A supervised public display of fireworks shall mean an exhibition consisting
           of the firing, igniting, or discharging of any fireworks, conducted for the benefit
           of one or more persons, which complies with the following:
              1.   The exhibition is sponsored and funded solely by a governmental entity or a
           private not-for-profit or other corporation authorized to do business in the State
202.0      of Illinois; and
              2.   The exhibition is supervised as provided in this Section; and
              3.   All aspects of the exhibition, including the site, have been approved.
           (b)   Supervised shall mean that the public display of fireworks is inspected by a
           member of the Department of Public Safety immediately prior to ignition and
           immediately following the conclusion of the exhibition, that the exhibition and
           ignition are attended at all times by a member of the Department of Public Safety,
           and that the entity holding the permit has agreed to pay to the village the actual
           costs of providing such services by the member of the Department of Public Safety.
           The member of the Department of Public Safety shall at all such times be in uniform
           and on duty and shall be a part of a special detail assigned to perform such
           services.
           Add the following sentence at the end of Section 307.1.1:
307.1.1    Open burning shall at all times comply with Chapter 21, Article III, Division 1 of
           the Glencoe Village Code.
           Substitute the following for Section 307.2:
           307.2 Permit required. No person shall prepare, set, ignite, maintain, counsel,
           advise, order, or assist in the preparation, setting, ignition, or maintenance of
           any open fire without first having obtained a permit from the Director of Public
           Safety. Permits for open burning shall be issued only for the following purposes:
           1.   Open burning of diseased trees as required by law;
307.2      2.   Open burning in conjunction with holiday or festive celebrations and other
           special occasions (hereinafter “a bonfire”);
           3.   Open burning authorized by the Director of Public Safety for governmental
           purposes (including fire training);
           4.   Open burning for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management
           practices;
           5.   Open burning for the prevention or control of disease or pests; or
           6.   Open burning for the warmth of outside workers.
           Substitute the following for Section 307.2.1:
           307.2.1 Permit exceptions. No permit shall be required for open fires that are
307.2.1    constantly tended and used solely for the purpose of outdoor cooking, for highway
           safety flares, or for burning authorized by the EPA as provided in Section 403.4.2
           below.
           Add the following new Section 307.2.2:
           307.2.2 Application for permit. Applications for a permit for open burning shall be
           submitted in writing at least ten days before the fire is proposed to be set and
307.2.2    shall be in such form and contain such information as is required by the Director of
           Public Safety. Such application shall contain, at a minimum, information regarding
           the purpose of the proposed burning, the composition and quantity of the material to
           be burned, the date and time when such burning will take place, the duration of the
           burning, and the specific location of the burning site.
           Add the following new Section 307.2.3:
           307.2.3 Prohibited open burning. Any open burning that causes injury, detriment,
           nuisance, or annoyance to any person, or endangers the health, comfort, repose,
           safety, or welfare of the general public, or that causes or tends to cause injury or
307.2.3    damage to property or business, is prohibited and is deemed to be hazardous,
           notwithstanding that any atmospheric conditions or local circumstances have
           contributed to such result. The Director of Public Safety shall order the
           extinguishment by the permit holder or by the Department of Public Safety of any
           open burning which is in violation of this section or which creates or adds to
           hazardous situation.
           Add the following new Section 307.4.4:
           307.4.4 Public safety officer. Bonfires or recreational fires shall be inspected and
           supervised by a member of the Department of Public Safety immediately prior to
307.4.4    ignition and immediately following extinguishment. The member of the Department of
           Public Safety shall at all such times be in uniform and on-duty, and shall be a part
           of a special detail assigned to perform such services. The permit holder shall pay
           to the Village the actual costs of providing such services by the member of the
           Department of Public Safety.
           Add the following new Section 308.1.9:
           308.1.9 Candles. No person shall use or allow to be used any open flame or burning
           candle in connection with any public meeting or gathering for purposes of
           deliberation, entertainment, amusement, instruction, education, recreation, awaiting
308.1.9    transportation or similar purpose in a place of public assembly or education such as
           a school, restaurant, eating establishment, cocktail lounge or bar, without first
           obtaining a permit from the Director of Public Safety; provided, however, that this
           regulation shall not apply to religious rites, services, or other religious
           practices within a church, temple, or other building or structure devoted primarily
           to religious worship.
           Substitute the following for Section 310.2:
           310.2 Prohibited areas. No person shall smoke or use any spark, flame or fire-
           producing device in any of the following areas:
           1.   In any retail store where there are sold or stored dried goods, clothing, floor
           coverings, curtains, cloth or fabrics, upholstery or drapery material, bedding,
           paper or paper products, pyroxylin plastics, paints, oils, or any other similarly
           flammable material or products, or any place where such materials or products are
           stored or handled in connection with the sale or delivery of such items;
           2.   In any place where moving picture films are processed, sold, used, or stored;
           3.   In any public garage or any stable;
           4.   In any place where volatile or flammable liquids are stored or handled, or
           hazardous processes exist;
           5.   In any building or premises used for public assembly where the conditions and
310.2      the use of the building or premises are such that, in the opinion of the Director of
           Public Safety, smoking would constitute a hazard to the life or property;
           6.   In any theater, church, school, auditorium, or gymnasium;
           7.   In any elevator used by the public;
           8.   In any other location and/or at such time as smoking is prohibited by this
           code.
           If the Director of Public Safety shall determine in his or her discretion that,
           based on the conditions and use of a portion of the premises or an adjacent room,
           smoking will not be dangerous or hazardous to life or property, the Director of
           Public Safety may, pursuant to a written order issued to the owner, occupant, or
           other person responsible for the premises, authorize such portion or room to be
           designated as a smoking area; provided that such designation may be limited by any
           reasonable conditions established by the Director of Public Safety for the purpose
           of protecting life, health, and property.
           Add the following new Section 310.2.1:
           310.2.1 Other prohibited areas. No person shall smoke or use any spark, flame, or
310.2.1    fire-producing device while on a bed in any hotel, motel, dormitory, rooming house,
           lodging house, hospital, convalescent home, nursing home, or similar institutional
           residential use.
           Add the following new Section 314.5:
           314.5 Flammable apparel and toys. No person shall manufacture, give away, offer for
           sale, or sell within the Village any wearing apparel or any toy which is of a
314.5      material that may be hazardous to any person wearing, using, or playing with such
           item by reason of the item’s high combustibility or flash-fire characteristics, or
           the tendency of such item to flame up when exposed to fire, flame, or heat. Any
           person knowing of the existence of any such merchandise within the Village shall
           immediately report the same to the Director of Public Safety.
           Add the following to the end of Section 315.1:
           All combustible rubbish, greasy, oily or paint-soaked rags, and other combustible
           materials of like character shall be stored in approved, self-closing metal
315.1      containers having metal legs at least three inches high and securely braced. Such
           containers shall be kept safely clear of all combustible surroundings and their
           contents shall be removed daily. Oily or greasy clothing shall be stored only in
           such approved containers or in non-combustible and well ventilated closets.
           Add the following new Section 315.2.15:
           315.2.5 Storage approval. Approval shall be required for storage located in any
315.2.15   structure or on any premises of more than 1,500 cubic feet gross volume of
           combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels, or similar containers or rubber
           tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork, or other similarly combustible materials.
           Substitute the following for Section 315.3:
           315.3 Inside storage. Storage in buildings and structures shall be neat, orderly,
           and compact, and shall not be less than 18" from any ceiling nor less than 12" from
           any sprinkler head if such area is equipped with automatic sprinklers. Storage shall
           be located so as to avoid obstructing egress from the building, blocking aisles, or
315.3      substantially reducing the effectiveness of any fire protection system. When stock
           is dispensed directly from a shipping container and combustible material is used as
           protective packing, such packing material shall be removed immediately upon opening
           the container and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this code, or
           such container shall be kept closed at all times except when removing stock
           therefrom.
           Add the following new Section 315.8:
           315.7 Christmas trees. Christmas trees stored or displayed for sale shall be kept
           outside of buildings and at a distance of at least ten feet from any building;
           provided, however, that such trees may be stored closer than ten feet from a blank
315.8      masonry wall of a building if permission is obtained from the owner of such wall. No
           Christmas trees may be stored or displayed within 35 feet of any gasoline pump. All
           Christmas trees shall be removed from the premises not later than December 31 of
           each year. For purposes of this section, “Christmas trees” shall refer to natural
           trees and combustible artificial trees.
           Substitute the following for Section 506.1:
           Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured
           openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting
           purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed
506.1      in an approved location. The key box shall be an approved type manufactured by the
           Knox Company, 1601 W. Deer Valley Road, Phoenix, Arizona 85027, or another product
           approved by the fire code official. All new or changed occupancies in the Business
           Districts shall have a key box to provide emergency access for Fire Department
           personnel.
           Add the following new Section 706.3:
           Section 706.3 FIRE AND SMOKE DAMPERS
           706.3 General. Fire and smoke dampers shall comply with the International Building
706.3      Code. Where any building or structure contains fire or smoke dampers, the owner or
           his or her representative must provide the village’s Public Safety Department with
           drawings indicating the location of all dampers, and a listing of the manufacturer,
           model, and fusible link type and temperature for each damper.
           Add the following sentence to the end of Section 903.2.
903.2      A fire hydrant must be located within 100 feet of the Fire Department connection,
           and Fire Department standpipe valves shall not be spaced greater than 120 feet
           apart.
903.2.1.1  Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. The fire area exceeds zero square feet.
903.2.1.2  Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. The fire area exceeds zero square feet.
903.2.1.3  Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. The fire area exceeds zero square feet.
903.2.1.4  Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. The fire area exceeds zero square feet.
           Amend to read as follows:
903.2.1.5  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all enclosed Group A-5 accessory
           use areas.
903.2.3    In Paragraph 1, delete phrase “greater than 12,000 square feet (1115m2) in area” and
           replace with phrase “greater than zero square feet in area”.
           Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. A Group F-l fire area exceeds 0 square feet.
903.2.4    Substitute the following for Paragraph 3:
           3. The combined area of all Group F-l fire areas on all floors, including any
           mezzanines, exceeds 0 square feet.
903.2.4.1  Delete phrase “in excess of 2,500 square feet in area (232m2)” and replace with
           phrase “in excess of zero square feet in area”.
           Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. A Group M fire area exceeds zero square feet.
903.2.7    Substitute the following for Paragraph 3:
           3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any
           mezzanines, exceeds zero square feet.
           Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. A Group S-l fire area exceeds zero square feet.
903.2.9    Substitute the following for Paragraph 3:
           3. The combined area of all Group S-l fire areas on all floors, including any
           mezzanines, exceeds zero square feet (2230m2).
           In paragraph 1, delete the phrase “exceeding 10,000 square feet (929m2)” and replace
           with phrase “exceeding zero square feet”.
903.2.9.1  In paragraph 2, delete the phrase “exceeding 12,000 square feet (1115m2)” and
           replace with phrase “exceeding zero square feet”.
           In paragraph 4, delete the phrase “where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet
           (464m2)” and replace with phrase “where the fire area exceeds zero square feet”.
           Substitute the following for Section 903.2.9.2:
903.2.9.2  903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and structures used for the storage of
           tires shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
           with Section 903.3.1.1.
903.2.10   Substitute the following for Paragraph 1:
           1. Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds zero square feet; or
903.2.10.1 Delete the phrase “where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464m2).”
           Add the following new Section 903.2.13:
903.2.13   903.2.13 Automatic sprinkler systems. Every bowling establishment shall be equipped
           with an approved automatic sprinkler system as defined by Section 902.1 in every
           room in which a bowling lane is located.
           Add the following new Section 903.2.14:
903.2.14   903.2.14 Knox box and external fire alarm strobe light required. Any commercial or
           residential building that has an automatic sprinkler system must have a knox box for
           rapid entry and an external fire alarm strobe light.
           Substitute the following for Section 907.6.4:
           907.6.4 Addressable fire alarm control panels required.  In addition to the
           requirements of NFPA 72, all newly-installed fire alarm control panels must be
907.6.4    addressable panels that are not zoned, and any existing fire alarm control panels
           must be updated to addressable panels that are not zoned no later than the earliest
           to occur of the following events: (1) the performance of any work on the alarm
           system, (2) a change in the occupancy or tenancy of the premises, or (3) a change in
           use group of the premises.
           Substitute the following for Section 907.6.6:
907.6.6    907.6.6 Monitoring. All fire alarms must be monitored by a UL-listed central station
           and a copy of the UL listing must be kept on file with the Department of Public
           Safety and must be submitted annually with the annual fire alarm inspection report.
           Substitute the following for Section 5601.1.3:
           5601.1.3 Fireworks prohibited. Except for a supervised public display of fireworks
           conducted in strict compliance with the provisions of this Article 33, no person
5601.1.3   shall manufacture, purchase, sell, offer for purchase or sale, loan, give away,
           deliver, store, possess, use, display, fire, discharge, or set off within the
           Village any fireworks, or any other article or substance of any explosive nature
           designed or intended to be used as fireworks.
           Add the following new Section 5601.1.6:
           5601.1.6 Overriding prohibition. No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale,
           loan, give away, deliver, store, possess, use, display, fire, discharge, or set off
5601.1.6   within the Village any explosives or blasting agents; except that this prohibition
           shall not apply to: (a) loaded shells for small arms, (b) the hand loading of small
           arms ammunition for personal use but not for sale, transportation, or giving away to
           any user or consumer, or (c) blasting operations conducted pursuant to a permit
           issued under this article.
           Add the following new Section 5601.1.7:
           5601.1.7 Additional regulations. The Director of Public Safety may, in his or her
5601.1.7   discretion, promulgate additional regulations to assure that the intent of this
           Article 33 is observed or to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
           Village, its residents, and the general public.
           Add the following sentence at the end of Section 5601.2.4.2:
5601.2.4.2 Where the permittee is a governmental entity, the Director of Public Safety shall
           waive the bond required by this section.
           Substitute the following for Section 5608.1:
           5608.1 General. No person shall manufacture, purchase, sell, offer to purchase or
5608.1     for sale, loan, give away, deliver, store, possess, use, display, fire, discharge or
           set off any fireworks except in full compliance with this code, the rules and
           regulations for the granting of permits and the terms and conditions of the permit
           issued for the supervised public display of fireworks.
           Substitute the following for Section 5608.2:
           5608.2 Permit for supervised public displays. No person shall conduct, prepare,
           assist, order, maintain, or participate in a supervised public display of fireworks
           without first having obtained a permit from the Director of Public Safety. The
5608.2     Director of Public Safety may issue rules and regulations for the granting of such
           permits, including a limitation on the number of permits to be granted in one year,
           and may impose terms or conditions on any permit as the Director of Public Safety
           may, in his or her discretion, deem necessary to protect property or to further the
           health, safety, or welfare of the Village, its residents, or any other person.
           Add the following new Section 5608.7.2.1:
           5608.7.2.1 Competent operator. Every supervised public display of fireworks shall be
           conducted and managed by an approved, competent operator whose qualifications and
5608.7.2.1 competence shall first be examined and approved by the Director of Public Safety.
           Such approved competent operator shall be present at the site during the public
           display of fireworks, and shall oversee the delivery, setup, ignition, display,
           cleanup, and disposal of all fireworks.
           Add the following new Section 5701.1.1:
5701.1.1   5701.1.1 Storage limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article,
           the total aggregate capacity of tanks for the storage of Class I and Class II
           flammable liquids on any lot shall not exceed 10,000 gallons.
           Substitute the following for Section 5704.2.9:
           5704.2.9 Aboveground tanks. No person shall install on any single lot any
5704.2.9   aboveground storage tanks with a total aggregate capacity of more than 55 gallons
           with respect to all Class I and Class II flammable liquids, or more than 550 gallons
           with respect to all Class III flammable liquids, except as specifically permitted in
           Article 38 of this code.
           Add the following at the end of Section 5704.2.11:
5704.2.11  No person shall store more than 275 gallons of any Class I flammable liquid under
           any building.
           Add the following paragraph at the end of Section 5704.3.3:
           5704.3.3 Storage in buildings. If any Class I, Class II, or Class III flammable or
           combustible liquid is stored in a building, such storage shall be in a room or space
           with good ventilation and, except for paints, oils, varnishes, or similar mixtures
           stored for painting, maintenance, or similar purposes with respect to such premises,
5704.3.3   such liquids shall not be stored in any cellar, stairwell, basement, pit, or similar
           location. No person shall store more than five gallons of any Class I or Class II
           flammable liquid, except that which is in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, in or
           less than fifty feet from any residential building. Any building used for the
           storage of more than five gallons of a Class I or Class II flammable liquid shall be
           secured by an approved lock except when the liquid is being transferred to or from
           storage therein.
           Add the following new Section 6101.1.1:
6101.1.1   6101.1.1 Limitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article 38, storage
           of liquefied petroleum gas shall be permitted only on a lot used for a residential
           occupancy, and shall be limited to not more than 1,000 U.S. gallons on a single lot.
           Substitute the following for the first sentence in Section 6101.2:
6101.2     No person shall install or locate a tank or container for the storage of liquid
           petroleum gas on any lot until a permit for such installation has been obtained from
           the Director of Public Safety and the Director of Public Works.
           Delete Table 6104.3 and add the following new Section 6104.3:
           6104.3 Container location. No person shall install a tank or container for liquefied
           petroleum gas with any part of such tank or container below the surface of the
           ground, or in a location less than 12½ feet from any lot line or less than 25 feet
           from any building. Where more than one tank or container for liquefied petroleum gas
6104.3     is located on any lot, there shall be a space of at least 3 feet between such tanks
           or containers. Where storage tanks or containers will be or are located in areas
           deemed by the Director of Public Safety to be heavily populated or congested, the
           siting provisions of this section may be modified by the Director of Public Safety
           pursuant to the fire safety analysis described in Section 3912 of NFiPA 58, listed
           in Appendix A.
6104.4     Delete Section 6104.4.
           Add the following new Section 6107.5:
           6107.5 Foundations. In addition to any other requirement of this Article 36, tanks
           or containers for liquefied petroleum gas shall be installed on substantial
           foundations which shall provide, at a minimum, as follows:
6107.5     (a)   Two or more Portland cement concrete footings at least 1 foot wide by 2 feet
           in depth and extending at least 6 inches beyond the ends of the saddle rests.
           (b)   A gravel base of the same dimensions as set forth in (a) above may be used if
           the tank rests on a solid Portland cement concrete block of the same area 4 inches
           in thickness covering the entire area of such gravel base.
           (c)   Use of hollow concrete blocks for support of such containers is prohibited.
           Add the following new Section 6107.6:
           6107.6 Protection of piping. In addition to all the other requirements of this
           Article 38, all piping or tubing connecting a storage container or tank for
6107.6     liquefied petroleum gas shall be protected against disturbance or damage as required
           by the Director of Public Safety in his or her discretion. If buried, such piping or
           tubing shall be placed at least 1 foot below the surface of the ground, or at a
           greater depth if deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety.
Appendix B Adopted by Reference.
Appendix C Adopted by Reference.
Appendix D Adopted by Reference.
Appendix F Adopted by Reference.
Appendix H Adopted by Reference.
Appendix I Adopted by Reference.
Appendix J Adopted by Reference.
Appendix K Adopted by Reference.
Appendix L Adopted by Reference.
Appendix M Adopted by Reference.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No.
2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
ARTICLE II. LIFE SAFETY CODE
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
§ 17-2 ADOPTION OF THE LIFE SAFETY CODE, 2021 EDITION.
   The Life Safety Code, 2024 Edition, (hereafter referred to as the “Life
Safety Code”), NFPA No. 101, prepared and promulgated by the National Fire
Protection Association, Inc., a nationally recognized technical service
association, are hereby adopted, subject to the additions, deletions and
modifications hereinafter set forth, as regulations for life safety and
building exits in the village. A copy of the Life Safety Code shall be kept on
file at all times in the office of the village clerk. The additions, deletions
and modifications to the Life Safety Code as applicable to the village are as
follows:
 
Life
Safety  Addition, Deletion, Modification
Code
Section
3.2.2/  Wherever the phrase “authority having jurisdiction” appears, it shall be deemed
Passim  to refer to the Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
Passim  Wherever the phrase “code official” appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the
        Building Officer or his or her duly designated representative.
        Substitute the following for Section 1.4.1:
        1.4.1
        (a)   Full application: This Code shall apply to all new construction, and to
        those portions of existing buildings where, in the opinion of the Director of
        Public Safety, a serious hazard to life is presented because of noncompliance
        with any of the provisions hereof. Whenever any addition or alteration shall be
        made to any existing building, such addition or alterations shall conform with
        this Code. Whenever any existing building is damaged by fire or other causes to
1.4.1   the extent of 50% of its value, or whenever alterations or additions are made to
        any existing buildings the actual cost of which is equivalent to 50% of the
        value of such buildings, then all provisions of this Code shall be applicable to
        all of such building and the construction or alterations shall include all
        changes necessary to bring the entire building into conformity with this Code.
        (b)   Limited application: Whenever a specific provision in a subsequent chapter
        or section provides for its application to an “existing building,” such
        provisions shall be deemed applicable to those existing buildings which do not
        meet the thresholds for full application of this Code under subsection (a) of
        this section.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. No. 2017-6-3414; Ord. No. 2025-22-3627)
ARTICLE III. SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 17-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article:
   APPROVED SMOKE DETECTOR, SMOKE DETECTOR, or DETECTOR. A smoke detector of
the ionization or photoelectric type, which complies with all the requirements
of the State of Illinois and the rules and regulations of the Illinois State
Fire Marshal, and which is of a type approved by the assistant director of
public safety-fire chief.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and
includes a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multiple
family residence and each living unit in a mixed-use building.
§ 17-4 RESIDENTIAL SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved smoke
detector in an operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for
sleeping purposes. The detector shall be installed on the ceiling at least six
inches from any wall, or on a wall between four and six inches from the
ceiling.
   (b)   Every single-family residence shall have at least one approved smoke
detector installed on every story of the dwelling unit, including basements but
not including unoccupied attics. In dwelling units with split levels, a smoke
detector installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower
level if the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level;
however, if there is an intervening door or similar partition between the
adjacent levels, a smoke detector shall be installed on each level.
   (c)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit, or contains
at least one dwelling unit and is a mixed-use structure, shall contain at least
one approved smoke detector at the uppermost ceiling of each interior
stairwell. The detector shall be installed on the ceiling at least six inches
from the wall, or on a wall between four and five inches from ceiling.
   (d)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection
17-4(d)(2) below, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of a building or
structure to supply, install, inspect, test and maintain all required
detectors.
      (2)   In structures containing more than one dwelling unit, the owner
shall be responsible for inspecting, testing and maintaining detectors in
common stairwells and hallways and in other common areas. Unless otherwise
agreed between the owner and the occupant, it shall be the responsibility of
the occupant to inspect, test and maintain the detectors within the occupant's
dwelling unit or rooming unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner shall
ensure that such detectors are in operating condition at the time the occupant
takes possession of the dwelling unit. In the event that a dwelling unit
becomes unoccupied, the owner shall assume the duties and responsibilities of
an occupant with respect to that dwelling unit. The owner shall be responsible
for providing one occupant over 21 years of age per dwelling unit with written
information regarding necessary testing and maintenance for all detectors in
the dwelling unit.
§ 17-5 APPLICATION.
   (a)   The requirements of this article shall apply to any dwelling unit in
existence on January 1, 1989. Except as provided in subsection
17-5(b), the smoke detectors required in such dwelling units may be either
battery powered or wired into the structure's AC power line, and need not be
interconnected.
   (b)   In the case of any dwelling unit that is newly constructed,
reconstructed or substantially remodeled after January 1, 1989, the
requirements of this article shall apply beginning on the first day of
occupancy of the dwelling unit after such construction, reconstruction or
substantial remodeling. The smoke detectors required in such dwelling unit
shall be permanently wired into the structure's AC power line, and if more than
one detector is required to be installed within the dwelling unit, the
detectors shall be wired so that the actuation of one detector will actuate all
the detectors in the dwelling unit.
§ 17-6 VIOLATION.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect or refuse to supply,
install, inspect, test or maintain in operating condition any smoke detector as
required by this article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, damage,
destroy, disconnect, remove the batteries from or render inoperable any
installed smoke detector, except in the course of installation, inspection,
testing, maintenance or replacement of such detector.
CHAPTER 18: FLORISTS
Section
   
18-1   Definition
   
18-2   License - required
   
18-3   Same - application
   
18-4   Same - fee
   
18-5   Sanitary and safety requirements
   
18-6   Noxious, etc., plants, etc.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to license, tax and regulate
florists, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-1
§ 18-1 DEFINITION.
   The term FLORIST, as used in this chapter, means any building, room, stand,
enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of an establishment in the
village operated, maintained or conducted for the sale, or offering or keeping
for sale, at wholesale or retail, any flowers, plants, trees or shrubs, of all
varieties and description.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 18-2 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the business of florist
without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 18-3 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Each application for a license to conduct the business of florist shall be
made to the village clerk in writing and shall state the name and address of
the applicant, a description of the place where the business is to be
conducted, and the names and home addresses of the proprietor, owner and person
designated to manage such place of business.
(Ord. No. 1406)
§ 18-4 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for the business of florist shall be set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 18-5 SANITARY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   Every establishment where the business of a florist is conducted, managed or
carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No decayed,
decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased flowers, plants or other things
shall be allowed to remain in or about the establishment, and the establishment
shall be kept clear of rubbish and inflammable matter.
(Ord. No. 1406)
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 18-6 NOXIOUS, ETC., PLANTS, ETC.
   Every florist establishment shall comply with all state laws governing the
sale, possession, growing or disposition of noxious, diseased or infected
plants, trees or shrubs.
(Ord. No. 1406)
CHAPTER 19: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE
Section
Article I. Foreign Fire Insurance Tax
   
19-1   "Foreign fire insurance company" defined
   
19-2   Tax on gross receipts - levied; amount
   
19-3   Same - duty of agents to render accounts and make payments
   
19-4   Same - collection by legal action; chapter not to affect contracts, etc.
   
19-5   Companies not complying with chapter - generally
   
19-6   Same - brokers not to use
Article II. Foreign Fire Insurance Board
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
   
19-7   Establishment of foreign fire insurance board
   
19-8   Establishment of foreign fire insurance fund
   
19-9   Transfers to foreign fire insurance fund
   
19-10   Election, powers, duties of foreign fire insurance board
   
19-11   Management and administration fund
ARTICLE I. FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX
§ 19-1 "FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY" DEFINED.
   As used in this article, the term FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY shall mean
a fire insurance corporation, company or association not incorporated under the
laws of the state and engaged in effecting fire insurance in the village.
§ 19-2 TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS - LEVIED; AMOUNT.
   Every foreign fire insurance company shall pay to the treasurer of the
foreign fire insurance board, established in §
19-7 below, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department of the
village, 2% per annum of the gross receipts received for premiums by all agents
of any such company during the year ending on July 1, for any insurance
effected or agreed to be effected in the village by or with any such company
during such year.
(1929 Code, § 523)
Charter reference:
   Taxation generally, see char.,
art. V, §§ 1 to
8
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to levy tax on foreign fire
insurance companies, see 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1
§ 19-3 SAME - DUTY OF AGENTS TO RENDER ACCOUNTS AND MAKE PAYMENTS.
   Every person acting in the village as agent, for or on behalf of any foreign
fire insurance company shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to the
treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board a full, true and just account,
verified by his or her oath, of all premiums which, during the year ending July
1 preceding the report, shall have been received by him or her, or any other
person for him or her, on behalf of such company. Such agent shall also at the
time of rendering such report pay to the treasurer of the foreign fire
insurance board the sum of money for which such company represented by him or
her is chargeable, by virtue of the provisions of this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 524)
§ 19-4 SAME - COLLECTION BY LEGAL ACTION; CHAPTER NOT TO AFFECT CONTRACTS, ETC.
   (a)   The sum of money for which any foreign fire insurance company is
chargeable under §
19-2, may be recovered of it, or of its agents, by an action in the name of and
for the use of the village, as for money had and received.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be held to affect liability on insurance
contracts or to exempt any person, from indictment and conviction under the
provisions of an act entitled "An Act to Enable Cities, Towns and Villages,
Organized under Any General or Special Law, to Levy and Collect a Tax or
License Fee from Foreign Insurance Companies for the Benefit of Organized Fire
Departments," in force July 1, 1895.
(1929 Code, § 525)
§ 19-5 COMPANIES NOT COMPLYING WITH CHAPTER - GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any foreign fire insurance company to engage, in
the village, in effecting fire insurance, or to transact any business of fire
insurance in the village, while in default by not fully complying with the
requirements of this chapter and until such requirements shall have been fully
complied with; but this provision shall not relieve any such company from the
payment of any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 522)
§ 19-6 SAME - BROKERS NOT TO USE.
   No insurance broker in the village shall place any insurance with any
foreign fire insurance company, which shall be in default for not reporting or
making payment provided in this chapter until it shall have complied with all
the requirements of this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 526)
ARTICLE II. FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
§ 19-7 ESTABLISHMENT OF FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD.
   There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance board, consisting of a
seven trustees; the director of public safety, who shall hold office by virtue
of rank, and six members, who shall be elected at large by the sworn members of
the department in accordance with §
19-10 below. If there is an insufficient number of candidates to fill these
positions, the number of board members may be reduced, but not to fewer than
three trustees.
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
§ 19-8 ESTABLISHMENT OF FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE FUND.
   There is hereby established a foreign fire insurance fund to be managed and
administered by the foreign fire insurance board in accordance with §
19-11 below.
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
§ 19-9 TRANSFERS TO FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE FUND.
   Each year, the treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board shall collect
foreign fire insurance taxes in the amount prescribed in article II of this
chapter and shall deposit such taxes into the foreign fire insurance fund on or
before December 31 of such year.
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
§ 19-10 ELECTION, POWERS, DUTIES OF FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD.
   (a)   Election of foreign fire insurance board.
      (1)   The sworn members of the village public safety department shall
elect three of the six members of the foreign fire insurance board from among
themselves at an election called and organized for such purpose by the village
manager in June of each year. Members shall serve for terms of two years and
until their successors have been elected and qualified for office. Any vacancy
that may occur shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by
appointment of the director of public safety. Following the regular election in
June of each year, the members of the foreign fire insurance board shall elect
which of them will serve as chairperson, vice chairperson, treasurer and
secretary.
      (2)   All sworn members of the public safety department shall be eligible
for election, but not including paid on call firefighters. The sworn members
receiving the most votes in each election shall be elected to the foreign fire
insurance board. A member of the foreign fire insurance board shall be eligible
for reelection, but no member shall serve on the foreign fire insurance board
for more than seven consecutive years.
   (b)   Treasurer's bond. The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board
shall give a bond before entering upon the duties of his or her office, in the
sum of $50,000. The bond, the form and content of which shall be approved by
the village president, shall be conditioned on the faithful performance by the
treasurer of his or her duties and shall indemnify the village and the foreign
fire insurance fund for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of
the treasurer. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of the foreign fire
insurance fund.
   (c)   Powers and duties of board. The foreign fire insurance board shall
manage and administer the money in the foreign fire insurance fund as required
by the provisions of this article. The chairperson of the foreign fire
insurance board (or, in the chairperson's absence, the vice chairperson) shall
preside over all meetings of such board. The foreign fire insurance board shall
have the power to adopt additional rules and regulations for the management and
operation of the foreign fire insurance board and foreign fire insurance fund
not inconsistent with the provisions of this article; provided that such rules
and regulations shall be subject to review by the village attorney and approval
by the village board. In addition, the members of the foreign fire insurance
board shall have the other responsibilities set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269)
§ 19-11 MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION FUND.
   The foreign fire insurance board shall administer the foreign fire insurance
fund in accordance with the following rules and regulations.
   (a)   Fund account. All money in the foreign fire insurance fund shall be
kept in a fully insured or collateralized interest bearing account in a bank or
savings and loan located within the village, designated by village ordinance as
an approved depository of village funds, and meeting the standards of the
Public Funds Investment Act, 30 ILCS 235/0.01 et seq., for deposit of public
funds.
   (b)   Restrictions on use of fund.
      (1)   Money from the foreign fire insurance fund may be used for the
following purposes and no others:
         A.   Maintenance of existing public safety department firefighting
equipment; and
         B.   Purchase of equipment for firefighting purposes. All such
equipment shall be purchased in the name of the village public safety
department and shall become the property of the village.
      (2)   No such money shall be used for the personal benefit of any person;
for any person, use or function not directly related to the public safety
department; for food or beverages; or for any recreational or entertainment
activity.
   (c)   Designation of uses.
      (1)   List of appropriate expenditures. The foreign fire insurance board
shall develop and maintain a list of those items that the board determines to
be appropriate expenditures under § 11-10-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65
ILCS 5/11-10-2 and this article II. The foreign fire insurance board shall
update this list at least once each year no later than December 1 of each year.
The list shall be a public document.
      (2)   Annual hearing; notice. The foreign fire insurance board shall
authorize use of money from the foreign fire insurance fund by written
resolution setting forth with particularity the items on which funds may be
expended and the amounts approved for expenditure. Such resolution shall be
adopted after an annual public hearing conducted no later than December 1 of
each year, at the village hall, which public hearing shall be noticed and
conducted in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et
seq.
      (3)   Recommended uses. Not less than 30 days prior to the date of the
aforesaid public hearing, the foreign fire insurance board shall submit to the
village president and board of trustees and make available to the general
public a list of items recommended for approval and funding from the foreign
fire insurance fund.
      (4)   Necessary vote. An affirmative vote of at least a majority of the
members of the foreign fire insurance board shall be required to authorize any
use of money from the foreign fire insurance fund.
   (d)   Fund pay outs. The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board shall
pay out money from the foreign fire insurance fund only upon the written order
of the foreign fire insurance board and only for maintenance work or purchases
authorized by resolution of the foreign fire insurance board pursuant to
subsection
19-11(c) of this section. The signatures of both the treasurer and either the
chairperson or vice chairperson of the foreign fire insurance board shall be
required on any check, draft or other order drawn on the accounts of the
foreign fire insurance fund.
   (e)   Limitation on debt and expenditures. The foreign fire insurance board
shall not be permitted to incur debt or to enter into any contract or agreement
for maintenance of existing equipment or for new equipment in excess of the
unencumbered funds currently on deposit in, and authorized for expenditure
from, the foreign fire insurance fund at the time of execution of such contract
or agreement.
   (f)   Fund records; meeting minutes. The treasurer of the foreign fire
insurance board shall keep accurate and current records of the foreign fire
insurance fund and all accounts maintained thereunder, including all deposits
thereto, withdrawals and disbursements therefrom, balances and the like. The
secretary of the foreign fire insurance board shall keep accurate and current
minutes of all meetings conducted by the foreign fire insurance board,
including, but not limited to, the annual public hearing.
   (g)   Annual report. The foreign fire insurance board shall, on or before no
later than 30 days after the completion of the Village’s fiscal year, make and
file with the village clerk an annual report of the activities of the foreign
fire insurance board during the Village’s prior fiscal year, including a full
and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements made from the foreign
fire insurance fund during the village’s fiscal year ended immediately prior to
the filling of such report. The foreign fire insurance fund and all records
relating thereto shall be subject to and part of the annual audit of the
village.
(Ord. No. 2010-11-3269; Ord. No. 2020-03-3469)
CHAPTER 20: WASTE COLLECTION
Section
Article I. In General
   
20-1   Authority and application
   
20-2   Definitions
   
20-3   Compliance with chapter
   
20-4   Village waste system; franchise
   
20-5   Private collection
   
20-6   Accumulation of waste a nuisance
   
20-7   Penalty for violations
   
20-8   Duty to give notice to abate; time for compliance
   
20-9   Abatement by village
   
20-10   Reserved
Article II. Collection Services
   
20-11   Solid waste collection
   
20-12   Solid waste carts and containers
   
20-13   Recyclable materials collection
   
20-14   Recyclable materials carts and containers
   
20-15   Landscape waste collection program - preparation; food scraps
   
20-16   Landscape waste collection program - stickers and subscription service
   
20-17   Same - Parkway leaf collection
   
20-18   Special collections
   
20-19   Licensing of scavengers
   
20-20   Collection vehicles
Article III. Fees and Billing
   
20-21   Collection fees; billing; non-payment penalties
   
20-22   General collection services fee
   
20-23   Discontinuation of service
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 20-1 AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION.
   The Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1 et seq.) grants the village the
authority to abate nuisances and to enter into contracts for the collection of
garbage, refuse, and waste from residential customers. The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to all residential, commercial, and institutional
properties with the village that generate waste,
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   BIODEGRADABLE OR “KRAFT”-TYPE PAPER BAGS. Paper bags that, in the
determination of the village manager, are capable of being broken down by the
action of microorganisms.
   COMPOSTING. The biological process by which microorganisms decompose the
organic fraction of waste, producing a humus-like product that may be used as a
soil conditioner.
   CURBSIDE COLLECTION. The collection of solid waste, recyclable materials, or
landscape waste adjacent to the street pavement, alley pavement, and gutter,
and within five feet thereof.
   DESIGNATED COLLECTION DAY. The day or days of the week designated by the
village manager for regular pick-up service, yard waste pick-up service and/or
curbside recycling pick-up service.
   FRANCHISE.  A contract awarded by the village to one or more private
scavenger firms to collect solid waste, recyclable materials, and/or landscape
waste from residential dwellings and municipal sites within the village.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.  An agreement with a private scavenger firm granting an
exclusive right to collect solid waste, recyclable materials, or landscape
waste from residential dwellings and municipal sites within the village.
   FRANCHISEE. A properly licensed private scavenger firm that has been awarded
a franchise and entered into a franchise agreement with the village for the
collection, processing, and disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and/
or landscape waste from residential dwellings and municipal sites within the
village.
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. Any person or entity that is in the business of
providing landscape care and maintenance services to premises in the village.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE.  All grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and
other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines, and trees.
   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  Any attached dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, with either individual or combined collection of waste and
recyclable materials.
   MUNICIPAL SITES. Those village-owned solid waste and recyclable materials
collection locations and containers designated in a franchise agreement.
   OWNER.  Any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others, has legal
or equitable title to any building or premises, the agent of the person, or any
person having control of, residing in, or occupying any building or premises.
   PREMISES.  A lot, plot or parcel of land.
   PROJECT USE AGREEMENT.  The 1992 project use agreement by and between the
village and SWANCC, as it may be amended from time to time.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Materials designated by the village manager that
would otherwise become municipal waste, including, without limitation,
newspapers, glass, metal cans and aluminum cans, and that are placed by a
resident in a recycling container at curbside and collected by the village or
licensed scavenger in order to eventually be separated or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for new,
reused or reconstituted products. For the purpose of residential collections,
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS shall be defined as set forth in the village’s residential
collection franchise agreement.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING.  Any single-family dwelling or multiple-family
dwelling in the village.
   SERVICE QUARTER.  The period of time approximately 90 days from the date
when service bills were last calculated, resulting in four service bills
annually.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  Any detached dwelling in the village containing
only one dwelling unit, with individual collection of waste and recyclable
materials.
   SOLID WASTE.  All garbage and refuse, but not recyclable materials or
landscape waste.
   SWANCC.  The Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook County, a municipal joint-
action agency, established pursuant to an agreement dated as of April 25, 1988,
by and between the village and certain other municipalities, which receives
solid waste and recyclables from the village’s residential customers.
   TOP-OF-DRIVE.  Collection of solid waste and landscape waste from locations
adjacent to a residential dwelling, including just outside of garage door or
front entrance to a dwelling.
   VILLAGE WASTE SYSTEM.  The collection of solid waste, recyclable materials,
and landscape waste from residential dwellings and municipal sites by either
the village or its designated franchisee(s).
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-3 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to collect, haul, move, carry, conduct,
dump, dispose of or maintain any accumulation of any solid waste, recyclable
materials, or landscape waste of any kind, or any matter that is prejudicial to
health, in, along, or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, public
thoroughfares or public places or upon private property, in the village unless
the same is done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   All solid waste, recyclable materials, or landscape waste must be
regularly and properly disposed of by placing it for collection either by the
village, the village’s designated franchisee, or a locally licensed private
scavenger.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-4 VILLAGE WASTE SYSTEM; FRANCHISE.
   The village may conduct its own collection of solid waste, recyclable
materials, or landscape waste, or may, in accordance with and pursuant to the
authority set forth in Article 11, Division 19 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/11-19-1 et seq.), award a franchise and enter into an agreement with
one or more private scavenger firms for the collection, processing, and
disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and/or landscape waste from
residential dwellings and municipal sites. All residential dwellings, with the
exception of certain multiple-family dwellings exempted by the village manager,
must be served exclusively by the village waste system. Such premises are
prohibited from hiring any private scavenger service in lieu of the village
waste system unless specifically provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-5 PRIVATE COLLECTION.
   Owners of all commercial, institutional, and any multiple-family residential
properties not included in the franchise must retain the services of a
scavenger, properly licensed as required by
chapter 29 of this code, to collect, process, and dispose of solid waste,
recyclable materials, and landscape waste in full compliance with the
requirement of this chapter, at the owners’ sole cost and expense.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-6 ACCUMULATION OF WASTE A NUISANCE.
   (a)   Any dumping, depositing, disposal, or accumulation of solid waste or
landscape waste in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and in violation of this code.
   (b)   Accumulations of landscape waste may be maintained for the purpose of
composting in properly contained and enclosed areas so long as they do not
create a nuisance due to odor or dust/particulates.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-7 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any owner of any premises who permits thereon any of the conditions herein
above declared to be nuisances and prohibited is guilty of maintaining a
nuisance and of a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and penalties specified in
chapter 16 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-8 DUTY TO GIVE NOTICE TO ABATE; TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
   It is hereby made the duty of the village manager, or other person
designated by him or her to do so, to serve a notice in writing upon the owner
of any premises, upon which any nuisance or violation defined in this chapter
is being permitted or maintained, requiring him or her to abate the same within
two days.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-9 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   In all cases arising under this chapter where the owner of any premises
neglects or refuses to abate a nuisance or violation as herein defined, after
receipt of notice as required by §
20-8, the village may abate the same and the owner will be charged with all
costs and expenses which may be incurred by the village in the removal or
abatement thereof. Such costs and expenses will be a lien on the real property
from which the nuisance was removed or abated, may be collected by the village
by suit or otherwise in accordance with applicable state statutes, and will be
in addition to any fine or penalty imposed.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-10 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION SERVICES
§ 20-11 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
   (a)   All premises within the village that generate solid waste must be
serviced by either a public or private solid waste collection service at least
once a week.
   (b)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must have their solid
waste collected curbside no less than once a week. Owners of residential
dwellings services by the village waste system may elect for an additional
weekly collection, as well as top-of-drive collection.
   (c)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place solid waste
out for collection curbside on the evening before or prior to 7:00 a.m. on the
premises’ designated collection date.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-12 SOLID WASTE CARTS AND CONTAINERS.
   (a)   All solid waste placed out for collection must be bagged and placed in
closed metal or plastic cans that have handles and tight-fitting covers, and
are of sturdy, leakproof construction. In no event may solid waste be left
exposed to the elements.
   (b)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place all solid
waste in carts or containers provided by franchisee. Any solid waste that does
not fit in the franchisee-provided cart or container must be bagged and placed
next to the provided cart or container on the designated collection date.
   (c)   Premises serviced by the village waste system will receive either a
65-gallon or 95-gallon cart free of charge for the collection of solid waste.
Additional carts may be purchased from the village or franchisee at costs set
forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or the franchise agreement.
Replacement of damaged or lost containers will be made at cost to the owner in
the event it is determined that the loss or damage resulted from the actions of
the owner. Carts lost or damaged as a result of the village’s or franchisee’s
actions will be replaced free of charge.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-13 RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION.
   (a)   The village shall administer, either through its own forces or through
a franchise, a voluntary curbside recycling program for all premises serviced
by the village waste system and any other premises approved by the village
manager. Only the village and/or franchisee may collect recyclable materials
from such premises. The collection of recyclable materials in violation of this
§
20-13 herein is unlawful and will be punished as provided in §
16-1 of this code.
   (b)   The village manager shall determine which materials qualify as
recyclable materials, and will publish a list of acceptable recyclable
materials on the village website or cause the franchisee to publish the same on
its website.
   (c)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place recyclable
materials out for collection curbside on the evening before or prior to 7:00
a.m. on the premises’ designated collection date.
   (d)   Any revenue or rebates derived from the sale of recyclable materials
collected by the village or its franchisee as part of curbside recycling pick-
up service will be deposited in the village’s general fund.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-14 RECYCLABLE MATERIALS CARTS AND CONTAINERS.
   (a)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place all
recyclable materials in carts or containers provided by the village or the
franchisee. Any recyclable materials that do not fit in the provided cart or
container must be bagged and placed next to the provided cart or container on
the designated collection date.
   (b)   Premises serviced by the village waste system will receive a 95-gallon
cart free of charge for the collection of recyclable materials. Additional
carts may be purchased from the village or franchisee at a cost set forth in
the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or the franchise agreement. Replacement
of damaged or lost containers will be made at cost to the owner in the event it
is determined that the loss or damage resulted from the actions of the owner.
Carts lost or damaged as a result of the village’s or franchisee’s actions will
be replaced free of charge.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-15 LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION - PREPARATION; FOOD SCRAPS.
   (a)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place all landscape
waste in metal or plastic cans, not exceeding 32 gallons, or biodegradable or
“kraft”-type bags not exceeding 32 gallons, 50 pounds in weight, or may be
tightly tied with biodegradable string or twine, in bundles not exceeding four
feet in length and two feet in diameter. No single branch may exceed four
inches in diameter. No bundle may exceed 50 pounds in weight. All cans for
landscape waste must be clearly marked on the outside thereof by the owner of
the serviced premises. All bags, bundles, or containers with landscape waste
must be appropriately stickered for collection.
   (b)   Food scraps may be intermingled with landscape waste during designated
food scrap collection periods. The village manager will determine which
materials qualify as acceptable food scraps and will publish a list of
acceptable recyclable materials on the village website or cause the village’s
franchisee to publish the same on its website.
   (c)   Premises serviced by the village waste system must place landscape
waste out for collection curbside on the evening before or prior to 7:00 a.m.
on the premises’ designated collection date.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-16 LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION - STICKERS AND SUBSCRIPTION SERVICE.
   (a)   All bags, cans and bundles of landscape waste must display a yard
waste sticker, unless the premises has subscribed for the yard waste pick-up
service in accordance with §
20-16(b). This section does not prohibit any landscape contractor from removing
landscape waste from any premises, provided that such landscape contractor will
thereafter dispose of the landscape waste in accordance with applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
   (b)   Owners or premises services by the village waste system may purchase
packs of stickers for individual collection of bags, cans, or bundles of
landscape waste or pay an annual subscription fee for collection of landscape
waste. The prices for packs of stickers and annual subscriptions will be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or in the franchise
agreement.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-17 PARKWAY LEAF COLLECTION.
   The village or its franchisee will collect leaves deposited in cohesive
piles on the parkway in front of premises serviced by the village waste system
during the village’s annual fall leaf collection program. This collection will
be made free of charge to the owners of the premises. Owners may not deposit
leaves from their property onto the parkway corresponding to any other property
during the annual fall leaf collection program.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-18 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.
   (a)   Bulk items.  Owners of premises serviced by the village waste system
may have items too large to fit in a solid waste container collected by the
village or its franchisee. The collection of such bulk items will be charged at
a rate set forth in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or the franchise
agreement.
   (b)   White goods.  Owners of premises serviced by the village waste system
may have white goods, as defined in § 22.28 of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/22.28), collected by the village or its franchisee.
The collection of such white goods will be charged at a rate set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or the village’s franchise agreement.
   (c)   Supplemental collections. Owners of premises serviced by the village
waste system may request an additional solid waste collection by the village or
its franchisee, in addition to the premises’ designated collection day. Such
supplemental collection will be charged at a rate set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or the franchise agreement.
   (d)   Construction and demolition materials not permitted.  Owners of
premises serviced by the village waste system may not put out for collection
building materials, plaster, lumber, tree or shrubbery branches larger than
four inches in diameter or ten feet in length, tree stumps, logs, earth,
stones, concrete, or fences. For the disposal of such construction and
demolition materials, owners may hire a scavenger service licensed pursuant to
chapter 29 of the village code.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-19 LICENSING OF SCAVENGERS.
   All scavengers engaged in the business of collecting, processing, or
disposing of solid waste, recyclable materials, or landscape waste from
premises in the village must obtain a scavenger license pursuant to and in
accordance with chapter 29 of the village code. Landscaping contractors
removing landscape waste from premises to which they are providing landscaping
or gardening services, pursuant to a valid landscaper license issued in
accordance with §
22-40 of the village code, are exempted from this requirement.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-20 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   (a)   Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the director of public works,
all solid waste, recyclable materials, and landscape waste removed from any
premises within the village must be taken therefrom in vehicles of closed
construction, which must, at all times during such transportation or removal,
be covered with tarpaulin, wood or metal covers or other suitable coverings,
which will prevent dust and the loss or dropping of such materials therefrom.
No collection vehicle may be operated on a village street that leaks any fluids
from the engine or compaction mechanism.
   (b)   Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the director of public works,
no open or uncovered vehicles of any kind may be used in any event for the
removal of solid waste, recyclable materials, and landscape waste from any
premises within the village, or for the transportation thereof through, in,
upon or along any of the streets, avenues, alleys, public thoroughfares or
public places in the village.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
ARTICLE III. FEES AND BILLING
§ 20-21 COLLECTION FEES; BILLING; NON-PAYMENT PENALTIES.
   (a)   Billing. Fees for solid waste and recyclable materials collection will
be billed quarterly as soon as practical, upon completion of the service
quarter, by either the village or the franchisee. Fees for special collections
will be billed as soon as practical after the service is rendered. All fees
will be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule or in
the franchise agreement.
   (b)   Charges for service. Charges for service will only be prorated on the
first and last service charge bill as a resident moves into the village or out
of the village. Residential dwellings receiving services for a portion of the
service quarter will be subject to the full service charge for the entire
quarter. Except for first and last service charge bills, service charges will
be applied even if the residential premises does not receive service for all or
part of the service quarter.
   (c)   Responsibility for payment.
      (1)   The owner of the premises, any occupant thereof, and the user of
the service are jointly and severally liable to pay user rates charged for
collection services rendered to the premises, and the service is furnished to
the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner and occupant
of the premises, and the user of the services are jointly and severally liable
therefor to the village, or the franchisee if so designated by the village in
the franchise agreement.
      (2)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation, or entity occupying any
premises requests or obtains collection services, there shall be established an
account for the premises that will remain in effect unless and until a final
collection services bill is requested and paid, and a certified receipt of
final payment is issued from the village relating to that account. Any person,
firm, corporation or entity owning or occupying the premises will be
responsible for all fees, charges, rates, penalties, fines, obligations and
liabilities relating to that account, whether that person, firm, corporation or
entity originally opened the account or assumed the account upon the transfer
of property ownership or occupancy, and irrespective of the collection services
usage by the person, firm, corporation, or entity; provided, however, that any
person, firm, corporation, or entity who is a transferee of premises for which
an account exists shall be relieved of any obligations and liabilities with
respect to that account if the person, firm, corporation, or entity obtains a
certified receipt of final payment from the village or the franchisee relating
to that account. If more than one person, firm, corporation or entity has
occupied or owned the premises during the pendency of that account, each such
person, firm, corporation, and entity will be jointly and severally liable for
all matters and charges relating to that account.
      (3)   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that owns or occupies the
premises may seek a certified receipt of final payment by requesting a final
collection services bill, and paying all outstanding sums due on that account.
      (4)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation, or entity occupying or owning
a premises requests a final collection services bill for the premises, the
village will have the right to terminate collection services to the premises
following the issuance of a final bill for collection services for the
premises, unless the village receives a request to establish a new village
utility account for the premises.
   (d)   Payment date; penalty for late payment.  All bills rendered for user
rates in connection with collection services will be due, and must be paid,
within 30 days after they are mailed. A penalty of up to 10% will be added to
every such bill that has not been paid on or before the thirtieth day after it
was mailed.
   (e)   Payment date; final service bills.  All final bills rendered for user
rates in connection with collection services will be due, and must be paid,
within ten days after they are mailed and subject to responsibility for payment
terms noted in subsection
20-23(c) above.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-22 GENERAL COLLECTION SERVICES FEE.
   The village is authorized to charge users of the village waste system a
general collection services fee to reimburse the village for costs resulting
from village-wide collection activities, including tipping fees negotiated with
SWANCC pursuant to the project use agreement, community-wide collections,
capital and equipment costs. This fee will be in an amount set forth in the
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 20-23 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   If any fee or charge for collection services is not paid within 30 days
after the bill for such service is mailed, the village or its franchisee shall
follow the notice and enforcement procedures as set forth in
chapter 34A of this code, except that:
   (a)   Following delivery of a final notice, collection services will be
discontinued for failure to pay for service rendered. Such notice may be
combined with other notices concerning services similarly billed.
   (b)   Upon written request of the owner/occupant, the director of public
works will affirm whether or not services were indeed rendered. If services are
determined to have been rendered, the full payment, including the late payment
penalty, will be required. Services are deemed to be rendered if the resident
did not notify the village in writing that the services should be stopped.
(Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
CHAPTER 21: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Article I. Vital Statistics
   
21-1   Duty of health officer to keep records
   
21-2   Registrar
Article II. Control of Disease
Division 1. Generally
   
21-3   Duty of persons to report diseases dangerous to public health
   
21-4   Diseases transmissible to man from animals
   
21-5   Educational, etc., programs
Division 2. Communicable Diseases
   
21-6   Definitions
   
21-7   Enforcement of state law
   
21-8   Promulgation of rules and regulations
   
21-9   Investigation by health officer; isolation and quarantine generally
   
21-10   Community education programs
   
21-11   Securing material for laboratory examination
   
21-12   Isolation or restriction of carriers
   
21-13   Emergency measures
Article III. Environmental Sanitation
Division 1. Air Pollution
   
21-14   Determination of status
   
21-14.1   Definitions
   
21-14.2   Emission of dense smoke prohibited and declared nuisance
   
21-14.3   Escape of air contaminants prohibited and declared nuisance
   
21-14.4   Open burning regulations
   
21-15   Pollutants of natural origin
   
21-15.1   Penalty and abatement both applicable for violations
Division 2. Water Supply
   
21-16   Polluters; cross-connections
Division 3. Disposal of Human Excrement
   
21-17   Disposal in public sanitary sewer required; permit for exceptions;
rescission of permit
Division 4. Insects Dangerous to the Public Health
   
21-18   Prohibited generally
   
21-19   Flies
   
21-20   Mosquito breeding water - defined
   
21-21   Same - prohibited; treatment by owner or occupant of premises
   
21-22   Same - proof of mosquito breeding
Division 5. Rodents
   
21-23   Infested premises and breeding sites
Division 6. Housing
   
21-24   Prohibited when dangerous to public health
Article IV. Promotion of Public Health
   
21-25   Duty of health officer
Article V. Milk and Food
Division 1. Generally
   
21-26   Milk and milk products generally
   
21-27   Food processing and handling generally
Division 2. Food Service Establishments and Food Stores
(Ord. No. 98-19-2062)
Subdivision I. Generally
   
21-28   Adoption of retail food store sanitation code/1992; where filed
   
21-29   Adoption of 2013 food sanitation code
   
21-30   Permit required
   
21-31   Issuance of permit
   
21-32   Suspension of permit
   
21-33   Revocation of permit
   
21-34   Service of notice
   
21-35   Hearings
   
21-36   Application after revocation
   
21-37   Inspection frequency
   
21-38   Access
   
21-39   Report of inspection
   
21-40   Correction of violations
   
21-41   Examination and condemnation of food
   
21-42   Submission of plans; inspection
   
21-42A   Procedure when infection is suspected
   
21-43   Sale of food from sources outside jurisdiction of the village
   
21-44   Violations and penalties
Division 3. Food Vending Machines
   
21-45   Adoption of the vending of food and beverages/1978; where filed
Article VI. Hazardous Materials
   
21-46   Definitions
   
21-47   Discharge of hazardous materials; cleanup or abatement; liability for
costs
   
21-48   Billing responsible persons; payment to the village; appeal
Charter reference:
   As to power of village in connection with prevention of contagious diseases,
etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 5
Cross-reference:
   As to board of health generally, see §§
2-111 to
2-115
   As to diseased animals generally, see §
6-14
   As to dogs suffering with rabies, etc., see §
6-40 to
6-43
   As to employment of infectiously diseased persons in laundries, see §
12-15
   As to employment of infectiously diseased persons in dry cleaning
establishments, see §
12-8
   As to health department generally, see §§
2-103 to
2-110
   As to sanitary, etc., inspection of taxicabs, see §
32-28
   As to sanitary, etc., requirements for florists, see §
18-5
   As to sanitary regulations for barbershops, see §§
8-7 to
8-22
   As to sanitation, etc., of busses, see §
32-35
   As to sanitation generally in connection with private swimming pools, see §
9-70
   As to sanitation in connection with public garages, see §
15-16
   As to sanitation in laundries, see §
12-14
   As to sanitation of tobacco dealers' premises, see §
33-3
   As to water generally, see
ch. 36
Statutory reference:
   As to public health generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 111 ½
   As to vital statistics, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 111 ½, §§ 73-1 to 73-
29
ARTICLE I. VITAL STATISTICS
§ 21-1 DUTY OF HEALTH OFFICER TO KEEP RECORDS.
   The health officer shall collect and keep records pertaining to abortions,
miscarriages, stillbirths, births, illnesses, accidents and deaths relating to
residents of the village and he or she shall prepare such indices therefrom as
are useful in determining the health status of the village.
§ 21-2 REGISTRAR.
   The health officer shall accept appointment as a registrar as provided by
state law and shall execute the duties required by statute.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to appointment and duties of local registrars for
registration of births and deaths, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 111 ½, §§ 73-
8, 73-9
ARTICLE II. CONTROL OF DISEASE
Division 1. Generally
§ 21-3 DUTY OF PERSONS TO REPORT DISEASES DANGEROUS TO PUBLIC HEALTH.
   It shall be the duty of every physician, dentist, other practitioner,
hospital, attendant, nurse, laboratory, parent, householder, school authority
or any other person having knowledge of a known or suspected case or carrier of
communicable disease or communicable disease death or any other disease
dangerous to the public health, shall report same immediately to the health
officer.
§ 21-4 DISEASES TRANSMISSIBLE TO MAN FROM ANIMALS.
   It shall be the duty of any owner or custodian of any animals to report the
occurrence among such animals of any disease transmissible to human beings to
the health officer. The owner or custodian shall care for or dispose of such
animal as provided in the state statutes or in the rules or regulations of the
State Department of Agriculture.
§ 21-5 EDUCATIONAL, ETC., PROGRAMS.
   (a)   Whenever it may be demonstrated that morbidity or mortality or
decreased efficiency in appreciable numbers of the residents of the village is
caused by any single illness or set of circumstances, the health officer may
adopt such measures as will alert the citizens to the facts and to the actions
which may reasonably be expected to exert an effect on postponing death,
limiting the extent of morbidity and facilitating rehabilitation of persons
sustaining such illness or experiencing such circumstances.
   (b)   Within the limits of medical knowledge about the cause of such
numerically important conditions, the health officer may develop programs that
may be expected to reduce the number of residents who may ultimately sustain
such illness or be exposed to such risk.
Division 2. Communicable Diseases
§ 21-6 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall
have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   ISOLATION. The separation of a person suffering from a communicable disease,
a carrier of the infection organism or a person suspected of having such a
disease or of being a carrier, from other persons in such places and under such
conditions as will prevent the direct or indirect transmission of the
infectious agent.
   QUARANTINE. The limitation of freedom of movement of any person who has been
exposed to a communicable disease.
§ 21-7 ENFORCEMENT OF STATE LAW.
   The health officer shall enforce the statutes of the state and the rules and
regulations of the State Department of Public Health relative to the control of
communicable diseases.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to segregation and treatment of diseased persons, see Ill.
Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 23, §§ 3461 to 3464
§ 21-8 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The board of health may in its discretion provide rules and regulations for
the control of communicable diseases not otherwise provided for.
§ 21-9 INVESTIGATION BY HEALTH OFFICER; ISOLATION AND QUARANTINE GENERALLY.
   (a)   The health officer or his or her duly authorized representative shall
make such investigation as in his or her judgment may be necessary to determine
the presence or absence of any communicable disease and if any such be found or
suspected, he or she shall adopt such measures of isolation and quarantine as
are necessary for the prevention of the spread of such disease and for the
relief of the patient and other members of the household, and to these ends he
or she or his or her duly authorized representative may enter any premises
where he or she reasonably suspects the presence of any such disease.
   (b)   The health officer is authorized to isolate persons ill with
communicable diseases and carriers, established modification of isolation where
indicated, to quarantine contacts to communicable diseases during the
incubation period of such disease, to modify quarantine where indicated, and to
placard premises in which persons isolated or quarantined because of
communicable diseases are so isolated or quarantined.
   (c)   The health officer is authorized to designate the place in which
persons ill with a communicable disease shall be isolated, and may order the
removal of the patient thereto at public expense, and may designate the limits
within which contacts to communicable diseases shall be quarantined.
§ 21-10 COMMUNITY EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
   The health officer shall carry out programs of community education relating
to those illnesses for which effective artificial immunity can be induced to
the end that such a number of the inhabitants of the village will cause
themselves to be immunized as to prevent the entrance of such preventable
illness into the village or to minimize the likelihood of an epidemic.
§ 21-11 SECURING MATERIAL FOR LABORATORY EXAMINATION.
   The health officer or his or her representative shall secure material for
laboratory examination to assist in determining the diagnosis of illness or of
the existence of the carrier state in any person whenever in his or her
judgment such procedure is necessary, and any person when requested by him or
her shall provide such material or permit such material to be taken.
§ 21-12 ISOLATION OR RESTRICTION OF CARRIERS.
   The health officer or his or her representative may isolate or restrict the
movement of carriers of the infectious agents of communicable diseases until
such carriers are shown by laboratory tests to be free from the specific
organisms of the disease.
§ 21-13 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   When a communicable disease exists in or near the community to the extent
that an epidemic exists or may develop, and the health officer deems the
situation an emergency, he or she may provide that persons who cannot provide
evidence of effective immunity naturally or artificially induced against such
disease shall not be permitted to attend any school or other public gathering.
In such an emergency it shall be the duty of the health officer to immunize all
persons who are unable to employ a private physician and to expedite the
immunization of all persons through mass procedures if, in the opinion of the
health officer, such mass procedures are indicated. A person shall be deemed
unable to employ a private physician if he or she states that he or she are
unable to employ a private physician.
ARTICLE III. ENVIRONMENTAL SANITATION
Division 1. Air Pollution
§ 21-14 DETERMINATION OF STATUS.
   The health officer is hereby authorized to undertake periodic determinations
of the status of air pollution in the village as, from time to time,
authoritative standards for air pollution are determined and practical methods
for measuring such standards are devised.
§ 21-14.1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   AIR CONTAMINANTS. Smoke, soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, noxious or
obnoxious acids, fumes, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or radioactive
substances, waste, particulate, solid, liquid or gaseous matter or any other
materials discharged into the open air.
   AIR POLLUTION. The discharging from stacks, chimneys, exhausts, vents,
ducts, openings, buildings, structures, premises, open fires, portable boilers,
vehicles, processes or any other source of any air contaminants in such place,
manner or concentration as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to
the public or to endanger the health, comfort, repose, safety or welfare of the
public or in such a manner as to cause, or to have a natural tendency to cause,
injury or damage to business or property.
   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any combustible waste material containing carbon in a
free or combined state, other than liquids or gases.
   DENSE SMOKE. The smoke which has the density of No. 2 or greater as
established by the Ringelmann chart referred to and adopted by this section.
   OPEN AIR. Any air space outside of a building.
   OPEN BURNING. The act of preparing, setting, igniting or maintaining an open
fire.
   OPEN FIRE. Any fire from which air contaminants are admitted directly into
the open air without passing through a stack, chimney or appliance that has
first been approved by the department of public works.
   RINGELMANN CHART. The chart published and described in United States Bureau
of Mines Information Circular 8333, and on which are illustrated graduated
shades of white to black for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of
smoke.
   SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles resulting from incomplete combustion,
consisting predominantly of carbon and other combustible material and present
in sufficient quantity to be observable independently of the presence of other
solids.
(Ord. No. 70-1-1470, § 2; Ord. No. 70-8-1477, § 1)
§ 21-14.2 EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE PROHIBITED AND DECLARED NUISANCE.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of any
dense smoke from any source whatever, except when a firebox, furnace, boiler or
other fuel consuming device is being cleaned out and a new fire is being built
therein, in which event dense smoke may be emitted there from for a period of
not to exceed six minutes in any single period of 60 minutes. The emission of
dense smoke is declared to be a public nuisance unless falling within the
foregoing exception.
   (b)   The owner, proprietor, lessee or occupant of any building or the
person in charge of the furnace therein who causes, permits or allows dense
smoke to issue or be emitted from the smoke stack of any stationary furnace or
the chimney or smoke stack of any building in the village, contrary to the
provisions of this code, is guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 70-1-1470, § 2)
§ 21-14.3 ESCAPE OF AIR CONTAMINANTS PROHIBITED AND DECLARED NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of such
quantities of air contaminants in such place or manner as to be detrimental to
any person or to the public or to endanger the health, comfort or safety of any
such person or of the public, or in such manner as to cause, or have a tendency
to cause, injury or damage to property or business. The escape of such matter
is declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 70-1-1470, § 2)
§ 21-14.4 OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS.
   Open burning is permitted only as provided by and in strict compliance with
chapter 17, article I of this code.
(Ord. No. 89-4-1797)
§ 21-15 POLLUTANTS OF NATURAL ORIGIN.
   The health officer shall take cognizance of all authoritative technical
procedures that may be found effective in reducing the concentration of
sensitizers of natural origin that may be in the air of the village. The board
of health may, in its discretion, make rules and regulations to ensure the
elimination or control of such air pollutants of natural origin.
§ 21-15.1 PENALTY AND ABATEMENT BOTH APPLICABLE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The institution of any proceeding to impose a fine under §
1-7 shall not impair, invalidate or affect actions under the abatement
provisions of this code.
(Ord. No. 70-1-1470, § 2)
Division 2. Water Supply
§ 21-16 POLLUTERS; CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute any watercourse or
water supply in the village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a cross-connection
between the public water system of the village and other water system.
Division 3. Disposal of Human Excrement
§ 21-17 DISPOSAL IN PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED; PERMIT FOR EXCEPTIONS;
RESCISSION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Any method for the disposal of human excrement other than by
depositing in the public sanitary sewer is hereby designated as hazardous to
the public health.
   (b)   No person shall build or maintain or allow to exist on any premises
any device for the disposal of human excrement which is hazardous to the public
health except by written permission of the health officer, which permission may
be rescinded at the discretion of the health officer; provided, that such
permission shall be rescinded by the health officer whenever a public sanitary
sewer is 400 feet or less distant from any part of a premises whereon disposal
of human excrement is by a hazardous method.
Cross-reference:
   As to sewers and sewage disposal, see
ch. 11
Division 4. Insects Dangerous to the Public Health
§ 21-18 PROHIBITED GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the village to become a
breeding site for insects or to become infested with insects in such a way as
to endanger health or permit the spread of such insects to other premises.
§ 21-19 FLIES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the village to become a
breeding site for flies or to become infested with flies in such a way as to
endanger health or permit the spread of flies to other premises.
§ 21-20 MOSQUITO BREEDING WATER - DEFINED.
   MOSQUITO BREEDING WATER is defined as a collection of water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed which shall include collections of
water contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open
cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks shallow wells, barrels,
troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof
gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers.
§ 21-21 SAME - PROHIBITED; TREATMENT BY OWNER OR OCCUPANT OR PREMISES.
   (a)   No person shall have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the
village any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed
or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is treated so as
effectually to prevent such breeding.
   (b)   Any person owning or occupying any premises on which mosquitoes breed
or are likely to breed who fails or refuses to take measures necessary to
prevent the breeding of such mosquitoes within ten days after the health
officer has given notice to him or her by mail to take measures necessary to
prevent such breeding, shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 21-22 SAME - PROOF OF MOSQUITO BREEDING.
   The presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be
evidence that mosquitoes are breeding in such water.
Division 5. Rodents
§ 21-23 INFESTED PREMISES AND BREEDING SITES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any premises in the village to become a
breeding site for rodents or to become infested with rodents in such a way as
to endanger health or permit the spread of such rodents to other premises.
Division 6. Housing
§ 21-24 PROHIBITED WHEN DANGEROUS TO PUBLIC HEALTH.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to be
or remain in a condition in any way dangerous to the public health.
   (b)   Any such structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
ARTICLE IV. PROMOTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 21-25 DUTY OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   The health officer shall make known to the citizens of the village those
facts which from time to time become known concerning what individuals may do
in the way of developing habits of eating, resting, recreation, working,
thinking and feeling which will lead to the best attainable health and the
prolongation of effective years of life.
ARTICLE V. MILK AND FOOD
Division 1. Generally
§ 21-26 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS GENERALLY.
   All milk sold in the village shall be pasteurized and the production,
transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling
and sale of all milk and milk products sold for ultimate consumption within the
village, the inspection of dairies and milk plants, the issuing and revocation
of permits of milk producers and distributors shall be regulated in accordance
with the Illinois Grade A Milk Law, Milk Pasteurization Plant Law and other
relevant sections of Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 56 ½.
Cross-reference:
   As to milk and milk products dealers, etc., generally, see §
22-21
§ 21-27 FOOD PROCESSING AND HANDLING GENERALLY.
   (a)   The Illinois Pure Food Law shall serve as the minimum requirements for
the manufacture, processing, preparation, handling, labeling, storage and
dispensing of all items of food and drink sold for human consumption in this
village.
   (b)   The department of health is hereby empowered to adopt and enforce such
reasonable regulations as may be necessary which may supplement and amplify the
Illinois Pure Food Law.
Division 2. Food Service Establishments and Food Stores
(Ord. No. 98-19-2062)
Subdivision I. Generally
§ 21-28 ADOPTION OF RETAIL FOOD STORE SANITATION CODE/1992; WHERE FILED.
   The provisions of the Retail Food Store Sanitation Code/1992, Illinois
Department of Public Health, Office of Health Protection, Division of Food,
Drugs, and Dairies, (hereinafter referred to as the "Food Store Sanitation
Code") are hereby adopted, subject to the additions, deletions and/or
modifications hereinafter set forth, as part of the rules and regulations for
health and sanitation of food service establishments and food stores in the
village. A copy of the Food Store Sanitation Code shall be on file in the
office of the village clerk. The additions, deletions and/or modifications to
the Food Store Sanitation Code as applicable in the village are as follows:
 
Food Store Sanitation
Code    Addition, Deletion, Modification
Section
760.20/ Wherever the phrase “regulatory authority” appears, it shall be deemed to refer
passim  to the Village of Glencoe or its duly authorized health officer or his
        designated representative.
        Add the following definitions to this section:
        Adulterated. The condition of any food:
        a.   if it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
        quantity that may render it injurious to health.
        b.   if it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for
        which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation or is in excess of
        such tolerances if one has been established.
        c.   if it consists in whole of in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
        substance or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption.
760.20  d.   if it has been processed, prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary
        conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may
        have been rendered injurious to health.
        e.   if it is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal or animal
        which has died otherwise than by slaughter.
        f.   if its containers are composed in whole or in part of any poisonous or
        deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.
        License. The document issued by the Village of Glencoe that authorizes a person
        to operate a food establishment.
        Permit. The document issued by the Village of Glencoe that authorizes a person
        to operate a food establishment.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
§ 21-29 ADOPTION OF 2013 FOOD SANITATION CODE.
   The provisions of the 2013 Food Sanitation Code, as promulgated by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the
Food Safety and Inspection Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
(hereinafter referred to as “Food Sanitation Code”) are hereby adopted, subject
to the additions, deletions and/or modifications hereinafter set forth, as part
of the rules and regulations for health and sanitation of food service
establishments and food stores in the village. A copy of the Food Sanitation
Code shall be on file in the office of the village clerk. The additions,
deletions and/or modifications to the Food Service Sanitation Code as
applicable in the village are as follows:
 
Food Sanitation
Code    Addition, Deletion, Modification
Section
1-      Wherever the phrase “regulatory authority” appears, it shall be deemed to
201.10/ refer to the Village of Glencoe or its duly authorized health officer or his
passim  designated representative.
 
(Ord. No. 2011-16-3297; Ord. 2017-6-3414)
§ 21-30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a retail food store or food service establishment
without a valid permit to operate such retail food store or food service
establishment issued to such person by the health officer. Such permit is not
transferable. A valid permit shall be posted in every retail food store or food
service establishment.
§ 21-31 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Any person desiring to operate a retail food store or food service
establishment shall make written application for a permit to operate such
retail food store or food service establishment on forms provided by the health
officer. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant,
the location and type of the proposed retail food store or food service
establishment and the signature of each applicant.
   (b)   Before approving an application for a permit to operate a retail food
store or food service establishment, the health officer shall inspect the
proposed retail food store or food service establishment, to determine
compliance with the provisions of this division.
   (c)   The health officer shall promptly issue a permit to operate a retail
food store or food service establishment, if its inspection reveals that the
proposed retail food store or food service establishment is designed,
constructed and equipped to be operated in a manner that protects the public
health.
§ 21-32 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The health officer may, upon written notice, without prior warning,
notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a retail food store or food
service establishment if the operation of the retail food store or food service
establishment constitutes an imminent or substantial hazard to the public
health, such as an extended loss of water supply, an extended power outage or
sewage back-up into the establishment, or if such operation is not in
compliance with the requirements of this division. When such permit is
suspended, retail food store or food service establishment operations shall be
suspended immediately.
   (b)   Whenever a permit to operate a retail food store or food service
establishment is suspended, the holder of the permit to operate the retail food
store or food service establishment, or the person in charge, shall be notified
in writing that the permit to operate the retail food store or food service
establishment is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the health officer by the holder of the permit within ten days.
If a written request is filed within ten days, an opportunity for a hearing
with the health officer shall be afforded within 20 days of receipt of the
request. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days, the
suspension is sustained. The health officer shall end the suspension if the
reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
§ 21-33 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing,
revoke a permit for:
      (1)   Serious violations of this division;
      (2)   Repeated violations of this division, found in consecutive
inspections; or
      (3)   Interference with the health officer in the performance of its
duty.
   (b)   Before revocation, the health officer shall notify the holder of the
permit to operate the retail food store or food service establishment or the
person in charge, in writing, of the reasons for which such permit is subject
to revocation. The permit to operate the retail food store or food service
establishment shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of
such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the health
officer by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. If no request
for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit to
operate the retail food store or food service establishment becomes final.
§ 21-34 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of the permit to operate the retail food store or food
service establishment, or to the person in charge, or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of such permit to operate a retail food store or food
service establishment. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of
the health officer.
§ 21-35 HEARINGS.
   The hearings provided for in this division shall be conducted by the health
officer at a time and place he or she designates. Any oral testimony given at a
hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make
provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The health officer shall
make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written
report of the hearing decision, including the reason(s) for such decision,
shall be furnished to the holder of the permit to operate the retail food store
or food service establishment, or to the person in charge, by the health
officer within ten days after the hearing.
§ 21-36 APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION.
   Whenever a revocation of a permit to operate a retail food store or food
service establishment has become final, the holder of such revoked permit may
make written application for a new permit to operate a retail food store or
food service establishment as provided in §
21-31 of this division.
§ 21-37 INSPECTION FREQUENCY.
   An inspection of a retail food store or food service establishment shall be
performed at least once every six months. Additional inspections shall be
performed as often as necessary for the efficient and effective enforcement of
this division.
§ 21-38 ACCESS.
   Representatives of the health officer, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any retail food store or food service establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance
with this division. The representatives shall, upon written notice, be
permitted to examine records maintained in the retail food store or food
service establishment (or other location) to obtain information pertaining to
the source of food and supplies in the establishment when deemed necessary for
the enforcement of this division.
§ 21-39 REPORT OF INSPECTION.
   Whenever an inspection is made of a retail food store or food service
establishment, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form set
out in the food store sanitation rules or food service sanitation rules. The
inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this division and
shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional
remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated
and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the
establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all
violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the completed inspection report form
shall be given to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion
of the inspection. The completed inspection report form constitutes an official
notice of inspectional findings. It is a public document that shall be made
available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
§ 21-40 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of
time for the correction of the violations found, and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions.
   (a)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as may be created by an
extended loss of water supply, an extended power outage, or a sewage back-up
into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease affected
retail food store or food service establishment operations. Such operations
shall not be resumed until authorized by the health officer.
   (b)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected within the period of time specified by the health officer, but in any
event, not to exceed ten days following inspection. Within 15 days after the
inspection, the holder of the permit to operate the retail food store or food
service establishment shall submit a written report to the health officer
stating the action taken to correct the four- or five-point weighted
violations. Purchase orders or work contracts with a work completion date
satisfactory to the health officer may be accepted as interim corrective
action. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction of the
violations.
   (c)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
   (d)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction of the violations.
   (e)   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations
shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24
hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until
authorized to resume by the health officer.
   (f)   Failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in
revocation of the permit to operate the retail food store or food service
establishment.
   (g)   Whenever a retail food store or food store establishment is required
under the provisions of §
21-32 of this article to suspend operations, it shall not resume operations
until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to
suspend operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be
offered within a reasonable time. An opportunity for a hearing by the health
officer will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed by the
holder of the permit to operate the retail food store or food service
establishment with the health officer within ten days following suspension of
operations. If such a written request for hearing is received, a hearing shall
be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.
§ 21-41 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   (a)   (1)   Food may be examined or sampled by the health officer for the
purpose of determining compliance with this division. The health officer may
place a hold order on any food which it has reason to believe is in violation
of any section of this division and may pose a health hazard to the public,
provided:
         A.   A written notice is issued to the holder of the permit to operate
the retail food store or food service establishment, or to the person in
charge; and
         B.   The notice specifies in detail the reason(s) for the hold order.
      (2)   The health officer shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food
subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, sold,
moved from the establishment, or destroyed without permission from the health
officer.
   (b)   The health officer shall permit storage of food under conditions
specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the
public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and
accomplished.
   (c)   The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed
with the health officer within ten days, and that if no hearing is requested,
the food shall be destroyed. If a request for a hearing is received, the
hearing shall be held within 20 days after receipt of the request. On the basis
of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the
holder of the permit to operate the retail food store or food service
establishment, or the person in charge, may be directed by written order to
denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this division. If food is to be denatured or destroyed, such
action shall be taken under the supervision of the health officer.
§ 21-42 SUBMISSION OF PLANS; INSPECTION.
   (a)   Before the construction or major remodeling of a retail food store or
food service establishment, and whenever an existing structure is converted to
use as a retail food store or food service establishment, properly prepared
plans and specifications for such construction, major remodeling or conversion
shall be submitted to the health officer for review and approval. The plans and
specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical
plans, construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed
fixed equipment and facilities. The health officer shall treat such plans and
specifications as confidential or trade secret information in accordance with
law and shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of this division. No retail food store or food service
establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer.
   (b)   Whenever plans and specifications are required by this section, the
health officer shall inspect the retail food store or food service
establishment prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the
approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 21-42A PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   (a)   When the health officer has reasonable cause to suspect possible
disease transmission from any retail food store or food service establishment
employee, he or she may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee,
or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action.
   (b)   The health officer may require any or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in retail
food stores or food service establishments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the retail food store or food service
establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the health officer, no further
danger of disease outbreak exits;
      (3)   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the store or
establishment where there could be no danger of transmitting disease; and
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of
other employees, and of the body discharges of all employees.
§ 21-43 SALE OF FOOD FROM SOURCES OUTSIDE JURISDICTION OF THE VILLAGE.
   Food from food service establishments or retail food stores outside the
jurisdiction of the village may be sold within the village if such food service
establishments or retail food stores conform to the provisions of this division
or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the health officer may accept reports from
responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service
establishments or retail food stores are located.
§ 21-44 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided by §
16-1. In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from continuing such
violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate violation.
Division 3. Food Vending Machines
§ 21-45 ADOPTION OF THE VENDING OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES/1978; WHERE FILED.
   The provisions of The Vending of Food and Beverages/1978, United States
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, Food and
Drug Administration, DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 78-2091 (hereinafter referred
to as "Food Vending Machine Rules") are hereby adopted, subject to the
additions, deletions and/or modifications hereinafter set forth, as part of the
rules and regulations for health and sanitation of food and beverage vending
machines in the village. A certified copy of the Food Vending Machine Rules
shall be on file in the office of the village clerk. The additions, deletions
and/or modifications to the Food Vending Machine Rules as applicable in the
village are as follows:
Food Store Sanitation
Rules Section Addition, Deletion, Modification
Food Store Sanitation
Rules   Addition, Deletion, Modification
Section
1-102/  Wherever the phrase "regulatory authority" appears it shall be deemed to refer
(s)/    to the Village of Glencoe or its duly authorized health officer or his
passim  designated representative.
1-104   Delete this section without substitution.
        Add the following new subsection (c):
6-102      (c) The operator's permit number, of a size and style approved by the
        regulatory authority, shall be conspicuously displayed on each vending machine
        operated by him.
        Delete this section and substitute the following new section:
           6-601.Violations and penalties.
              Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall
6-601   be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
        provided by section
        16-1. In addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from continuing such
        violations. Each day upon which such a violation occurs shall constitute a
        separate violation.
6-602   Delete this section without substitution.
 
(Ord. No. 84-4-1690; 85-10-1716)
ARTICLE VI. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 21-46 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meaning described herein in this section, except where the context
could indicate a different meaning.
(Ord. No. 89-11-1804)
   COST INCURRED BY VILLAGE. All costs and expenses of the village in
connection with the cleanup or abatement of the discharge of hazardous
materials or the extinguishing of a fire involving hazardous materials and
shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following: actual
labor costs of village personnel involved in cleanup or abatement of the
discharge (including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefit and
administrative overhead); cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as solely
determined by the village; cost of materials obtained by the village; and cost
of any contract labor and materials.
   DISCHARGE. To leak, seep, spill or to otherwise release.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
public safety director or his or her authorized representatives to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property
or to the ecological balance of the environment including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiologic (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   THIRD PARTY. Any person or company or business entity, other than the
village and its officers and employees.
§ 21-47 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; CLEANUP OR ABATEMENT; LIABILITY FOR
COSTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any hazardous materials in the
village without first obtaining a permit from all appropriate federal and state
authorities as well as the director of public safety.
   (b)   The public safety department is authorized to clean up, or abate the
effects of, any hazardous material discharged upon or into any property or
facilities within the village where such discharge creates a hazard to
individuals, property or the environment. The public safety department may be
assisted in such cleanup or abatement by any other village department or any
third parties as necessary to protect against or eliminate such hazard.
   (c)   Any person who discharges or otherwise causes a discharge of hazardous
material and any person who owns or controls the hazardous material's container
at the time of discharge shall be jointly and severally liable to the village
for the payment of all costs incurred by the village as a result of such
cleanup or abatement by the village, regardless of fault.
   (d)   For purposes of this article, the person who discharges or causes the
discharge of hazardous materials, or who owns or controls the container at the
time of discharge, if an individual, shall include that individual's employer
and any related entity of the employer; of a corporation or partnership, that
person shall include any entity legally related to such corporation or
partnership.
   (e)   The authority to recover costs incurred by the village shall not
include cost for fire suppression services that are normally or customarily
provided by the public safety department unless the fire involves hazardous
materials or services not normally or customarily provided by village
departments.
   (f)   The remedies provided by this article shall be in addition to any
other remedies provided by law.
§ 21-48 BILLING RESPONSIBLE PERSONS; PAYMENT TO THE VILLAGE; APPEAL.
   (a)   The village shall, within 60 days of completion of the cleanup or
abatement of any hazardous material discharge, send an invoice for the costs
incurred by the village in connection with such discharge to the person
determined by the village to be responsible for such discharge pursuant to this
§
21-48 of this article.
   (b)   The person responsible for such hazardous material discharge shall
submit payment for the invoice to the village within 30 days of receipt of the
invoice.
   (c)   Any person determined by the village to be responsible for a hazardous
material discharge may appeal to the village manager any invoice sent pursuant
to this section by sending a written notice of appeal to the village manager
within 30 days of receipt of the invoice. The appeal shall be heard by the
village manager and his or her decision shall be final.
   (d)   The village may institute an action for the recovery of costs billed,
or take other action provided by law.
(Ord. No. 89-11-1804)
CHAPTER 21A: SEWER USE AND USER CHARGE
Section
Article I. Definitions
   
21A-1   Definitions and word usage
Article II. Sewer Use
Division 1. Use of Public Sewers Required
   
21A-2   Illegal disposal of waste
   
21A-3   Discharges into natural outlets
   
21A-4   Private sewage facilities prohibited
   
21A-5   Required connections to sanitary sewer system
   
21A-6   Storm sewers required
   
21A-7 - 21A-9   Reserved
Division 2. Private Sewage Disposal
   
21A-10   Private sewage disposal system; when permitted
   
21A-11   Same; obtaining permit
   
21A-12   Same; effective date; inspections
   
21A-13   Same; restrictions
   
21A-14   Abandoning private sewage disposal system
   
21A-15   Maintaining private sewage disposal system
   
21A-16   Relation to health requirements
Division 3. Building Sewers and Public Sewer Connections
   
21A-17   Restrictions on use of public sewers
   
21A-18   Sewer permit application
   
21A-19   Permit classes; fees
   
21A-20   Sewer permits standards
   
21A-21   Connection, installation and maintenance costs; liabilities
   
21A-22   Public sewer connections
   
21A-23   Building sewer requirements
   
21A-24   Building sewer standards
   
21A-25   Notice and inspection
   
21A-26   Excavations and deposit
   
21A-27 - 21A-29   Reserved
Division 4. Use of the Public Sewers
   
21A-30   Runoff and unpolluted discharges
   
21A-31   Prohibited discharges
   
21A-32   Restricting other discharges
   
21A-33   Permitting discharges of restricted matters
   
21A-34   Grease interceptors required
   
21A-35   Maintaining pretreatment facilities
   
21A-36   Control manholes required
   
21A-37   Testing industrial discharges
   
21A-38   Standards for testing industrial discharges
   
21A-39   Exceptions
   
21A-40   Reserved
Division 5. Protection of Waste Water Facilities From Damage
   
21A-41   Prohibited activities
   
21A-42 - 21A-44   Reserved
   
21A-45   Right to inspect
   
21A-46   Injuries during inspections
   
21A-47   Use of authorized easements
   
21A-48 - 21A-49   Reserved
Division 6. Penalties
   
21A-50   Notice of violation
   
21A-51   Fines, offenses
   
21A-52   Liability for violations
   
21A-53   Pre-termination enforcement action
   
21A-54 - 21A-60   Reserved
Article III. User Charges
Division 1. Waste Water Service Charge Computation
   
21A-61   Basis for waste water service charges
   
21A-62   Measurement of flow
   
21A-63   Waste water service rates and charges
   
21A-64   Computation of waste water service charges
   
21A-65 - 21A-69   Reserved
Division 2. General Provisions
   
21A-70   Bills; responsibility for payment
   
21A-71   Delinquent bills; discontinuance of service
   
21A-72   Reserved
   
21A-73   Reserved
   
21A-74   Revenues
   
21A-75   Accounts
   
21A-76   Notice of rates
   
21A-77   Penalty
   
21A-78   Access to village records
   
21A-79 - 21A-80   Reserved
Division 3. Effective Dates of Rates
   
21A-81   Effective date of rates
Division 4. Appeals
   
21A-82   Appeals
ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS
§ 21A-1 DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
   (a)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
      BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
      BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet outside the interface of the building
wall.
      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend
or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer that is designed and intended to receive waste
water, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
      COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments, or places involved in selling merchandise or rendering
services.
      CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for a village
representative to sample and or measure discharges.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of loans or revenue bonds
outstanding.
      DIRECTOR. The director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. The director of finance of the Village of Glencoe or
such other official who shall perform the duties and functions ordinarily
performed by the director of finance.
      DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The director of public works of the Village of
Glencoe or such other official who shall perform the duties and functions
ordinarily performed by the director of public works.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      EFFLUENT CRITERIA. As defined in applicable NPDES permit.
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 466 et seq.) as
amended, Pub. L. No. 95-217.
      FEDERAL GRANT. The United States government participation in the
financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Title
II "Grants for Construction of Treatment Works" of the federal act or
implementing regulations.
      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from waste water by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A waste water shall be considered free of FLOATABLE OIL if it is
properly treated and the waste water does not interfere with the collection
system.
      GARBAGE. Solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.
      INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      INDUSTRY. Any person whose property is serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial waste.
      INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes school, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with federal, state and local governments.
      LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for cost other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
      MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
         A.   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
         B.   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
         C.   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under § 307(A) of the Federal Act; or
         D.   Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of concentration of water or waste water
constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and waste water
analysis.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
      NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the administrator, or, where appropriate, by the director, after enactment of
the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
§ 402 of the Federal Act.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
      pH. A logarithm "base ten" of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment or stream. One population equivalent is 130
gallons of sewage per day, containing two pounds of BOD and two and four-tenths
pounds of suspended solids.
      ppm. Parts per million by weight.
      PRETREATMENT. The treatment of waste water from the sources before
introduction into the waste water treatment works.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER.
         A.   The sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village.
         B.   It shall also include sewers within or outside village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary, storm or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have
been constructed with village funds.
         C.   For purposes of this chapter, a PUBLIC SEWER is available to a
particular location when, in the opinion of the village engineer, the public
sewer is reasonably capable of accepting additional discharge from that
location in a cost-effective manner.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784; Ord. No. 88-20-1787)
      REPLACEMENT.
         A.   Expenditures or obtaining and installing equipment, accessories
or appurtenances which are necessary for the ordinary operation and maintenance
of the waste water works during the useful life of the treatment works, but not
expenditures for the improvement, extension or reconstruction of such works.
         B.   The term "operation and maintenance" includes REPLACEMENT.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
      SEWAGE. May be used interchangeably with waste water.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
      SEWER PERMIT. A written permit issued by the director of public works
that authorizes a person to connect with or open into or otherwise use, alter
or disturb a public sewer.
      SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
      SEWERAGE ACCOUNT. The principle accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times an average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
      STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the state act and for making
such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
      STORM SEWER. Sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted clean water.
      STORM WATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation, including storm,
surface and ground water, that is drained into the sewers.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
      SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge that is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in article III of this
chapter.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS).
         A.   The solids that either float on the surface of or in suspension
in water, sewage or industrial waste, in which are removable by a laboratory
filtration device.
         B.   Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual
for Laboratory Methods.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and waste water treatment facilities provided.
      USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/
or treatment works will be operated.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
      USER CLASS. The type of user, "residential," "institutional/
governmental," "commercial" or "industrial" as defined herein.
      WASTE WATER. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination of a
liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
      WASTE WATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, devices and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial waste and
transport effluent to a water course.
      WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the waste water facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in article III of this chapter and shall consist of the total of the
basic user charge, the local capital cost if applicable and a surcharge, if
applicable.
      WASTE WATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating waste water, industrial waste and sludge. It shall also mean "waste
water treatment plant" or "waste treatment plant" or "pollution control plant."
      WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
      WATER COURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs continuously or
intermittently.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe, Cook County, Illinois.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter the word SHALL is mandatory, and the word
MAY is permissible.
ARTICLE II. SEWER USE
Division 1. Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 21A-2 ILLEGAL DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 21A-3 DISCHARGES INTO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or storm sewers
within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 21A-4 PRIVATE SEWAGE FACILITIES PROHIBITED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
§ 21A-5 REQUIRED CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   The owner of any building, structure or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary (combined) sewer of the
village, may be required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and any such toilet or other sewage facilities shall be
directly connected with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do
so, provided that the public sewer is within 400 feet of the property line.
§ 21A-6 STORM SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   In addition to building sewers for the disposal of sewage, each
building shall be provided with a building sewer for the disposal of storm
water runoff which shall be connected to the public storm sewer where
available.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
   (b)   Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps for further discharge
to the storm sewer.
§§ 21A-7 - 21A-9 RESERVED.
Division 2. Private Sewage Disposal
§ 21A-10 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; WHEN PERMITTED.
   Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
21A-5, the building sanitary sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this division 2.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
§ 21A-11 SAME; OBTAINING PERMIT.
   (a)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the director of
public works. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the village which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the director of
public works.
   (b)   An inspection fee as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule shall be paid to the village at the time the application is
filed.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 21A-12 SAME; EFFECTIVE DATE; INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
director of public works.
   (b)   The applicant for the permit shall notify the director of public works
when the installation work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours
of the receipt of written notice by the director of public works.
   (c)   The director of public works shall be allowed to inspect the
installation work at any stage of construction in addition to the final
inspection.
§ 21A-13 SAME; RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 13,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
   (b)   The type, capacities, location and layout of the private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 21A-14 ABANDONING PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (a)   At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
21A-5, a direct connection of the building sanitary sewer shall be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
   (b)   Upon connection of the building sewer to the public sanitary sewer,
the private sewage disposal system shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and
filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
§ 21A-15 MAINTAINING PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, and at his or her own expense.
§ 21A-16 RELATION TO HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by any public health authority.
Division 3. Building Sewers and Public Sewer Connections
§ 21A-17 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (a)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, connect with, open into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a sewer permit from the director of public works.
   (b)   No person shall dispose of or discharge any matter into a public sewer
unless such disposed or discharged matter complies with federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state, regional,
county, sanitary district or village standards.
§ 21A-18 SEWER PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   A person may apply for a sewer permit by obtaining an application from
the director of public works.
   (b)   The director of public works may require an applicant to supplement
the permit application with any plans, specification or other information
considered pertinent by the director.
§ 21A-19 PERMIT CLASSES; FEES.
   (a)   Sewer permits shall either be Class A (for residential waste water
service) or Class B (for commercial, institution/governmental or industrial
waste water service) or Class C (for storm sewer service).
   (b)   The inspection and sewer permit fee for a Class A permit shall be set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. The inspection and
sewer permit fee for a Class B or Class C permit shall be set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Such fee shall be paid to the
village at the time the application is filed.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (c)   As a condition for a Class B permit for commercial and industrial
waste water service, the applicant must provide information describing its
waste water constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
§ 21A-20 SEWER PERMITS STANDARDS.
   A sewer permit will only be issued and a connection to a public sanitary
sewer shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream waste
water works, including sewers, pump stations and waste water treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
§ 21A-21 CONNECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS; LIABILITIES.
   (a)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by owner of the premises.
   (b)   The owner shall indemnify the village from and against any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
connection of the building sewer. The village may require the owner to purchase
insurance or provide a bond as additional protection against damages.
§ 21A-22 PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   The connection of the building sewer into a public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of this article, the building and plumbing code, and other
applicable rules and regulations of the village. All such connections shall be
made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the director of public works before
connection.
   (b)   No person shall connect roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains,
yard or patio area drains or other sources of surface run-off or ground water
to a building sewer or building drain if the sewer or building drain is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 21A-23 BUILDING SEWER REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Each building shall have separate, independent building sewers for
disposal of sewage and, where a public storm sewer is available, for disposal
of storm runoff.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
   (b)   An existing building sewer may be used in connection with a new
building only when the director of public works determines that the building
sewer meets all requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection
21A-23(a), where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot
and no public or private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 21A-24 BUILDING SEWER STANDARDS.
   (a)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice Number 9 and Standards Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
   (b)   All new buildings with occupancy areas below ground level shall have
overhead plumbing. In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with
§
21A-17(b), and discharged to the building sanitary sewer.
(Ord. No. 88-17-1784)
§ 21A-25 NOTICE AND INSPECTION.
   The applicant for a sewer permit shall notify the director of public works
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director of
public works or his or her representative.
§ 21A-26 EXCAVATIONS AND DEPOSIT.
   (a)   All excavations for building sewer installation or connection shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in manner satisfactory to the village.
   (b)   At the time of issuance of a sewer permit or at any time there after,
the village may require a sewer permit applicant to deposit with the village
such amounts equal to the estimated cost of restoration of the public property
to be disturbed. Upon satisfactory completion of such restoration of public
property, the village shall return such deposited amounts to the applicant.
   (c)   Any street opening necessary or incidental to excavation shall be in
accordance with the provisions of §§
30-28 through
30-39 of this code.
§§ 21A-27 - 21A-29 RESERVED.
Division 4. Use of the Public Sewers
§ 21A-30 RUNOFF AND UNPOLLUTED DISCHARGES.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (b)   Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the director of public works. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the director of
public works, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 21A-31 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (a)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (b)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (c)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; or
   (d)   Solid viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper
dishes, cups, milk containers or any other thing which is not properly shredded
garbage.
§ 21A-32 RESTRICTING OTHER DISCHARGES.
   (a)   Except as may be permitted in §
21A-33, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director
of public works or public health authority that such wastes can harm the sewers
or waste water facilities, can have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or constitute a nuisance.
   (b)   In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of certain
wastes, the director of public works or public health authority will consider
such factors as the quantities of such wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the waste water facilities, degree of
treatability of wastes in the waste water facilities, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies.
   (c)   (1)   Pursuant to subsection
21A-32(a), and by the publication in pamphlet form of this ordinance, the
village hereby publishes the following list of those substances that shall not
be discharged in the village:
         A.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F
(65°C);
         B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0°
to 65°C);
         C.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
         D.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution (whether neutralized or not);
         E.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the director of public works for such materials;
         F.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols, or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits established by the
director of public works or any state, federal or other public agencies having
jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters.
         G.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by director of public works in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         H.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;
         I.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/
l except as permitted by director of public works in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
         J.   Any cyanide except as permitted by the director of public works
in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
         K.   Materials which exert or cause:
            1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
            2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
            3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
            4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs as defined herein.
         L.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
      (2)   The foregoing list is not all-inclusive, and the director of public
works may publish new supplements to such list.
§ 21A-33 PERMITTING DISCHARGES OF RESTRICTED MATTERS.
   (a)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
21A-32, or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
40 C.F.R. § 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in the
judgment of the director of public works or public health authority may have a
deleterious effect upon the waste water facilities, or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
director of public works may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of this chapter.
   (b)   If the director of public works permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of public
works, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws.
§ 21A-34 GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by and at the expense of
a property owner when, in the opinion of the director of public works, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters
or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
director of public works, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 21A-35 MAINTAINING PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
§ 21A-36 CONTROL MANHOLES REQUIRED.
   (a)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole. Such
manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the director of public works. The manhole
shall be installed and maintained by the industry at its own expense so as to
be safe and accessible at all times. The director of public works may require
other property owners to install control manholes.
   (b)   When required by the director of public works, an industry or other
property owner shall also install such necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes.
§ 21A-37 TESTING INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   (a)   An industry shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses
of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (b)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
waste water discharge to assure compliance with the federal, state and local
standards. The industry shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as prescribed by the
village. The industry shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and
reporting required by the village.
   (c)   The village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for
analysis by an outside laboratory service at such times as it deems necessary.
The industry shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reports
conducted pursuant to this subsection.
§ 21A-38 STANDARDS FOR TESTING INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.
§ 21A-39 EXCEPTIONS.
   No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industry whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
village for treatment, subject to payment by the industry of user charges in
accordance with article III of this chapter, provided such payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge systems.
§ 21A-40 RESERVED.
Division 5. Protection of Waste Water Facilities from Damage
§ 21A-41 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the waste water facilities. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
§§ 21A-42 - 21A-44 RESERVED.
§ 21A-45 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   (a)   (1)   The owner of any building, structure or property that has
connected such building, structure or property to a public sewer shall grant
the director of public works and any other duly authorized representative of
the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Environmental Agency, bearing proper credential and identification, permission
to enter upon the owner's property for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing to determine whether such connection to the
public sewer is in accordance with village standards. Where no permission has
been granted to enter or inspect any property, no entry or inspection shall be
made without the procurement of a warrant from the Circuit Court of Cook
County. The court may consider any of the following factors along with such
other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a warrant
shall issue:
         A.   Eyewitness account of violation;
         B.   Citizen complaints;
         C.   Tenant complaints;
         D.   Plain view violations;
         E.   Violations apparent from village records;
         F.   Property deterioration;
         G.   Age of property;
         H.   Nature of alleged violation;
         I.   Similar properties in the area;
         J.   Documented violations of similar properties in the area;
         K.   Passage of time since last inspection; and
         L.   Previous violations on the property.
      (2)   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light
of reasonable legislative and administrative standards that show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of the village code.
   (b)   The director of public works or his or her representative shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
(Ord. No. 91-7-1848)
§ 21A-46 INJURIES DURING INSPECTIONS.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
21A-45, the director of public works or duly authorized representatives of the
village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the owner of such premises and the owner shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the director or such representatives and
the village shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands
for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operating, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of owner to maintain conditions as required in division
4.
§ 21A-47 USE OF AUTHORIZED EASEMENTS.
   The director of public works and other duly authorized representatives in
the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the
easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§§ 21A-48 - 21A-49 RESERVED.
Division 6. Penalties
§ 21A-50 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (a)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
division 5, shall be served by the village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
   (b)   If any violation continues after the expiration of the time period set
forth in the notice provided under subsection
21A-50(a) hereof, village may terminate both the water and sanitary sewer
service to the offender's premises following a pre-termination enforcement
action in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
21A-53.
(Ord. No. 91-7-1848)
§ 21A-51 FINES, OFFENSES.
   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in §
21A-50, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be
fined in the amount as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 21A-52 LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village by reasons of such violations.
§ 21A-53 PRE-TERMINATION ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (a)   Prior to the termination of both water and sanitary sewer service to
any premises for failing to comply with a written notice of violation issued
pursuant to §
21A-50, the village shall conduct an enforcement action in substantial
conformity with the procedures in this section. The failure of the village to
follow the procedures in this section, however, shall not constitute a waiver
of its rights to proceed under administrative regulations or provisions of the
village or other provisions of this chapter, this code, or any applicable state
statutes, or of its rights to institute judicial proceedings to seek any
appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   If, on or after the date that all violations were to have ceased
pursuant to the notice issued under §
21A-50, the director of public works determines that the property owner has not
demonstrated to the village that all violations of this chapter have been
corrected, the director shall issue an order to show cause for such
noncompliance. A notice of a show cause hearing shall accompany the order
setting a date for the show cause hearing. Such notice shall specify the time
and place where the show cause hearing will be held and shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail at least seven days prior to the
show cause hearing. The director of public works shall designate a hearing
officer to conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence provided for in
this section, and transmit a report of the evidence of the hearing, together
with a written determination regarding compliance, to the director of public
works for action thereon.
   (c)   The show cause hearing shall be informal and designed to obtain all
information and evidence relevant to any sewer violations and the correction of
such violations. After hearing all relevant information and evidence presented
at the show cause hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings of
act and a written determination and shall send a copy of the finding and
determination to the property owner via certified mail, return receipt. The
written determination shall state either that the premises are in compliance or
that the property owner must correct the noncompliance and submit to a
reinspection to confirm compliance within a specified period not exceeding 60
days after the date the written determination is sent to the property owner.
   (d)   If a property owner fails to attend a show cause hearing or fails to
correct any noncompliance within the time provided in the hearing officer's
written determination, then the director of public works may terminate both the
water and sanitary sewer service to the owner's property or take any other
appropriate action to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (e)   The initiation of a pre-termination enforcement action under this
section shall not preclude the village from asserting any other right or remedy
it may have under law to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (f)   If any provisions of this section are declared unconstitutional or
invalid by the final decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions of this section shall continue in effect.
(Ord. No. 91-7-1848)
§§ 21A-54 - 21A-60 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. USER CHARGES
Division 1. Waste Water Service Charge Computation
§ 21A-61 BASIS FOR WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (a)   Generally. The waste water service charge for the use of and for
service supplied by the waste water facilities of the village shall consist of:
      (1)   A basic user charge rate (OM&R) to pay the cost of operation,
maintenance and replacement of the system;
      (2)   A debt service charge, if applicable, to pay the amount required
annually for interest, principal and coverage of any revenue bonds or loans
outstanding; and
      (3)   A surcharge, if applicable.
   (b)   The basic user charge (OM&R).
      (1)   Shall include both a fixed charge based on the size of the water
meter installed on the premises as well as a volumetric charge based on water
usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the
following normal concentrations:
         A.   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) of 200 mg/l;
and
         B.   A suspended solids (SS) content of 240 mg/l.
      (2)   The volumetric portion of the basic user charge shall be computed
by multiplying the water and/or waste water usage per billing period by a waste
water user rate which is developed as follows:
         A.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the waste water facilities including replacement costs;
         B.   Estimate the projected annual billable water and/or waste water
volume from past meter reading records; and
         C.   Compute the user rate by dividing the annual operation,
maintenance and replacement costs by the annual billable water volume.
   (c)   Debt service charge. The debt service charge, if applicable, shall
consist of the average annual amount required to pay interest, principal and
coverage of revenue bonds or loans outstanding and shall be determined by:
      (1)   Dividing such average annual amount by the number of users
connected to the system and pro-rated to each user each quarterly billing
period;
      (2)   By dividing such average annual amount by the number of gallons
billed in the preceding year to determine a unit rate per 1,000 gallons; or
      (3)   By a combination of subsections
21A-61(c)(1) and (2) above to provide the required annual amount for debt
service.
   (d)   Surcharge. A surcharge, in addition to the above mentioned charges,
may be levied upon users by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago in accordance with its regulations and ordinances.
      (1)   The adequacy of the waste water service charge shall be reviewed
annually and shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service
or a change in operation and maintenance costs including replacement costs.
      (2)   The users of waste water treatment services will be notified
annually in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of
the user charges that are attributable operation, maintenance and replacement
of the system and that part attributable to debt service.
(Ord. No. 2018-05-3436; Ord. No. 2020-30-3496)
§ 21A-62 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (a)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be either:
      (1)   Metered waste water volume read to the nearest increment of 1,000
gallons during each billing period; or
      (2)   Metered water consumption read to the nearest increment of 1,000
gallons during the most recent billing period.
(Ord. No. 08-04-3215; Ord. No. 2020-30-3496)
   (b)   If the person discharging sewage into the public sewers procures part
or all of his or her water from sources other than the public water system, the
person shall install and maintain at his or her expense water meters of a type
approved by the director of public works for the purpose of determining the
volume of water obtained from these other sources.
   (c)   Devices for measuring the volume of sewage discharged may be required
by the director of public works if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined
from the metered water consumption records.
   (d)   Metering devices for determining the volumes of sewage shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person discharging such sewage.
Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless
service is cancelled, without the consent of the director of public works.
§ 21A-63 WASTE WATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   There shall be and there are hereby established rates for the use of and
service supplied by the sewerage system of the Village of Glencoe as follows.
   (a)   Basic user rate (OM&R). A basic user rate (OM&R) which may consist of
both a fixed and volumetric consumption based component as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule is hereby established. The
minimum basic user rate of the Village of Glencoe to be billed during each
three-month period shall be set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2011-02-3283; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2018-05-3436)
   (b)   Debt service charge. Reserved.
   (c)   Surcharge rates and charges. The rate of surcharge for BOD5 and
suspended solids shall be determined by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago, if applicable.
(Ord. No. 2011-02-3283; Ord. No. 2012-03-3304)
§ 21A-64 COMPUTATION OF WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The following is the procedure for calculating waste water service charges
for users located within the corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 96-20-2016; Ord. No. 2008-19-3230)
   (a)   Metered users. The waste water service charge for metered users shall
be computed using the following formula:
 
WC = V (OM&R) + DSC + V (DSR) + S
Where WC = Amount of waste water service charge in dollars per billing period
V        = The volume of flow expressed in thousand gallons as described in §
           21A-62(a)
(OM&R)   = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement costs in
           dollars per thousand gallons.
DSC      = Debt Service Charge for the fixed charge applicable to payment of
           debt service in dollars per billing period, if applicable
           Remaining debt service rate in dollars per billing period for the
           remainder of debt service cost (after deducting revenues received
DSR      = from the debt service charge), such remainder of debt service
           requirements will be divided by total billable flow to compute the
           rate per 1,000 gallons, if applicable
           Amount of waste water surcharge in dollars as computed by the
S        = Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, if
           applicable
 
   (b)   Non-metered users.
      (1)   All non-metered users of the waste water facilities within the
corporate limits shall pay a minimum flat rate charge as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule which shall allow the use of
10,000 gallons per quarter.
(Ord. No. 08-04-3215; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
      (2)   In the event use of the waste water facilities is determined by the
director of public works to be in excess of 10,000 gallons per quarter, the
director may require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the
water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
   (c)   Multiple unit users. Where more than one residential and/or commercial
unit is located on the same premises as the user or being served through the
same water meter or sewer connection as such user, there shall be imposed on
such user an additional debt service charge for each such additional unit
provided with sewer service and served by the single connection. The additional
debt service charge, if applicable, for each unit shall be added to the bill
computed in the manner as hereinabove set forth.
   (d)   Golf courses.
      (1)   Golf courses with separate meters for irrigation shall not be
considered a basic user of the village’s sewer service, and therefore, will not
be charged a waste water service charge.
      (2)   In the event the director of public works determines golf courses
are utilizing waste water service, the director may require installation of
metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of
service supplied or base usage on actual water consumption on that meter.
(Ord. No. 2008-19-3230; Ord. No. 2020-30-3496)
§§ 21A-65 - 21A-69 RESERVED.
Division 2. General Provisions
§ 21A-70 BILLS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (a)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable quarterly or such other
period for which bills may be rendered. The owner of the premises, the occupant
thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the
premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises,
occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to
the village.
   (b)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the director of finance
during the quarter or other such period succeeding the period for which the
service is billed.
   (c)   All sewer bills are due and payable 30 days after being sent out. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the thirtieth day after
they have been rendered.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
   (d)   (1)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity occupying any
premises requests or obtains waste water service from the village there shall
be established a waste water account for such premises that shall remain in
effect unless and until a final waste water service bill is requested and paid,
and a certified receipt of final payment is issued from the village relating to
such account. Any person, firm, corporation or entity owning or occupying the
premises shall be responsible for all fees, charges, rates, penalties, fines,
obligations and liabilities relating to such account, whether such person,
firm, corporation or entity originally opened such account or assumed such
account upon the transfer of property ownership or occupancy and irrespective
of the usage of the waste water system by such person, firm, corporation or
entity; provided, however, that any person, firm, corporation or entity who is
a transferee of premises for which an account exists shall be relieved of any
obligations and liabilities with respect to such account if such person, firm,
corporation or entity obtains a certified receipt of final payment from the
village relating to such account. If more than one person, firm, corporation or
entity has occupied or owned the premises during the pendency of such account,
each such person, firm, corporation and entity shall be jointly and severally
liable for all matters and charges relating to such account.
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity that owns or occupies the
premises may seek a certified receipt of final payment by requesting a final
waste water service bill and paying all outstanding sums due on such account.
      (3)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity occupying or owning
a premises requests a final waste water service bill for such premises, the
village shall have the right to terminate water service to such premises
following the issuance of a final bill for waste water services for such
premises, unless the village receives a request to establish a new waste water
account for such premises. If water service is terminated before any request
for a new waste water account is received, the applicable re-connection fee or
charge must be paid to the village before water service to such premises will
be re-activated. Unless the director of public works determines that a premises
is authorized to be served by a sewerage system other than the village's waste
water system, any request for a water account from the village will also be
deemed a request for a waste water account from the village.
(Ord. No. 2003-15-3085)
§ 21A-71 DELINQUENT BILLS; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, the village shall follow the notice
and enforcement procedures as set forth in
chapter 34A of this code, except that:
   (a)   Following delivery of a final notice, both the water and sanitary
sewer service to the premises shall be discontinued for failure to pay services
rendered. Such notice can be combined with other notices concerning services
similarly billed; and
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
   (b)   Upon written request of the owner/occupant, the director of public
works will affirm whether or not services were indeed rendered. If the services
are determined to have been rendered, then full payment, including the late
payment penalty will be required. Services are deemed to be rendered if the
resident did not notify the village in writing that the services should be
stopped even if the service was not utilized by the owner/occupant.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
§ 21A-72 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
§ 21A-73 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
§ 21A-74 REVENUES.
   (a)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewage
system shall be credited to the sewerage account of the general fund. All such
revenues and monies shall be held by the director of finance and adequate
records shall be maintained to account for such revenues and monies. All of the
sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the director of
finance not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the president and
board of trustees of the village.
   (b)   The director of finance shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the general fund designated as the sewerage account. The
director shall administer such account in every respect in the manner provided
by statute.
§ 21A-75 ACCOUNTS.
   (a)   The director of finance shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (b)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the waste
water facilities, including replacement costs, to indicate the sewer service
charges under this article. In this regard, the financial information to be
shown in the audit report shall include the following:
      (1)   Billing data to show total number of units billed per fiscal year;
      (2)   Debt service, if applicable, for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (3)   Number of users connected to the system;
      (4)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (5)   A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
§ 21A-76 NOTICE OF RATES.
   Each user will be notified by the village in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges or ad valorem taxes
which are attributable to waste water treatment services, including the
financial information of §
21A-75(b).
§ 21A-77 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense. Each day
that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
§ 21A-78 ACCESS TO VILLAGE RECORDS.
   The administrator or his or her authorized representative shall have access
to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable
to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the
terms of the federal regulations and conditions of the federal grant.
§§ 21A-79 - 21A-80 RESERVED.
Division 3. Effective Date of Rates
§ 21A-81 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.
   The rates and charges established for user charges in this article shall be
effective commencing on the first day of the next fiscal year as defined in
Section 1-12 of this Code, and on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding
quarter that commences on the first day of the next fiscal year for quarterly
users.
(Ord. No. 2020-03-3469)
Division 4. Appeals
§ 21A-82 APPEALS.
   (a)   The method of computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in this article shall be made available to a user within ten
working days or receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over
the method used or in the computations thereof shall be resolved by the village
manager or such person designated by the village manager within ten working
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
   (b)   Appeals taken pursuant to this section shall not limit any civil
remedy available to the person requesting the appeal.
CHAPTER 22: LICENSES AND PERMITS GENERALLY
Section
Article I. In General
   
22-1   Issuing officer and forms; additional fees; exemptions
   
22-2   Applications
   
22-3   Investigation of applicant, etc.
   
22-4   Issuance of certain permits where applicant indebted to village
   
22-5   Bonds
   
22-6   Time of payment of fee
   
22-7   Rebate of fee
   
22-8   Term; proration
   
22-9   Notice of termination
   
22-10   Transferability, etc.
   
22-11   Change of location
   
22-12   Posting
   
22-13   Records to be kept
   
22-14   Ordinances, etc., to be obeyed
   
22-15   Condition of premises
   
22-16   Revocation
   
22-17   Frontage consents
Article II. Certain Specific Businesses
   
22-18   Bakeries
   
22-19   Grocery stores
   
22-20   Ice cream parlors
   
22-21   Milk and milk products dealers, etc.
   
22-22   Restaurants
   
22-23   Vending machines
   
22-24   Coin-operated devices and video games
   
22-25   Operation of public elevator
   
22-26   Valet parking
   
22-27   Consumption of alcoholic beverages brought from off premises prohibited
   22-28 - 22-29   Reserved
Article III. General Business Licenses
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
   
22-30   License - required
   
22-31   Same - fee
   
22-32   Designated businesses, retail establishments, occupations and
activities
   
22-33   Severance clause
   
22-34   Consumption of alcoholic beverages brought from off premises prohibited
Article IV. Group Home Registration
(Ord. No. 90-2-1811)
   
22-35   Definition of "group home"
   
22-36   Registration required
   
22-37   Minimum distance requirements
Article V. Landscape and Lawn Care Professionals
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190)
   
22-38   Definitions
   
22-39   Licenses required
   
22-40   Landscaper license
   
22-41   Applications
   
22-42   Landscaper regulations
   
22-43   Enforcement; fines; revocation of licenses
Article VI. Raffles
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
   
22-44   Adoption; purpose
   
22-45   Definitions
   
22-46   General conduct of raffles
   
22-47   Records and reports
   
22-48   Raffle Manager
   
22-49   License required
   
22-50   License application
   
22-51   Persons eligible for license
   
22-52   License issuance
   
22-53   License location limitations
   
22-54   License suspension and revocation
   
22-55   Penalty
   
22-56   Gambling prohibition
Cross-reference:
   As to auctioneers' license, see §§
7-1 to
7-6
   As to barbershop license, see §§
8-4 to
8-6
   As to barbershop permit, see §§
8-2,
8-3
   As to billiard and pool licenses, see §§
5-15,
5-16
   As to bowling alley licenses, see §§
5-21,
5-22
   As to building permits, see §§
9-9 to
9-17
   As to bus licenses, see §§
32-32 to
32-34
   As to dog licenses, see §§
6-20
   As to drain layers' and sewer builders' licenses, see §§
11-1 to
11-3
   As to draymen, carters and expressmen's licenses, see §§
32-38 to
32-40
   As to driveway construction, etc., permit, see §
30-17
   As to dry cleaning outlet license fee, see §
12-9
   As to filling station licenses, see §§
15-2 to
15-4
   As to florists' licenses, see §§
18-2 to
18-4
   As to itinerant merchants' licenses, see §
25-7
   As to laundry licenses, see §§
12-10 to
12-12
   As to license to operate motion picture projector, see §§
5-25 to
5-27
   As to licenses for distribution of advertising matter, see §
3-5
   As to licenses for dry cleaning establishments, see §§
12-1 to
12-4
   As to licenses for public amusements, see §§
5-1 to
5-3
   As to licenses for public dance halls, see §§
5-36,
5-37
   As to parking cutout construction permit, see §§
30-42 to
30-46
   As to permit for construction of private swimming pools, see §§
9-68,
9-69
   As to permit to use mechanical power driven excavating, etc., equipment, see
§§
30-33 to
30-35
   As to permits for food service establishments and food stores, see §§
21-30 to
21-33
   As to permits for moving buildings, see §§
9-58 to
9-60
   As to public garage licenses, see §§
15-10 to
15-13
   As to registration of bicycles, see §§
23-32 to
23-39
   As to scavenger's license, see §§
29-1 to
29-3
   As to secondhand stores' licenses, see §§
25-14,
25-15
   As to sidewalk construction permit, see §§
30-11,
30-12
   As to solicitors, secondhand stores' and itinerant merchants' licenses, see
§§
25-2 to
25-4
   As to street excavation and tunneling permit, see §§
30-29 to
30-31
   As to suspension of business license in connection with dangerous buildings,
see §
9-56
   As to taxicab driver's licenses, see §§
32-11 to
32-15
   As to taxicab licenses, see §§
32-1 to
32-4
   As to tobacco dealers' licenses, see §§
33-1,
33-2
   As to undertakers' licenses, see §§
35-1 to
35-5
   As to village vehicle licenses, see §§
23-65 to
23-70
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 22-1 ISSUING OFFICER AND FORMS; ADDITIONAL FEES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   In all cases where a license or a permit is required by this code or
other village ordinance, such license or permit shall be issued by the village
manager, and shall be attested by the village clerk, except where provision is
expressly made to the contrary. Forms for licenses and permits shall be
prescribed by and provided by the village manager.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
   (b)   Notwithstanding any code provision to the contrary, the fee for any
license or permit applied for after the date required by this code or other
village ordinances for obtaining such license or permit shall be equal to 150%
of the fee otherwise prescribed in this code or other village ordinance.
   (c)   The license and permit requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
any person, business, retail establishment, occupation or activity to the
extent that the village is precluded or preempted by state law from exercising
the licensing and permit power set forth in this chapter over such person,
business, retail establishment, occupation or activity. The burden of raising
an exemption as provided in this chapter shall be on the person claiming to be
exempt or claiming to be conducting an exempted business, retail establishment,
occupation or activity. This subsection
22-1(c) shall not be construed to limit the authority of the village to perform
any of its necessary or ordinary regulatory functions.
§ 22-2 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for all licenses and permits shall be made in writing on forms
to be provided by the manager, and shall be submitted to the village manager
unless express provision to the contrary is made. A new application shall be
made upon the expiration of any license which it is sought to renew.
(1929 Code, § 247)
§ 22-3 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT, ETC.
   In case the provisions of this code or other village ordinances require an
investigation into the character of any applicant or into the premises to be
used, the village manager shall cause such investigation to be made, except
where it is otherwise expressly provided. The officer or employee making any
such investigation shall return a report as soon as possible, giving the
results of investigation. No license or permit shall be issued unless the
village manager is satisfied that all the requirements of this code and other
ordinances of the village have been complied with.
(1929 Code, § 248)
§ 22-4 ISSUANCE OF CERTAIN PERMITS WHERE APPLICANT INDEBTED TO VILLAGE.
   No permits shall be issued by the village or any of its officers or
employees for the construction, alteration, repair, removal or placing of any
building or structure, nor for the installation of any sewer or water pipe,
upon or for the use of any premises upon which there shall exist any unpaid
forfeited taxes or special assessment, and it shall be incumbent upon the
applicant for the issuance of any such permit to duly satisfy the village
manager, by filing a proper certificate therefor, or otherwise, that any such
property or premises, for, upon or relating to which any such permit is
required or requested, is then fully and completely free from any such
forfeited taxes or special assessment.
(1929 Code, § 249)
§ 22-5 BONDS.
   In case a bond is required by any provision of this code or other village
ordinance for the issuance of any license or permit, such bond shall be filed,
and the surety thereon approved by the village manager, before the license or
permit is issued.
(1929 Code, § 250)
§ 22-6 TIME OF PAYMENT OF FEE.
   The fees required for licenses and permits shall be paid at the time that
application for the same is first made.
(1929 Code, § 251)
§ 22-7 REBATE OF FEE.
   In no event shall any rebate or refund made of any license fee or part
thereof, by reason of the death of the licensee or by reason of non-use of the
license, or by reason of a change of location or occupation of any such
licensee.
(1929 Code, § 252)
§ 22-8 TERM; PRORATION.
   All licenses or permits, except building permits, shall expire at the
termination of the fiscal year during which they were issued, unless such
licenses or permits are issued for a period of time less than a year. In case
application for any license is made after the expiration of six months of the
current fiscal year, the license shall be issued upon the payment of one-half
the annual fee, except as otherwise expressly provided.
(1929 Code, § 253)
§ 22-9 NOTICE OF TERMINATION.
   If a license extends beyond one month, it shall be the duty of the village
manager from ten to 20 days prior to the termination of the license period to
cause a written notice to be mailed to each licensee, directing the attention
of such licensee to the fact that a new license will be required on the day
following the expiration of his or her existing license and directing his or
her attention also to the amount of the license fee and to the penalty for
failure to procure a license in accordance with the provisions of this code and
other ordinances of the village governing the issuance of such license;
provided, however, that failure on the part of the village manager to cause
such notice to be mailed to each licensee shall not be deemed a defense to a
suit brought by the village to recover the penalty for a violation of the
provision of this code or other ordinance under which the license is required
to be secured.
(1929 Code, § 254)
§ 22-10 TRANSFERABILITY, ETC.
   No license granted under this code or other ordinances of the village shall
be assigned or transferred except as hereinafter provided, nor shall any such
license authorize any person to do business or act under it but the person
named therein. Any person to whom any license shall have been issued, may, with
the permission of the village manager, assign and transfer the same to any
other person, and the person to whom such license is issued or the assignee of
such license may have a new license issued for the unexpired term of the old
license authorizing the assignee or transferee of such license to carry on the
same business or occupation at such place as may be named in such new license;
provided, that nothing herein contained shall be held to authorize the
assignment or transfer of auctioneer's licenses, all amusement licenses,
peddlers', retail beverage dealers', junk dealers', secondhand stores',
scavengers' or outdoor advertisers' licenses. Such licenses shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable.
(1929 Code, § 255)
§ 22-11 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   If any person licensed by the village to carry on, engage in or conduct any
business or occupation required to be licensed by this code or other ordinances
of the village, having designated in his or her license a particular place in
which business so licensed is to be carried on, engaged in or conducted shall,
before the expiration or such license, change the location of such place of
business, he or she shall forthwith notify the village manager of such fact,
and no business shall be carried on, engaged in or conducted under the
authority of such license at such new location until notice of such change has
been given.
(1929 Code, § 256)
§ 22-12 POSTING.
   Every license granted for the purpose of conducting any business or
occupation required by this code or other ordinances of the village to be
licensed, and having designated therein the particular room, store, office or
place in which such business so licensed is to be conducted, shall be posted at
all times in a conspicuous place, so that the same may easily be seen, upon the
wall of the principal room or office of the store or place in which such
licensed business or occupation is carried on. When such license shall have
expired, it shall be removed from such place in which it has been posted and no
license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
upon the wall or upon any part of any room, store, office or place of business
after the period of such license has expired.
(1929 Code, § 257)
§ 22-13 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   The village manager shall cause to be kept a record showing every license
and every permit issued, showing the amount of fee paid and the purpose and
location for each license so issued as whereas the name of the licensee or
person receiving the permit.
(1929 Code, § 258)
§ 22-14 ORDINANCES, ETC., TO BE OBEYED.
   (a)   All licenses and permits shall be subject to all the provisions of
this code and other village ordinances which may be in force at the time of
issuing thereof and all which may be subsequently passed by the village
relating to the license or subject matter thereof.
   (b)   Any person who fails to obtain a license or permit as required by this
code or other village ordinance shall be in violation of this code and subject
to the penalty provisions of
chapter 16 hereof.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 22-15 CONDITION OF PREMISES.
   (a)   No license for carrying on any business or occupation shall be issued
when it appears that the premises or building in or on which the business or
occupation licensed is to be conducted does not comply with the provisions of
the building code or with any other ordinance of the village.
   (b)   No license to conduct any business or occupation shall be issued when
it appears that the premises or building on or in which the business or
occupation licensed is to be conducted is maintained or permitted to remain in
an unsanitary condition so as to endanger health.
(1929 Code, §§ 260, 261)
§ 22-16 REVOCATION.
   Any license or permit, except permits for construction, may be revoked by
the village president on the recommendation of the village manager for any
violation of the terms or conditions upon which the license was issued, or of
any ordinance or provision of this code relating to the license or the subject
matter thereof.
(1929 Code, § 262)
§ 22-17 FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any
hospital, rescue or shelter institution, blacksmith shop, machine shop,
laundry, theatre, medical dispensary or sanitarium in any place in the village
where one-half of the buildings, lots or plots of ground lying wholly or partly
within lines drawn 150 feet distant from and parallel to the exterior sides of
the lot or plot of ground in which is desired or intended to carry on such
business are used exclusively for residence purposes without having first
secured and filed frontage consents as provided in this section.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a public
garage or a building for the housing or more than four motor vehicles anywhere
in the village without having first secured and filed frontage consents as
required in this section.
   (c)   Wherever frontage consents are required for the location or
maintenance of any business or building in the village, the person securing
such consents shall secure the consent of the owners of not less than one-half
of the property having frontage and lying wholly or in part within lines drawn
150 feet distant from and parallel to the exterior sides of the lot or plot of
ground in which it is desired or intended to build any such building or carry
on any such business to the location of such business or building.
   (d)   Frontage consent petitions shall contain the names and addresses of
the owners of each lot or parcel or ground wholly or partially within the lines
indicated in the preceding subsection, and a statement as to the total frontage
involved.
      (1)   Such petitions shall be accompanied by a plat or survey drawn by a
licensed surveyor showing the location and dimensions of the lot or plot of
land involved and of all the property within the frontage consent district as
defined in this section.
      (2)   Such petitions shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn to by the
person obtaining the signatures to the effect that such person personally
obtained the signatures thereon.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any of the businesses
mentioned in the first subsection of this section within 300 feet of any
property used for church or school purposes unless the written consent of the
managing board or officer of such church or school is first obtained.
   (e)   Whenever frontage consents are required by any provision of this code
or other village ordinance, such consents shall be filed with the village
manager before the license or permit needed for the location of the building or
business concerned is issued. Consents once given may not be withdrawn after
the petition has been so filed.
   (f)   It shall not be necessary to secure a renewal of such consents, once
given, for the continued operation of the business concerned.
(1929 Code, § 263)
ARTICLE II. CERTAIN SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
§ 22-18 BAKERIES.
   (a)   No person shall establish, maintain or operate any bakery without
first having been licensed to do so. Every person establishing, maintaining or
operating any bakery shall annually pay a license fee as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each bakery so maintained.
   (b)   Any place used for any process of mixing, compounding or baking, for
sale, or the purpose of a restaurant, bakery or hotel, any bread, biscuits,
pretzels, crackers, buns, rolls, macaroni, cake, pies or any food product of
which flour or meal is a principal ingredient shall be deemed a bakery for the
purpose of this section; provided, that licensed restaurants in which any of
the foregoing food products are mixed and baked for consumption in such
restaurant only, on or in ordinary restaurant kitchen stoves or ranges, and
kitchens or rooms in dwellings, where any of such food products are mixed and
baked in an ordinary kitchen stove or range, shall not be considered bakeries.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-19 GROCERY STORES.
   (a)   No person shall operate or conduct a grocery store in the village
without first having obtained a license therefor. The annual license fee for a
grocery store shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule, and no license shall be issued except upon payment of the fee.
   (b)   The term GROCERY STORE as used in this section shall be construed to
mean any establishment for the retail sale of butter, cheese, vegetables, meat,
fruit or other provisions intended for human consumption; but any licensee
under the provisions of this section may engage in the retail sale of milk
without securing an additional license therefor; provided, that all the
provisions of chapter 21 relating to the quality, care and handling of milk are
fully complied with.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-20 ICE CREAM PARLORS.
   (a)   No person shall conduct or operate an ice cream parlor in the village
without having first obtained a license therefor. Applications for licenses
shall be made in writing to the village manager and he or she shall cause an
investigation to be made into the character of the applicant. No such license
shall be issued to any person who is not a person of good character.
   (b)   The annual, weekly and daily fee for a license for an ice cream parlor
shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. No
license shall be issued except upon the payment of the fee; provided, that an
establishment licensed as a grocery store or a restaurant serving ice cream in
connection with such business shall not be required to pay an additional fee
for such license.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-21 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS DEALERS, ETC.
   (a)   Persons desiring to engage in the sale, delivery or distribution of
milk or milk products within the village shall make written application to the
village manager who shall have the power to issue a license upon the
presentation of a permit to sell milk and milk products as issued by the health
officer and other satisfactory proof that the applicant is entitled to such
license.
   (b)   The annual fee for the various licenses for engaging in the business
of the sale, delivery and distribution of milk shall be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, plus the following additional
fees:
      (1)   For each wagon or other vehicle employed in such delivery or
distribution, the additional sum as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule;
      (2)   For retail business, where milk is sold or kept for sale; provided,
that the dairy producing the milk is not already licensed to sell milk in the
village, the sum as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule; and
      (3)   For wholesale business where milk is sold or kept for sale, the sum
as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-22 RESTAURANTS.
   (a)   No person shall engage in the business of conducting a restaurant
within the village without first obtaining the required licensing therefor.
   (b)   A separate annual license shall be required for each of the following
restaurant activities:
      (1)   A regular restaurant license shall be required if meals, short-
order lunches, sandwiches or prepared foods are served to customers for
consumption on the premises;
      (2)   A drive-in restaurant license shall be required if meals, short-
order lunches, sandwiches or prepared foods are served to customers using a
drive-in facility for consumption on or off the premises; and
      (3)   A carry-out restaurant license shall be required if meals, short-
order lunches, sandwiches or prepared foods are served to customers not using a
drive-in facility for consumption off the premises.
   (c)   The annual fee for a general restaurant license required under this
section shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule. The annual fee for a drive-in restaurant license or a carry-out
restaurant license required under this section shall be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (d)   Any license issued under this section may be revoked for a violation
of any of the provisions of article V, division 2 of
chapter 21 or any other ordinance provision relating to restaurants, the
premises used or the license.
   (e)   For the purposes of this section, a RESTAURANT shall be defined as a
place, house or room where meals, short-order lunches, sandwiches or prepared
foods are sold for public consumption, on or off the premises. For purposes of
this section, a DRIVE-IN FACILITY shall be defined as that place at which a
customer may place an order for service at a restaurant while remaining in his
or her motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 3)
§ 22-23 VENDING MACHINES.
   (a)   No person shall establish or maintain any vending machine without
having been licensed to do so. Every person establishing or maintaining any
such vending machine shall annually pay a license fee as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (b)   Licenses for the operation of vending machines subject to the
provisions of article V, division 3 of
chapter 21 of the village code shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures established therein. Licenses for the operation of all other vending
machines shall be issued in accordance with licensing procedures, including
regular inspections, to be established by the village manager as necessary to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (c)   The term VENDING MACHINE shall mean any self-service device offered
for public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by any other
means, dispenses any product for human consumption, either in bulk or in
package, without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending
operation. For purposes of this section, ice shall be deemed to be a product
for human consumption. The term VENDING MACHINE shall not include machines
which dispense cigarettes or other tobacco products; each such machine shall be
subject to the license and fee provisions of chapter 33 of the code.
(Ord. No. 80-12-1612; Ord. No. 80-19-1619; Ord. No. 85-10-1716; Ord. No. 2016-
04-3394)
§ 22-24 COIN-OPERATED DEVICES AND VIDEO GAMES.
   (a)   No person shall establish or maintain any coin-operated device or
video game without having been licensed to do so. Every person establishing or
maintaining any such coin-operated device or video game shall annually pay a
license fee as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule
per business establishment.
(Ord. No. 08-04-3215; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (b)   The term COIN-OPERATED DEVICE OR VIDEO GAME shall mean any self-
service device offered for public use which, upon insertion of one or more
coins or tokens, or by any other means, either dispenses a product or item not
for human consumption or engages the operator in a game of skill or chance. The
term COIN-OPERATED DEVICE OR VIDEO GAME shall not include machines that are
subject to the license and fee provisions of
chapter 33 of the code.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 22-25 OPERATION OF PUBLIC ELEVATOR.
   (a)   No owner or occupant of any building shall install, operate or
maintain a public elevator without having been licensed to do so. Every person
installing, operating or maintaining an elevator shall annually pay a license
fee as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (b)   The term PUBLIC ELEVATOR shall mean any device used for transporting
one or more persons from one floor of a building to another floor of a
building, excluding stairs, escalators and chairlifts or elevators in single-
family residences.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000)
§ 22-26 VALET PARKING.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection.
      APPLICANT. A person who applies for a valet parking service license as
provided by this section.
      ATTENDANT. A person who drives motor vehicles from a loading area to a
parking space for the purpose of providing valet parking service.
      LOADING AREA. An area in the public way located adjacent to or near the
business use or uses for the purpose of picking up and delivering motor
vehicles for a valet parking service.
      VALET PARKING OPERATOR. A person who has been issued a valet parking
service license as provided in this article, and who may employ one or more
attendants for the purpose of providing valet parking service.
      VALET PARKING SERVICE. A service offered as accessory to a principal
business use or uses by which a motor vehicle is relocated by an attendant for
temporary storage in a parking lot while the occupants of the vehicle patronize
the principal business use or uses, regardless of whether a fee is charged for
such service.
   (b)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
valet parking service without first obtaining a license as provided in this
section. A separate license is required for each loading area in which valet
parking services are performed. Each valet parking service license shall be
nontransferable, and any attempt to transfer a license shall result in the
automatic and immediate expiration of the license.
   (c)   License application.
      (1)   All applications for licenses required by this section shall be
made to the village clerk in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual
or by a duly authorized agent and designated manager thereof if a partnership
or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information and statements:
         A.   The name, address and age of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a partnership or limited liability company, the
names, addresses and ages of persons entitled to share in the profits thereof;
in the case of a corporation, the name and address, the date and state of
incorporation, the date qualified to do business in Illinois, the name and
address of the registered agent, the objects for which it was organized, the
names, addresses and ages of the officers and directors and of any stockholders
or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the capital or voting
stock of such corporation along with the percentage of stock owned;
         B.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
or businesses where the license is to be used;
         C.   A description of the principal business or businesses engaged in
at that location;
         D.   Consent of the owners of the principal use or uses to which the
valet parking service will be accessory, if such owners are different from the
applicant, and evidence that such owners will own or lease the premises where
the license is to be used during the entire term of the license; and
         E.   Consent of the owners of each parcel of private property where
vehicles may be parked by the valet parking service attendants.
      (2)   In addition to the foregoing information, the application shall
contain such other information as the village may require.
      (3)   The application shall be on a form provided by the village.
      (4)   No license required by this section shall be issued:
         A.   To an applicant whose license issued under this section has been
revoked for cause;
         B.   To an applicant that has, or whose valet parking operator or
attendant has, been convicted of either:
            1.   A felony; or
            2.   Within the previous three years, a misdemeanor or any other
offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle.
         C.   To an applicant who does not have the consent of the owners of
the principal use to which the valet parking service will be accessory, if such
owners are different from the applicant; or
         D.   For premises which are not owned or leased by such owners, which
lease is for the full period for which the license is to be issued.
      (5)   Each valet parking operator and attendant shall have a duty to
promptly supplement all information required pursuant to this section and
disclose to the village any post-licensing circumstances affecting the
qualifications of the applicant or any of the applicant's attendants.
   (d)   Issuance of license. Upon proper application being made and payment of
the license fee specified in subsection
22-26(e) of this section, the village manager shall issue the license.
   (e)   License fees. The annual fee for a license required by this section
shall be $100 and shall be paid to the village clerk at the time the
application is made. The fee for each licensed location shall be non-
refundable. There shall be no prorating of fees if a license is issued during a
license period, or in the event of a suspension or revocation of a license.
   (f)   Insurance. The applicant shall provide evidence to the village manager
that he or she has obtained general liability insurance coverage in the minimum
amounts of $1,000,000 per occurrence for comprehensive general liability and
$500,000 per occurrence for property damage, naming the village as an
additional insured. The applicant shall also provide, either as part of the
foregoing policies or as a separate policy with the same minimal amounts,
general liability and property damage coverage relating to automobile-related
occurrences. The insurance policy shall be for a term at least co-extensive
with the term of the license and shall not be subject to cancellation except
upon 30 days' notice to the village manager. Upon termination or lapse of the
licensee's insurance coverage, any license issued to the applicant shall
automatically and immediately expire.
   (g)   License term. Each valet parking service license shall be issued for
term not to exceed one year from the date of issuance of the license.
   (h)   Revocation.
      (1)   Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked,
or an application for issuance or renewal of a license required by this section
may be refused by the village manager if he or she determines:
         A.   The application of the applicant or license holder contains any
false, fraudulent or misleading material statement;
         B.   The applicant or license holder has conducted any activities
directly related to the licensed activity in an unlawful manner or in such
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety
or general welfare of the public;
         C.   The applicant or license holder has violated any of the
provisions of this section or of any other code, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of the village, or any federal or state law or regulation; or
         D.   That the applicant or license holder no longer holds the
qualifications for a valet parking service license as set forth in subsection
22-26(c).
      (2)   An applicant or license holder aggrieved by the action of the
village manager in refusing to issue any license or in suspending or revoking
any license already issued shall have the right to appeal such decision to the
village board of trustees by filing with the village clerk, within ten days
after such refusal, suspension or revocation, a request for a hearing before
the board of trustees. The applicant shall be given ten days' advance notice of
the hearing date. At the hearing, the applicant may be present and submit
evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited for such refusal, suspension
or revocation.
   (i)   Transfer restrictions. A license issued under this section shall be
purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed the period ending one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. For the proposed of this subsection, to ALIENATE or
TRANSFER a license shall mean to give, sell or convey a license or 50% or more
of the total ownership of any entity that holds a license.
   (j)   Qualifications of attendants. Every attendant shall:
      (1)   Be 18 years of age or older;
      (2)   Have a valid Illinois driver's license;
      (3)   Provide to the village manager the attendant's full name, current
address, telephone number, driver's license number, driving record and whether
the attendant has ever been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or any offense
involving the operation of a motor vehicle. Such information shall be provided
to the village manager by the valet parking operator within seven days of an
attendant commencing work for the valet parking operator in the village. In
addition, the attendant agrees to sign a release form provided by the village
to permit the village to conduct a criminal background check of the attendant
with the Department of State Police;
      (4)   Keep his or her driver's license upon his or her person at all
times while operating a motor vehicle for the purpose of providing valet
parking service;
      (5)   Wear a uniform or an insignia that conspicuously identifies the
valet parking operator for whom the attendant is working; and
      (6)   Operate any motor vehicle for the purpose of providing valet
parking service in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois and this
chapter of the village code.
   (k)   Location restrictions. A license issued under this section shall
permit the operation of a valet parking service only at the premises described
in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon the
written permit to make such change issued by the village manager. No change of
location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
under the codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the village.
   (l)   Approval of route. The applicant shall obtain written approval from
the village manager of the traffic route to be used by the attendants when
driving the motor vehicles from the loading area to the parking area. The
attendants shall not be permitted to utilize any route other than the route
approved by the village manager.
   (m)   Conditions of operation. No valet parking service shall be conducted,
operated, maintained, carried on or managed except in compliance with all of
the following regulations:
      (1)   All vehicles shall be operated and parked only in compliance with
the provisions of
chapter 23 of this code and all applicable federal, state and local statutes,
codes, ordinances and regulations;
      (2)   Space at the curb shall be provided at a location approved by the
village manager within which a vehicle can be pulled out of the flow of through
traffic;
      (3)   There shall be maintained at all times an unobstructed width of
roadway opposite of any standing vehicle sufficient for the free passage of
other vehicles within such roadway;
      (4)   Valet parking services shall only be provided by a valet parking
attendant in parking spaces owned or controlled by the village and only during
the hours approved by the village manager;
      (5)   Every vehicle left for an attendant shall be moved immediately to
its place for temporary storage;
      (6)   Valet parking attendants shall not obstruct, or cause or allow any
materials or equipment related to such service to obstruct, at any time, the
use by pedestrians of any public sidewalk; and
      (7)   The valet parking service shall employ an adequate number of
attendants to provide an efficient process of loading, parking and retrieval of
vehicles.
   (n)   Loading area signs. Each valet parking operator shall post a temporary
sign adjacent to the loading area, which sign shall be approved by the village
manager and shall be in compliance with the village code. Such sign shall state
the name of the valet parking operator and the rate, if any, for the valet
parking service offered.
   (o)   Penalty; revocation of license. Any person who violates the provisions
in this section shall be subject to a fine as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each such offense. If the village
manager determines that a valet parking operator or attendants employed by the
operator have three violations of this section within any 90-day period, the
village manager may revoke the valet parking operator’s license. The fine for
any violation under this section shall be the sole responsibility of the valet
parking operator.
(Ord. No. 2001-26-3043; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-27 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BROUGHT FROM OFF PREMISES
PROHIBITED.
   No restaurant, retail, or service business establishment required to obtain
a specific business license from the village pursuant to this Article II of
Chapter 22 of the Village Code shall establish, maintain or encourage a policy,
commonly known as “BYOB,” that allows patrons of establishment to bring into
the establishment for consumption on the premises, any alcoholic beverages of
any kind acquired off of the premises. Further, no restaurant, retail, or
service business shall permit any patron to bring into the restaurant, retail,
or service business any alcoholic beverages for purposes of consuming them on
the premises.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 3)
§§ 22-28 - 22-29 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 22-30 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, operate, engage in, or conduct any business,
retail establishment, occupation or activity designated in this article without
first having obtained a general business license therefor. Applications for
such licenses, and the issuance thereof, shall comply with the provisions of
article I herein.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 22-31 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for the businesses, retail establishments,
occupations or activities designated in this article shall be as set forth in
the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-32 DESIGNATED BUSINESSES, RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS, OCCUPATIONS AND
ACTIVITIES.
   The following businesses, retail establishments, occupations and activities
are subject to the license requirement of this article:
   (a)   Ambulance services;
   (b)   Banks and bankers;
   (c)   Brokers, other than insurance or real estate brokers;
   (d)   Coffee houses;
   (e)   Community antenna television systems offices;
   (f)   Elevator operators;
   (g)   Fire extinguisher service, repair or refill;
   (h)   Heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractors;
   (i)   Hospitals;
   (j)   Medical dispensaries;
   (k)   Pawnbroking shops;
   (l)   Porters;
   (m)   Sanitariums;
   (n)   Ticket agencies;
   (o)   Retailers permitted under article VIII, § 1(5) and 1(14) of the
Glencoe zoning ordinance; and
   (p)   Intercity busses.
(Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
§ 22-33 SEVERANCE CLAUSE.
   A declaration that any business, retail establishment, occupation or
activity designated in this article may not be licensed and/or is not subject
to a license fee shall not affect the validity of the licensing of the
remaining businesses, retail establishments, occupations and activities
designated herein.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 22-34 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BROUGHT FROM OFF PREMISES
PROHIBITED.
   No restaurant, retail, or service business establishment required to obtain
a specific business license from the village pursuant to this Article III of
Chapter 22 of the Village Code shall establish, maintain or encourage a policy,
commonly known as “BYOB,” that allows patrons of establishment to bring into
the establishment for consumption on the premises, any alcoholic beverages of
any kind acquired off of the premises. Further, no restaurant, retail, or
service business shall permit any patron to bring into the restaurant, retail,
or service business any alcoholic beverages for purposes of consuming them on
the premises.
(Ord. No. 2015-13a-3385, § 3)
ARTICLE IV. GROUP HOME REGISTRATION
(Ord. No. 90-2-1811)
§ 22-35 DEFINITION OF "GROUP HOME".
   (a)   For purposes of this article, the term GROUP HOME shall mean any
premises that is used in whole or in part for the treatment, care,
rehabilitation, recovery or supervision of individuals other than:
      (1)   The legal or beneficial owners of such premises; or
      (2)   Individuals related to such owners by blood, marriage or adoption
(including foster children).
   (b)   Group homes shall include, but not be limited to, child care
facilities, nursing homes, convalescent homes, community integrated living
arrangements, community residential alternatives, intermediate care facilities
and medical dispensaries.
(Ord. No. 90-2-1811)
§ 22-36 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall own, establish or operate a group home in the village
unless such person shall have registered with the village manager as provided
in this section before operation of such home commences.
   (b)   Any person seeking to register with the village as an owner or
operator of a group home shall complete a form to be provided by the village
manager that includes at least the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of:
         A.   The owner of the group home;
         B.   The operator of the group home;
         C.   The individual who manages the group home; and
         D.   An individual (other than the manager) who may be contacted in
the event of an emergency.
      (2)   The address and phone number of the group home;
      (3)   A brief description of the activities conducted at the group home,
including the number of individuals receiving care at the group home, the
nature of the care and any special needs or limitations of such individuals;
and
      (4)   Evidence that the group home and its owner, operator, manager and
staff have obtained and maintained all licenses, permits, certifications and
approvals required by law.
   (c)   The registration required in this section shall be renewed annually or
whenever any information provided in the most recent registration has changed.
   (d)   No fee shall be charged for such registration.
(Ord. No. 90-2-1811)
§ 22-37 MINIMUM DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall own, establish or operate a group home that qualifies as a
community integrated living arrangement, pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 91 ½
§§1701-1709, if such home is located within 1,500 feet of any other community
integrated living arrangement in the village.
(Ord. No. 90-9-1818)
ARTICLE V. LANDSCAPE AND LAWN CARE PROFESSIONALS
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190)
§ 22-38 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article V, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except when the
context otherwise indicates.
   LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES. The improvement and/or maintenance of the
appearance of an area of land by planting and/or maintaining trees, shrubs,
grass or other plants and lawn ornaments, or by altering the contour of the
ground. In addition, LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE SERVICES shall include the providing
of services in the nature of cultivation or beautification of gardens; the
trimming, cutting or pruning of hedges, plants and/or grass; the application of
restricted yard chemicals or other yard chemicals; the raking, sweeping or
gathering for removal of landscape waste and other yard debris; or other
activities similar in nature to the foregoing.
   LANDSCAPER. Any person who is engaged in the business of providing landscape
maintenance services within the village. This definition shall not apply to
persons while and to the extent that they are acting as landscaping contractors
or to individuals who are acting while in the employ of a licensed LANDSCAPER.
   LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR. Any person while engaged in the business of
installing landscaping materials and constructing yard improvements such as
grade changes, walkways, patios and the like, provided that such person is
conducting such activities pursuant to an express permit issued by the
village's director of public works or the village engineer and pursuant to a
landscaping and/or grading plan duly approved by the village.
   LICENSE YEAR. The one-year period in which a license issued pursuant to this
article is valid, corresponding to the Village’s fiscal year as set forth in
Section
1-12 of this Code.
   PERSON. Any individual over the age of 17, or any partnership, firm,
corporation or other business entity authorized to do business in the State of
Illinois.
   VEHICLE. Any motor-driven vehicle, or any vehicle customarily attached to a
motor-driven vehicle, used by a landscaper to transport a work crew, equipment
and/or debris, including trucks, trailers and vans, but excluding sedans or
similar passenger vehicles.
   YARD CHEMICALS. Any fertilizer, fungicide, herbicide, insecticide or similar
substance that is not a restricted yard chemical.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190; Ord. No. 2020-03-3469)
§ 22-39 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any landscaper to provide landscape maintenance
services within the village without first obtaining a license as required
pursuant to this article. In addition, no landscaper may park its vehicles on
the streets of the village unless the landscaper shall have obtained a license
and identified each such vehicle in its application pursuant to this article.
Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid only during the license
year for which it was issued. No license issued pursuant to this article shall
be transferable, and any attempt to transfer a license shall result in the
automatic and immediate expiration of the license.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190)
§ 22-40 LANDSCAPER LICENSE.
   Each landscaper shall be required to obtain and maintain a license during
the license year for so long as the landscaper is providing landscape
maintenance services in the village. Landscaper licenses shall be non-
transferable, and each vehicle of a licensed landscaper shall display the
identifying information required pursuant to §
22-41(d) of the village code in order to be entitled to be parked on a village
street. The fee for the license shall be as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and is non-refundable, per license year or
fraction thereof, and shall accompany the application. Upon issuance of a
license pursuant to this section, the village manager or the manager’s designee
shall also provide the landscaper a certified license.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22-41 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for a landscaper license shall be made to the village manager
on forms provided by the village and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership,
the application shall show for each partner his or her name and address and
interest. If the applicant is a corporation or other business entity, the
application shall show the name and address of the registered agent, and each
manager or director; and with respect to each shareholder or person owning at
least a 5% interest in the entity or any class of its corporate shares, the
person's name and address;
   (b)   The number, kind and license plate number of vehicles owned and
controlled by the applicant's landscaping business;
   (c)   The location of the applicant's principal business office and garage;
   (d)   The color scheme, insignia, trade name and telephone number located
upon and used to designate the vehicles of the applicant;
   (e)   A statement that the applicant has received copies of, reviewed and
understands the applicable ordinances of the village and will notify the
applicant's employees thereof;
   (f)   A statement that the applicant has received copies of, reviewed and
understands the guide to ravines and bluffs;
   (g)   Delivery of proof of insurance with the coverage types and amounts as
established from time to time by the village manager, which insurance shall
name the village as an additional insured; and
   (h)   Such other information as the village manager may require from time to
time.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190)
§ 22-42 LANDSCAPER REGULATIONS.
   (a)   All landscapers shall be required to comply with the regulations set
forth or otherwise referenced in this section. Any violation under this section
shall subject the landscaper to fines. In addition, any violations under this
section, or convictions of any felony or crimes of moral turpitude, may affect
the landscaper's eligibility to obtain or continue to hold a license issued
pursuant to this article. In the event of a refusal to renew, a suspension or a
revocation of a landscaper license by the village manager, any landscaper may
request to appeal such refusal to renew, suspension or revocation of the
license by the village manager by filing with the village clerk a request for
appeal within 15 calendar days after the village manager mails or personally
delivers a decision to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license. Following
the filing of an appeal, the village clerk shall notify the appealing
landscaper of the date on which such appeal will be considered by the village
board, which date shall not be less than ten calendar days after the clerk
mails or personally delivers such notice to the landscaper. The landscaper
appealing the revocation, suspension or refusal to renew shall then be
permitted to appear before the village board on the designated date to plead
the reasoning for the revocation, which appeal shall be subject to the
procedural rules established by the village board from time to time. The
village board may affirm, affirm with conditions, remand or overturn the
refused renewal, suspension or revocation of a landscaper license.
   (b)   All landscapers doing business in the village shall abide by the
following regulations:
      (1)   Licensing. Every landscaper shall be required to obtain and
maintain a landscaper license pursuant to §
22-40 of the village code. The village manager may refuse to issue or renew,
may suspend or revoke a landscaper license or fine a licensee for any one or
more of the following reasons, including but not limited to:
         A.   Engaging in the business of landscape maintenance service without
first securing a landscape and lawn care contractors license from the Village
of Glencoe;
         B.   1.   Violation of any village ordinance by the licensee
(including this article), including without limitation:
               a.   Unauthorized dumping of debris;
               b.   To cause or make loud noise through the operation of lawn
maintenance equipment, including but not limited to, lawn mowers and tractors,
pursuant to §
24-38 of the Glencoe village code;
               c.   Use of gasoline-powered leaf blowers or other lawn
maintenance equipment beyond the times set forth in §
24-38 of the Glencoe village code;
               d.   Make inaccurate, false or misleading statements in any
application for any such license;
               e.   Make substantial misrepresentation or false promise of
character likely to influence or induce another in connection with the business
of landscape maintenance service; and/or
               f.   Pursue a continued course of misrepresentations or making
false promises through advertising, salesman, agents or otherwise in connection
with the business of landscaping.
            2.   Failure to obtain a permit for work requiring village review
and issuance of a permit.
            3.   Provided, however, that, unless expressly stated in a ticket
or violation notice issued by the village, a landscaper can avoid the refusal
of the renewal, suspension or revocation of a landscaper license by paying any
fines applicable to the violation(s) in question.
      (2)   Insurance. Each landscaper shall obtain and maintain a policy of
comprehensive general liability insurance, including bodily injury and property
damage. The applicant shall also carry adequate workers' compensation and
vehicle insurance. Proof of insurance will be reviewed by the village manager
from time to time. A landscaper shall deliver to the village evidence of
compliance with this requirement within five business days after a request from
the village manager.
      (3)   Vehicle identification. Each vehicle operated by the licensee shall
at all times display information required by §
22-41(d) of the village code and shall have been identified in the landscaper's
application pursuant to this article.
      (4)   Accuracy of license information. Each landscaper shall fully and
accurately complete any license application required pursuant to this article.
In the event that there is a material change regarding any information required
in any such license application, the landscaper shall promptly deliver
corrected or updated information to the village. Any false, inaccurate or
misleading information relating to a license application shall be a violation
of this article.
      (5)   Vehicle parking. No landscaper shall permit any of its vehicles to
be parked on a village street unless such vehicle shall comply with all
applicable parking and other regulations in the village code.
      (6)   Compliance with laws. Each landscaper and the landscaper's
employees shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances,
rules, regulations and orders of any federal, state or local government
affecting the landscaper while performing landscape maintenance services in the
village, including provisions of the village code, any stop orders imposed by
the village, and any regulations that the village manager may promulgate in
furtherance of the purposes and effective administration of this article.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190)
§ 22-43 ENFORCEMENT; FINES; REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   (a)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The village manager and the manager's designees shall be authorized
to enforce the provisions of this article, including the issuance of citations
for any violations of this article.
      (2)   Citations shall be issued to the landscaper or one of the
landscaper's employees after the violation has been discovered, and the village
manager shall have the option to issue the citation with or without a specific
date for a court appearance. If the citation does not provide for a specific
court date, the landscaper receiving the citation may request a court date in
writing within five calendar days after the issuance of the citation, whereupon
the village manager will establish such court date and notify the affected
landscaper. Failure of a landscaper to request a court date shall be deemed an
admission to the violation identified in the citation. In addition to the
issuance of citations, the village manager or the manager's designees may issue
stop orders to any landscaper violating any provisions or requirements of this
article.
   (b)   Fines. Any violation by a landscaper under this article or other
provisions of the village code shall subject the landscaper to a fine. Except
as herein set forth, any violations under this article shall be subject to a
fine as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Any
violation of any other provision of the village code or ordinance of the
village shall be subject to the fine applicable to such violation.
(Ord. No. 2007-13-3190; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
ARTICLE VI. RAFFLES
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-44 ADOPTION; PURPOSE.
   (a)   This Article VI is adopted pursuant to the provisions of 230 ILCS 15/
0.01 et seq.
   (b)   The purpose of this Article VI is to license and regulate raffles
conducted within the village.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Article VI, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS ORGANIZATION.  A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION.  An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-
supported schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.  An organization of persons having a common
interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its
members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be
cared for by the government.
   KEY LOCATION.  The location where the raffle organized by a law enforcement
agency or a statewide association that represents law enforcement officials is
conducted and the prize or prizes are awarded.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION.  An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  An agency of this State or unit of local government
which is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public order and
to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
   NET PROCEEDS.  The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expected for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION.  An organization or institution organized and
conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one
as a result of the operation.
   RAFFLE.  A form of lottery defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), in which the
player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance represented and
differentiated by a number or a combination of numbers or by some other medium,
one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance and in
which the winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or some other
method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except that, the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a sporting contest.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION.  Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS ORGANIZATION. An organization or association comprised of members
of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows,
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to confer a public benefit.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-46 GENERAL CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   All raffles licensed under this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance
with the following provisions:
   (a)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes in any raffle shall not
exceed $1,000,000.
   (b)   The maximum retail value of any one prize in any raffle shall not
exceed $250,000.
   (c)   No chances may be sold, or tickets delivered, for any raffle more than
120 days prior to the date set for the determination of the winning chance.
   (d)   The maximum price for any one chance or ticket in any raffle shall be
$500, however, the Village Board may approve an amount up to twice the maximum
price for any one chance or ticket for any eligible person (as defined in §
22-51) that has been in active existence continuously in the village for a
period of 15 consecutive years immediately before making application for a
license.
   (e)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization licensed to conduct such raffle.
   (f)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (g)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of a raffle.
   (h)   Each license shall specify the time and place where the winning chance
or ticket will be determined. No other time or place may be substituted for
that appearing on the license.
   (i)   With the exception of a license issued to a law enforcement agency or
a statewide association that represents law enforcement officials, each license
shall specify the area or areas within the village where raffle chances may be
sold or issued.
   (j)   No person under the age of 18 may participate in the conduct of
raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 may be within the area where
winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/her parent or
guardian.
   (k)   A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed to
conduct a raffle in the state.
   (l)   The winning chance or chances shall not be determined by the outcome
of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-47 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   All raffles licensed under this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance
with the following provisions:
   (a)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of
the gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds of each raffle. All deductions
from gross receipts for each raffle shall be documented with receipts or other
records indicating the amount, reason for deduction and recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and
date of payment.
   (b)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and the village manager
its gross receipts, expenses, the net proceeds from the raffle and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (c)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of a licensee organization. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be
the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (d)   Records required by this paragraph shall be preserved for three years.
These records shall be made available for public inspection at reasonable times
and places.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-48 RAFFLE MANAGER.
   Each application for a raffle license shall designate one individual as the
raffle manager. The raffle manager must be a bona fide member of the applicant
organization. The raffle manager shall supervise the operation and conduct of
the raffle for the applicant organization. Along with the application, the
raffle manager shall tender a fidelity bond in favor of the organization
conditioned on the faithful performance of assigned duties. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the Village Manager in favor of
the licensee conditioned upon the manager's honesty in performance of the
manager's duties. The premium for such bond may be reimbursed from the gross
receipts of the raffle. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be
given in writing to the village manager not less than 30 days prior to its
cancellation. The said bond requirement shall be waived, and a provision to
that effect shall be included in the license, if the raffle manager submits to
the village manager proof that the members of the applicant organization have
unanimously voted in favor of a request that the bond requirement be waived.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-49 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct any raffle in the village without having first
obtained a license therefor. The license fee for a raffle shall be as
established by the comprehensive fee and fine schedule.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-50 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   No person shall conduct any raffle without having first obtained a license
therefor. The license fee for a raffle shall be as established by the annual
fee ordinance.
   (a)   Any person seeking a license for a raffle shall submit an application
to the office of the village manager. Such application shall be on the form
furnished by the village. Each application shall contain a sworn statement
attesting to the applicant organization's qualifications under §§
22-51(a) and
22-51(b). The application and required sworn statement shall be signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of the organization. The application shall
be made not less than 30 days prior to any date set for the commencement of the
distribution of raffle chances or tickets.
   (b)   Every application shall specify the area or areas within the village
in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which
raffle tickets will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning
chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined.
   (c)   The village shall act on an application for a license within 30 days
from the date of the village's receipt of a complete application.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-51 PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   (a)   Raffle licenses shall be issued only to:
      (1)   Bona-fide nonprofit, religious, charitable, labor, business,
fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations which have been in active
existence continuously for a period of five consecutive years immediately
before making application for a license and which had during that entire five-
year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives;
      (2)   A nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster; or
      (3)   Law enforcement agencies and statewide associations that represent
law enforcement officials so long as the key location is located within the
Village.
   (b)   No raffle license shall be issued hereunder to any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has been convicted of a felony.
      (2)   A person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
      (3)   A person who is not of good moral character.
      (4)   A person, firm, corporation or organization which has had a license
issued pursuant to this division revoked or has been found to have violated any
provision of this article.
      (5)   A firm, corporation or organization in which an individual
described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), or (4) above, has a proprietary,
equitable or credit interest, or in which such an individual is active or
employed.
      (6)   A firm, corporation or organization in which an individual
described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3) or (4) is an officer, director, or
employee, whether compensated or not.
      (7)   A firm, corporation or organization which will allow an individual
described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3) or (4) above, to participate in the
management or operation of a raffle.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-52 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   Upon satisfaction of all requirements of this article, the village manager,
acting on behalf of the board of trustees, shall issue a raffle license to the
applicant organization.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-53 LICENSE LOCATION LIMITATIONS.
   With the exception of a license issued to a law enforcement agency or a
statewide association that represents law enforcement officials, no license
issued under this Article VI shall authorize the licensee to conduct a raffle
or sell tickets outside of the village.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-54 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   The village manager may immediately suspend or revoke a raffle license
issued pursuant to this Article VI if the village manager determines that the
licensee or any licensed raffle does not comply with any of the provisions of
this Article VI or of the Illinois Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 150/
0.01 et seq.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-55 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions in this section shall be subject to a
fine as set forth in the village's comprehensive fee and fine schedule for each
such offense and for each day each such violation exists.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
§ 22-56 GAMBLING PROHIBITION.
   Nothing in this Article VI shall be construed to authorize the conduct or
operation of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for in this Article VI.
(Ord. No. 2017-19-3427)
CHAPTER 22A: AMBULANCE SERVICE FEE
Section
   
22A-1   Purpose
   
22A-2   Goals
   
22A-3   Fees
   
22A-4   Penalty for failure to pay promptly
   
22A-5   Non-payment notice procedure
§ 22A-1 PURPOSE.
   Whereas, services which are unusual in nature, services which are in excess
of the usual services provided to the community at large, services which are
available to individuals through private vendors, and those services which may
be designated from time to time, shall be provided on a fee for service basis.
Rates for such services shall be as established by ordinance in the village
code.
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22A-2 GOALS.
   (a)   Whereas, transportation by the public safety ambulance from the scene
of an emergency to a medical treatment facility shall be on a fee for service
basis.
   (b)   Whereas, the village manager or his or her designee is hereby
authorized to waive all or part of the public safety ambulance transportation
fee upon presentation of evidence of unusual hardship or under special
circumstances, left to his or her discretion.
§ 22A-3 FEES.
   (a)   Ambulance fee.
      (1)   Any resident of the Village of Glencoe shall pay fees as set forth
in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for:
         A.   Advanced life support (ALS) base level 1;
         B.   Advanced life support (ALS) base level 2; and
         C.   Basic life support (BLS).
      (2)   Any non-resident shall pay fees as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for:
         A.   Advanced life support (ALS) base level 1;
         B.   Advanced life support (ALS) base level 2; and
         C.   Basic life support (BLS).
   (b)   Mileage fee. In addition to the fees set forth above, a mileage fee
shall be assessed based on the one-way transport cost from the scene to the
hospital. The rate per mile will be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 10-03-3261; Ord. No. 2011-04-3285; Ord. No. 2012-06-3307; Ord. No.
2016-04-3394)
§ 22A-4 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO PAY PROMPTLY.
   If the ambulance fee is not paid within 30 days after the bill for fees is
payable, such bill shall be subject to an additional charge of the ambulance
bill as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 22A-5 NON-PAYMENT NOTICE PROCEDURE.
   If the charges for ambulance services are not paid within 30 days after the
bill for fees is payable, the village shall follow the notice and enforcement
procedure as set forth in
chapter 34A of this code.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
CHAPTER 23: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Section
Article I. In General
   
23-1   Definitions
   
23-2   Obedience to traffic regulations; adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code
   
23-3   Police to direct traffic; directing in event of fire or emergency
   
23-4   Obedience to police
   
23-5   Persons propelling pushcarts or riding or driving animals subject to
traffic regulations
   
23-6   Permits for parades and processions
   
23-7   Funeral procession to be identified
   
23-8   Certain vehicles prohibited on Sheridan Road; proviso
   
23-9   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
23-10   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
   
23-11   Unlawful riding generally
   
23-12   Use of coasters, roller skates, etc., restricted
   
23-13   Authorized emergency vehicles generally
   
23-14   Duty of operator in event of accident
Article II. Bicycles
   
23-15   Subject to traffic regulations
   
23-16   Lights required
   
23-17   Audible warning devices
   
23-18   Brakes
   
23-19   Riding on sidewalks
   
23-20   Speed
   
23-21   Stopping and turning
   
23-22   Riding on right
   
23-23   Riding in a group
   
23-24   Emerging from alleys, driveways or buildings
   
23-25   Extra passengers
   
23-26   Carrying articles
   
23-27   Trick, etc., riding
   
23-28   Riding at certain locations may be prohibited
   
23-29   Parking
   
23-30   Responsibility of parents, etc., of cyclists
   
23-31   Impounding
   
23-32   Registration - generally
   
23-33   Same - same - rental agencies
   
23-34   Same - reciprocity with other municipalities
   
23-35   Same - application; mechanical condition of bicycle
   
23-36   Same - fee
   
23-37   Same - examination; when registration may be denied
   
23-38   Same - issuance; duration
   
23-39   Same - transferability; when deemed cancelled
   
23-40   Sales to be reported and tags of sold bicycles returned
   
23-41   Junking bicycles
   
23-42   Removal, etc., of serial numbers and plates - generally
   
23-43   Same - dealing, etc., in bicycles from which distinguishing marks
removed, etc.
   
23-44   Police department serial number
   
23-45   Police auction
   
23-45.1   Protective helmets
Article III. Pedestrians
   
23-46   Pedestrians' right-of-way at crosswalks
   
23-47   Crossing at other than crosswalks; loitering, etc., in roadway
   
23-48   Pedestrians to obey signals
   
23-49   Pedestrians not to obstruct sidewalks
   
23-50   Crossing roadway generally
   
23-51   Walking along roadways
   
23-51.1   Entry upon street ends
   
23-52   Soliciting rides
   
23-53   Right-of-way of blind persons
Article IV. Traffic-Control Devices
   
23-54   Authority to install generally
   
23-55   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
23-56   Traffic-control signal legend - generally
   
23-57   Same - pedestrian control signals
   
23-58   Same - flashing signals
   
23-59   Authority of village manager - to establish crosswalks, traffic parking
lanes, loading zones, etc.
   
23-60   Same - to designate one-way streets and restrict turning at
intersections
   
23-61   Same - to designate through streets and stop, etc., intersections
   
23-62   Same - to establish play streets and zones of quiet
   
23-63   Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, etc.
   
23-64   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs or
signals
Article V. Village Licenses
   
23-65   Required
   
23-66   Application
   
23-67   Classification; fees
   
23-68   Issuance
   
23-69   Expiration
   
23-70   Transfer of license upon sale of vehicle
Article VI. Operation of Vehicles
   
23-71   Driving on sidewalks, etc.
   
23-72   Limitations on turning around
   
23-72.1   Limitations on right turns
   
23-72.2   Limitations on turns when parking
   
23-73   Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or combination
thereof
   
23-74   Negligent driving
   
23-75   Reckless driving
   
23-75.1   Speed limits - "urban district" defined
   
23-75.2   Same - reasonable and proper speed; decreasing speed under certain
conditions
   
23-75.3   Same - maximum limits in and outside of urban district
   
23-75.4   Same - specific streets and zones
   
23-76   Driving with view obstructed; when mirror required
   
23-77   Operating noisy vehicle
   
23-78   Approaching railroad grade crossing
   
23-79   Driving through processions
   
23-80   Approaching authorized emergency vehicle
   
23-81   Approaching fire department vehicle
   
23-82   Following, etc., fire apparatus
   
23-83   Driving over fire hose
Article VII. Stopping, Standing and Parking
   
23-84   Manner of parking
   
23-84.1   Parking on sidewalks, parkways and driveway aprons
   
23-84.2   Limitations on parking maneuvers
   
23-85   Parking in alleys or roadways
   
23-86   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
23-86.1   Handicapped and medical emergency parking
   
23-87   Parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. prohibited
   
23-87.1   Parking prohibited on Sheridan Road
   
23-88   Authority of village manager - to prohibit parking on certain streets;
parking in violation of signs
   
23-89   Same - to restrict parking on certain streets; overtime parking
   
23-90   Liability of parking regulations
   
23-91   Standing vehicle generally; standing freight carrying vehicle in
loading zone
   
23-92   Parking of busses and taxicabs
   
23-93   Use of bus stops and taxicab stands by vehicles other than busses and
taxicabs
   
23-93.1   Snow emergencies
   
23-93.2   Prolonged parking prohibited
   
23-93.3   Abandonment of motor vehicles on private property
   
23-93.4   Violations of this article - penalties
Article VIII. Business District Parking
   
23-94   Definitions
   
23-95   Installation and maintenance of parking zones and coin boxes
   
23-96   Improper parking generally; coin to be deposited in meter; proper
parking pass to be displayed
   
23-96.1   Specific prohibition; business (B) permit parking
   
23-97   Maximum parking time permitted; parking fees; overtime parking
   
23-98   Designation of “overnight” daytime parking zones
   
23-98.1   Reserved
   
23-99   Parking longer than maximum time permitted
   
23-100   Tampering with coin boxes prohibited
   
23-101   Depositing slugs prohibited
   
23-102   Violations of this article - penalties
   
23-103   Reserved
   
23-104   Parking fees generally
   
23-105   Construction of article
Article IX. Towing
   
23-110   Definitions
   
23-111   Authorization for towing
   
23-112   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles
   
23-113   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
23-114   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
23-115   Procedures for releasing towed vehicles
   
23-116   Post-tow hearings
   
23-117   Sale of towed vehicle
   
23-118 - 23-119   Reserved
Article X. Other Motor-driven Vehicles on Streets and Highways
   
23-120   Definitions
   
23-121   Operational restrictions
   
23-122   Location restrictions
   
23-123   Required equipment
   
23-124   Exemptions
   
23-125 - 23-130   Reserved
Cross-reference:
   As to changing of auto plates and engine numbers by public garages, see §
15-17
   As to duty of driver of vehicle upon striking dog, see §
6-16
   As to filling stations and public garages, see
ch. 15
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
   As to obedience of busses to traffic rules and regulations, etc., see §
32-36
   As to parking bicycles, see §
23-29
   As to pedestrian traffic-control signals, see §
23-57
   As to placing advertising matter in cars, see §
3-11
   As to railroads, see
ch. 27
   As to registration of bicycles, see §§
23-32 to
23-39
   As to scavengers' vehicles, see §
29-5
   As to taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, see
ch. 32
   As to vehicles for sprinkling streets, see §
36-33
Statutory reference:
   As to authority of village to regulate the standing or parking of vehicles,
see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 123
   As to local traffic-control devices, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, §
127
   For state law as to motor vehicles generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch.
95 ½, ch. 95 ½, §§ 1-100 et seq.
   For state law as to pedestrians' rights and duties, see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 95 ½ §§ 170 to 175
   For state law as to stopping, standing and parking generally, see Ill. Rev.
Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, §§ 185 to 188a
   For state law as to traffic signs, signals and markings, see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 95 ½, §§ 126 to 132
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 23-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section, except when the context otherwise requires.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway, when
within any 600 feet along such highway there are buildings in use for business
or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway.
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways, of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway that is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle that is self-propelled, except for (i) vehicles
moved solely by human power, and (ii) motor-driven vehicles, as defined in
Section
23-120  of this code.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public
body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   PARKWAY. The portion of a street between the edge of the improved roadway
and the adjacent property line.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and
operated for the transportation of children to or from school or privately
owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or
from school.
   SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS. A permanently mounted electrically operated signal
device equipped with two-way, two color (red and yellow) signal heads, together
with a diamond shaped, signal faced sign reading "school crossing," by which at
predetermined times and when actuated by push button, traffic is directed to
stop so as to permit school children to cross the street or highway safely.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, is any halting, even momentarily, of a
vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   STREET END. The extension along public property of the following streets
lying east of Sheridan Road from the end of the paved area used for purposes of
vehicular traffic eastward to, but not including, the beach: Beach Road, Dell
Place, Harbor Street, Hazel Avenue, Maple Hill Road, Park Avenue and South
Avenue.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of a quarter of a
mile or more.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. No. 82-12-1698)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law definitions, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, §§ 1-
101 to 1-190 and 99 to 116a
§ 23-2 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this chapter
with respect to particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do
any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter,
including those actions forbidden or required by the Illinois Vehicle Code,
which is adopted by reference in §
23-2(b) below.
   (b)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as amended from
time to time, is hereby adopted by reference to be applied within the corporate
limits of the village to the extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 2017-16-3424; Ord. 2024-14-3591)
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 118
§ 23-3 POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC; DIRECTING IN EVENT OF FIRE OR EMERGENCY.
   (a)   Officers of the police department or such other persons as are
assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand or signal in conformance with the provisions of this chapter;
provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic
or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct
traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter.
   (b)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 23-4 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer or other person invested by law with authority
to direct, control or regulate traffic.
Cross-reference:
   As to police department generally, see §§
2-84 to
2-87
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95 ½, § 11-203
§ 23-5 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS SUBJECT TO
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Every person propelling a pushcart or riding an animal or driving any animal
drawing a vehicle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this
chapter which by their nature can have no application.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to applicability of traffic laws to person riding animals,
etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95 ½, § 11-206
§ 23-6 PERMITS FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
   No parade containing more than ten persons shall occupy, march or proceed
along any street except pursuant to a permit issued by the village manager and
such regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. The
applicant for such a permit shall apply for a permit 14 days preceding the
parade. The village manager shall designate the parade route.
(Ord. No. 78-15-1571, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate, etc., processions, see
Ill. Rev. Stat., § 11-208
§ 23-7 FUNERAL PROCESSION TO BE IDENTIFIED.
   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the village manager.
Cross-reference:
   As to driving through processions, see §
23-79
§ 23-8 CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SHERIDAN ROAD; PROVISO.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any freight carrying vehicle,
stream roller or traction engine on Sheridan Road, except to cross it in case
of necessity at intersections; provided, however, that deliveries may be made
to premises on Sheridan Road, and for the purpose of making such deliveries
freight carrying vehicles may be permitted to travel on Sheridan Road for not
to exceed one block.
§ 23-9 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any moving
vehicle upon any roadway.
§ 23-10 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion.
§ 23-11 UNLAWFUL RIDING GENERALLY.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 23-12 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, ETC., RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
as authorized by this code or other ordinance of the village.
Cross-reference:
   As to playing games on streets, see §
30-9
§ 23-13 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement or parking of
vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver on approaching a red or stop
signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed
cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times drivers of
authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
   (b)   No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges under this section except when such vehicle is operated in response
to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 120
§ 23-14 DUTY OF OPERATOR IN EVENT OF ACCIDENT.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle which has collided with
any person or property in such a manner as to cause an injury or damage to any
person or property to fail or refuse to stop immediately to ascertain the
extent of such injury or damage, to render such assistance as may be needed, to
give his or her true name and residence to the injured person or any other
persons requesting the same, and to give notice of such accident to a police
officer, or if no police officer is present, then to the village police
department.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to accidents generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½,
§§ 133 to 143
ARTICLE II. BICYCLES
§ 23-15 SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Bicycles are hereby classed as vehicles and every person operating a
bicycle shall be subject to the provisions of all state vehicle laws and all
traffic provisions of this code and other ordinances of the village, except
such provisions in conflict with this article or which by their nature can have
no application.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to fail or
refuse to comply with any order, signal or direction of a police officer, or to
disobey the instructions or any official traffic sign, signal or other traffic-
control device.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to applicability of traffic laws to bicycle riders, see
Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 121
§ 23-16 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every bicycle, when upon a street or highway within the village during
the period from sunset to sunrise, shall be equipped with at least one lighted
lamp exhibiting a white light, or light of a yellow or amber tint, visible from
a distance of 500 feet to the front of the bicycle and with at least one
lighted lamp exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear thereof.
   (b)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 204a
§ 23-17 AUDIBLE WARNING DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any street,
sidewalk or other public place which is not equipped with a warning device, in
good working order and audible at a distance of not less than 25 feet when
sounded; except, that no bicycle may be equipped with or make use of any gong,
siren or mechanical whistle.
Statutory reference:
   For state law prohibiting sirens or whistles or bicycles, see Ill. Rev.
Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 212(c)
§ 23-18 BRAKES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any street,
sidewalk or other public place without a brake that will enable the operator to
make the brake wheel skid on a dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 23-19 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks except where such operation is
prohibited under §
23-28. Pedestrians on sidewalks shall be given the right-of-way at all times,
and the operator of a bicycle shall give an audible signal before overtaking or
passing any pedestrian.
§ 23-20 SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing, taking into account the safety of
the rider and of other persons, property and vehicles.
§ 23-21 STOPPING AND TURNING.
   No operator of a bicycle shall suddenly stop, slow down or turn without
giving an arm signal as provided by state law for the operation of motor
vehicles.
§ 23-22 RIDING ON RIGHT.
   Every person operating a bicycle shall keep to the right and shall operate
as nearly as practicable at the right-hand edge of the roadway or sidewalk.
§ 23-23 RIDING IN A GROUP.
   When two or more persons are operating bicycles in a group, they shall ride
single file and it shall be unlawful for them to ride abreast of each other.
§ 23-24 EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR BUILDINGS.
   The operator of a bicycle coming out of an alley, driveway or building shall
stop before riding on or across a sidewalk or into a roadway if the view is
obscured. Such operator shall in all cases yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk, and to all vehicles approaching on
such roadway.
§ 23-25 EXTRA PASSENGERS.
   No bicycles shall be used to carry more than one person at any time unless
it is a tandem or multiple bicycle and so designed and equipped.
§ 23-26 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry a package, bundle or article which
prevents him or her from keeping both hands on the handlebars, or from
operating the bicycle in a proper and efficient manner.
§ 23-27 TRICK, ETC., RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle on the public
streets to indulge in any kind of trick or unsafe riding.
§ 23-28 RIDING AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS MAY BE PROHIBITED.
   The village manager is hereby authorized to erect signs on any street,
sidewalk or other public place prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. When
such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle on such street,
sidewalk or other public place.
§ 23-29 PARKING.
   No bicycle shall be operated or parked on any street, sidewalk or other
public place in such a manner as to unreasonably block or interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The village manager is hereby authorized to
designate certain areas in any congested district where bicycles may be parked.
When such areas have been so designated, it shall be unlawful to park bicycles
in such congested district except in such areas.
Cross-reference:
   As to stopping, standing and parking generally, see §§
23-84 to
23-93.3
§ 23-30 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, ETC., OF CYCLISTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent of any child or the guardian of any ward
to authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this article.
§ 23-31 IMPOUNDING.
   In addition to or in lieu of the penalties provided by this code, any person
who commits a violation of this article may be punished by the impounding of
the bicycle used in committing any such violation for a period not exceeding 30
days. Such impounding shall be at the discretion of the chief of police.
§ 23-32 REGISTRATION - GENERALLY.
   The village encourages the registration of bicycles intended to be operated
or otherwise used within the village.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
Cross-reference:
   As to village vehicle licenses, see §§
23-65 to
23-70
§ 23-33 SAME - SAME - RENTAL AGENCIES.
   All persons engaged in operating bicycle rental agencies for the purpose of
renting or lending bicycles to patrons shall first obtain registration
certificates and plates for such bicycles. Registration certificates and plates
thus obtained by bicycle rental agencies shall not be transferred from one
bicycle to another.
§ 23-34 SAME - RECIPROCITY WITH OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   Any non-resident of the village may operate in the village any bicycle which
is duly registered in another municipality and equipped with a registration
plate, without obtaining a village registration plate; provided, that such
other municipality wherein such bicycle is licensed or registered extends the
same privilege to the residents of the village.
§ 23-35 SAME - APPLICATION; MECHANICAL CONDITION OF BICYCLE.
   Every person desiring a bicycle registration plate to be issued by the
village shall make application to the police department upon blanks furnished
by the village. Such application shall contain such information as may be
required by the chief of police concerning the applicant and the description of
the bicycle to be registered. No registration plate shall be issued unless the
bicycle complies with the requirements of this article concerning its safe
mechanical condition.
§ 23-36 SAME - FEE.
   No fee shall be required for the initial registration of the bicycle. Upon
loss of the registration the registree shall report as lost within seven days;
upon receipt of such report the police shall cancel the original registration
and issue a new registration plate to the registree.
(Ord. No. 92-2-1868)
§ 23-37 SAME - EXAMINATION; WHEN REGISTRATION MAY BE DENIED.
   Upon making an application for the initial registration of a bicycle, the
applicant shall be examined by an examining officer designated by the chief of
police. The chief of police shall designate the scope and manner of the
examination. Upon completion of such examination, the chief of police may
refuse to issue a registration plate to the applicant if such examination
discloses to the chief of police that the applicant does not have a reasonable
knowledge of the provisions of this article or that the applicant is unable to
exercise reasonable control in operating a bicycle.
§ 23-38 SAME - ISSUANCE; DURATION.
   Upon approval of the application referred to in §
23-35, the chief of police shall issue a registration plate which shall be
effective as long as the bicycle remains under the ownership of the applicant.
§ 23-39 SAME - TRANSFERABILITY; WHEN DEEMED CANCELLED.
   No registration plate shall be transferred from one bicycle to another or
from one owner to another. A registration plate shall be deemed to be cancelled
when the bicycle is sold, exchanged, junked or is disposed of in any other
manner by the person to whom the registration plate was originally issued.
§ 23-40 SALES TO BE REPORTED AND TAGS OF SOLD BICYCLES RETURNED.
   Every person, other than the operator of a bicycle establishment, who sells
or transfers ownership of any bicycle shall report the sale or transfer of
ownership to the chief of police. He or she shall return the registration plate
issued to such person to the chief of police, together with the name and
address of the person to whom such bicycle has been sold or transferred, within
seven days from the date of sale or transfer. If the sale or transfer is made
to the operator of a bicycle establishment, then such registration plate shall
be given to the owner of such bicycle establishment who shall then forward the
registration plate to the chief of police.
§ 23-41 JUNKING BICYCLES.
   Upon dismantling and disposing of any bicycle as junk, the registree shall
turn in his or her registration plate to the chief of police.
§ 23-42 REMOVAL, ETC., OF SERIAL NUMBERS AND PLATES - GENERALLY.
   No person shall willfully remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the
manufacturer's serial number or the village serial number, if any, on any
bicycle frame, nor shall any person remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any
registration plate during the period for which such registration plate is in
effect.
Cross-reference:
   As to public garages changing auto plates and engine numbers, see §
15-17
§ 23-43 SAME - DEALING, ETC., IN BICYCLES FROM WHICH DISTINGUISHING MARKS
REMOVED, ETC.
   No person shall buy, sell receive, dispose of or conceal any bicycle or
bicycle equipment from which the manufacturer's name plate, serial number or
any other distinguishing mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or
destroyed.
§ 23-44 POLICE DEPARTMENT SERIAL NUMBER.
   If the serial number of any bicycle is obliterated or defaced, and the
possessor has satisfactory proof of ownership, the chief of police is hereby
authorized to place a police department serial number thereon.
§ 23-45 POLICE AUCTION.
   All abandoned bicycles and unidentified bicycles remaining in the hands of
the chief of police shall be sold at auction after six months.
Cross-reference:
   As to auctions and auctioneers generally, see
ch. 7
§ 23-45.1 PROTECTIVE HELMETS.
   (a)   Helmet required. Every person under the age of 16 years, whenever
riding or being carried on or upon any bicycle, carrier attached to or pulled
by a bicycle, skateboard, roller or inline skates, or non-motorized scooter on
a public street, sidewalk, bicycle path or other public right-of-way in the
village, shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by
the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and
Materials or the Snell Memorial Foundation.
   (b)   Violation; penalties. Every person who is found to have violated the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the following penalties.
      (1)   First violation. A notice shall be sent to the parents or legal
guardians of the violator regarding the violation.
      (2)   Second violation. The violator shall either:
         A.   Be required to attend an educational program provided by the
department of public safety on public safety-related subjects including the use
of protective helmets; or
         B.   If the violator fails to attend the educational program as
provided in subsection
23-45.1(b)(2)A. of this section, be subject to a fine as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (3)   Third violation. The violator shall either:
         A.   Be required to complete, to the satisfaction of the department of
public safety, ten hours of community service in the village within a time
period to be prescribed by the department of public safety; or
         B.   If the violator fails to provide the community service as
directed by the department of public safety and within the time period
prescribed therefor as provided in subsection
23-45.1(b)(2)A. of this section, be subject to a fine as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (4)   Fourth and subsequent violations. The violator shall either:
         A.   Be required to complete, to the satisfaction of the department of
public safety, 20 hours of community service in the village within a time
period to be prescribed by the department of public safety; or
         B.   If the violator fails to provide the community service as
directed within the time period prescribed, shall be subject to a fine as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 06-22-3164; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
ARTICLE III. PEDESTRIANS
§ 23-46 PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (a)   Where traffic-control signals are not in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of- way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to
a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (b)   Wherever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections, the pedestrian shall
have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places
drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any
pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall
have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.
   (c)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk, when
any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for
the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
§ 23-47 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS; LOITERING, ETC., IN ROADWAY.
   (a)   At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the
most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other
than a crosswalk, he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon
the roadway.
   (b)   No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety
zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.
Cross-reference:
   As to loitering, etc., in fire engine rooms, etc., see §
24-36
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to crossing at other than crosswalks, see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 95 ½, § 172
§ 23-48 PEDESTRIANS TO OBEY SIGNALS.
   At intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop
and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway
other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful
movement of traffic.
§ 23-49 PEDESTRIANS NOT TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as
near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing
interferes with the use of the sidewalk by other pedestrians.
Cross-reference:
   As to streets and sidewalks generally, see
ch. 30
§ 23-50 CROSSING ROADWAY GENERALLY.
   (a)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (b)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business section.
§ 23-51 WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (a)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (b)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway
or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step off to
the left.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to pedestrians walking on highways, see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 95 ½, § 175
§ 23-51.1 ENTRY UPON STREET ENDS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian or any other person at any time
to enter upon the street ends or the beaches under the control of the village
adjoining the street ends at Beach Road, Harbor Street, Hazel Avenue and Park
Avenue; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to paved paths
crossing street ends and leading to beaches not under such control. The village
manager shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices at such street
ends indicating the same.
(Ord. No. 84-12-1698)
   (b)   Between 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian
or other person to enter upon the street ends, or the beaches under the control
of the village adjoining the street ends, at Dell Place, Maple Hill Road and
South Avenue. The village manager shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or
devices at such street ends indicating the same.
§ 23-52 SOLICITING RIDES.
   No person shall stand in any portion of the public street between the
property lines thereof for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of
any private vehicle.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 174
§ 23-53 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSONS.
   (a)   Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a
cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who
is guided by a dog, shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street or
highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by
traffic signals, anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding.
   (b)   The driver of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind
person, so carrying such a cane or walking stick or being guided, is crossing a
street or highway, shall bring his or her vehicle to a full stop and before
proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to
the blind person.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who
is not carrying such a cane or walking stick or guided by a guide dog when
walking on streets, highways or sidewalks but such fact shall not be considered
evidence of contributory negligence.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch 95 ½, § 172a
ARTICLE IV. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 23-54 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL GENERALLY.
   The village manager shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control
signs, signals and other devices when and as required under this chapter and
under state laws to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such
state laws to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such state laws
and may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control
devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the
provisions of this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 23-55 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to obedience to traffic-control devices, see Ill. Rev.
Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 128
§ 23-56 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND - GENERALLY.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, only the
following colors shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and
apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians, as follows.
   (a)   Circular green (alone).
      (1)   Vehicle traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian
signal.
   (b)   Steady yellow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter of the related green
movement is being terminated, and shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal, pedestrians
facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross
the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles.
   (c)   Steady red (alone).
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line or if none, before entering the intersection, and
shall remain standing until the green indication is shown unless otherwise
directed by a sign or arrow.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic or
unless a separate "Walk" indication is shown.
   (d)   Green straight-through arrow (alone).
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through,
but shall not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-
of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians legally within the intersection at
the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
the appropriate marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a
pedestrian signal.
   (e)   Green turn arrow (alone or with circular green, with steady yellow,
with steady red or with green straight-through arrow).
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning
of the circular green, steady yellow, steady red or green straight-through
arrow indication as if it where shown alone; except, that such vehicular
traffic may cautiously enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by
the green turn arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall comply with the meaning of the
circular green, steady yellow, steady red or straight-through arrow indication
as if were shown alone, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian signal.
   (f)   Signal at a place other than an intersection. In the event an official
traffic-control signal or flashing red signal is erected and maintained at a
place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section or §
23-58 shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any
such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 129
§ 23-57 SAME - PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows.
   (a)   Walk. While the "Walk" indication is illuminated, pedestrians facing
such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and
shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (b)   Don't walk. While the "Don't Walk" indication is illuminated, either
steady or flashing, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed his or her
crossing during the "Walk" indication shall proceed to a sidewalk, or to a
safety island if one is provided.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 129a
§ 23-58 SAME - FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (a)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (b)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
§ 23-59 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE MANAGER - TO ESTABLISH CROSSWALKS, TRAFFIC PARKING
LANES, LOADING ZONES, ETC.
   The village manager is hereby authorized to establish, designate and set off
with appropriate markings, signs or other devices, crosswalks, traffic lanes,
parking lanes and spaces, bus stops, taxicab stands, passenger zones and
loading zones, and other places established, designated or set off for the
enforcement of this chapter, and the village manager shall determine the
character and kind of such markings, signs or other devices.
Cross-reference:
   As to village manager generally, see §§
2-20 to
2-27
§ 23-60 SAME - TO DESIGNATE ONE-WAY STREETS AND RESTRICT TURNING AT
INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Subject to approval of the board of trustees, the village manager is
hereby empowered to designate certain streets or alleys or portions thereof
along which vehicles shall travel only in one prescribed direction, and to
designate certain intersections at which vehicles shall not make left-hand or
right-hand or U-turns, as the case may be.
   (B)   The village manager shall cause the placement of proper signs along
such streets, alleys and at such intersections indicating the direction of
travel and the kinds of turns which are prohibited.
§ 23-61 SAME - TO DESIGNATE THROUGH STREETS AND STOP, ETC., INTERSECTIONS.
   (a)   Subject to approval of the board of trustees, the village manager may
designate certain streets or portions thereof as through streets and shall
cause to be erected and maintained an appropriate stop sign on each
intersecting such through streets.
   (b)   The village manager may designate street intersections in addition to
the intersections of through streets as dangerous or hazardous intersections
and shall cause a stop sign or "yield right-of-way" sign to be erected and
maintained at each such dangerous or hazardous intersection.
§ 23-62 SAME - TO ESTABLISH PLAY STREETS AND ZONES OF QUIET.
   (a)   The village manager shall have authority to declare any street or part
thereof a play street and shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices
in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same.
   (b)   The village manager shall also have authority to establish zones of
quiet in streets adjacent to hospitals or elsewhere whenever in his or her
judgment such quiet zones are necessary for the welfare of inmates of such
hospitals or others and shall cause to be placed appropriate signs designating
such zones as zones of quiet.
§ 23-63 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS, ETC.
   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any
person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other sign
which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and
no person shall place or maintain upon any highway any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising, and the village manager may remove
or cause to be removed any sign or signal.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 1/2, § 131
§ 23-64 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or
any other part thereof.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 132
ARTICLE V. VILLAGE LICENSES
§ 23-65 REQUIRED.
   Any motor vehicle registered with the State of Illinois (or any other state)
to an address within the corporate limits of the village by a person, residing
or maintaining a place of business within the village, is required to be a
licensed as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371)
§ 23-66 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license for any motor vehicle shall file an
application with the village, upon such forms as the village shall prescribe.
New residents moving into the corporate limits of the village be permitted 30
days from the date of establishing residency in the village to purchase a
vehicle license.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2019-08-3456)
§ 23-67 CLASSIFICATION; FEES.
   (a)   The licensing period shall begin on May 1 and shall run for one year.
Application for annual licenses may be made 45 days prior to May 1 (by March 15
each year).
   (b)   Fees for licenses shall be paid annually to the village based upon the
date such licenses are issued. The fees for motor vehicle licenses, including
penalties for late payment, are and shall be as set forth in the Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (c)   Any unit of local government with authority to levy property taxes
will be exempt from fees authorized in this section.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2017-1-3409)
§ 23-68 ISSUANCE.
   After payment of the fees provided for in the preceding section, the village
shall issue the license required by this article for a motor vehicle and shall
record such license in the Village’s official records.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2025-04-3608)
§ 23-69 EXPIRATION.
   All motor vehicle licenses provided for in this article shall expire on
April 30 following the date of issue.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2019-08-3456)
§ 23-70 TRANSFER OF LICENSE UPON SALE OF VEHICLE.
   Immediately upon the sale of any motor vehicle licensed under this article,
such license shall cease to apply to and be valid for that motor vehicle. Any
person who sells a motor vehicle license under this article may transfer such
license to a different motor vehicle upon making application to the village,
giving such information as may be required (i.e. documentation of sale) no
later than 30 days after the date of sale.
(Ord. No. 2014-19-3371; Ord. No. 2025-04-3608)
ARTICLE VI. OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 23-71 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, ETC.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any parkway or sidewalk area
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 23-72 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   (a)   No driver of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle to the left upon any
street in the business district for the purpose of proceeding in the opposite
direction or for the purpose of standing, stopping or parking on such street.
   (b)   No driver of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle to the left upon any
street outside of the business district for the purpose of proceeding in the
opposite direction or for the purpose of standing, stopping or parking on such
street unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with
other traffic.
(Ord. No. 85-11-1716)
§ 23-72.1 LIMITATIONS ON RIGHT TURNS.
   Pursuant to the authority vested in the board of trustees of the village by
Ill. Rev. Stat., chapter 95 ½, § 11-208, it is hereby determined upon the basis
of an engineering and traffic investigation of the department of public works
of the village and the public safety department of the village, that right
turns at red signals after stopping as permitted by Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971,
chapter 95 ½, § 11-306, chapter 95 ½, upon all public streets be prohibited due
to potentially hazardous conflicts with vehicles or pedestrians at the
following approaches to the following intersections:
 
Intersection                  Limitation
Glencoe Road at Harbor Street Right turns at red signals are prohibited at all
                              approaches to this intersection
 
(Ord. No. 73-11-1508, § 1; Ord. No. 77-14-1556, § 1)
§ 23-72.2 LIMITATIONS ON TURNS WHEN PARKING.
   No driver of any vehicle shall make a left turn of such vehicle so as to
cross the center line of any street located in any area of the village zoned
for business uses for the purpose of parking on such street nor shall any such
driver turn or back such vehicle across the center line of any such street when
exiting any parking space located on any such street.
(Ord. No. 83-3-l663)
§ 23-73 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, OTHER DRUG OR COMBINATION
THEREOF.
   (a)   A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any
vehicle within this state while:
      (1)   The alcohol concentration in such person's blood or breath is 0.10
or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501.2;
      (2)   Under the influence of alcohol;
      (3)   Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or
      (4)   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs
to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving.
   (b)   The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has
been legally entitled to use alcohol, or other drugs, or any combination of
both, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this
section.
   (c)   Every person convicted of violating this section or a similar
provision of a local ordinance, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and,
in addition to any other criminal or administrative action, for any second or
subsequent conviction of violating this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance committed within five years of a previous violation of this
section or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be mandatorily
sentenced to a minimum of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or assigned to a
minimum of ten days of community service as may be determined by the court. The
imprisonment or assignment shall not be subject to suspension nor shall the
person be eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence or assignment.
   (d)   The Secretary of State shall revoke the driving privileges of any
person convicted under this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance. Amended by P.S. 82-783, Art. III, § 37, eff. July 13, 1982; P.A. 83-
204, § 2, eff. Jan. 1, 1984.
Cross-reference:
   As to alcoholic beverages, see
ch. 4
   As to procedure when taxicab driver is guilty of drunk driving, etc., see §
32-17
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95 ½, § 11-501
§ 23-74 NEGLIGENT DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way
negligently so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
Without limiting the foregoing, for purposes of this section, it shall be
presumed that a person has operated a vehicle negligently and is endangering or
is likely to endanger persons or property if such person:
   (a)   Uses a wireless telephone as defined in 625 ILCS 5/12-610.1(a) while
operating a vehicle; and
   (b)   Operates the vehicle in a manner that violates any law or regulation
governing the movement of vehicles on any public way.
(Ord. No. 2010-22-3280)
§ 23-75 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   (a)   Any person who drives any vehicle with a willful or a wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of reckless
driving within the village.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to reckless driving, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95 ½, § 11-
504
§ 23-75.1 SPEED LIMITS - "URBAN DISTRICT" DEFINED.
   As used in §§
23-75.2 to
23-75.4, the term URBAN DISTRICT shall mean the territory contiguous to and
including any street in the village which is built up with structures devoted
to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100
feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more.
(Ord. No. 65-7-1432, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to speed restrictions generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch.
95 ½, §§ 11-601 et seq.
§ 23-75.2 SAME - REASONABLE AND PROPER SPEED; DECREASING SPEED UNDER CERTAIN
CONDITIONS.
   (a)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any street in this village at a
speed which is more than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the street, which endangers the safety of any person
or property or is more than the applicable maximum speed limit established by
§§
23-75.3 and
23-75.4.
   (b)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
   (c)   Speed shall also be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding
with any person or vehicle on or entering a street in compliance with the legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(Ord. No. 65-7-1432, § 1)
§ 23-75.3 SAME - MAXIMUM LIMITS IN AND OUTSIDE OF URBAN DISTRICT.
   The maximum speed limit for any vehicle operated on a street in the village,
unless some other such limit is established pursuant to the provisions of §
23-75.4 or unless some other such limit is established by the state or the
county pursuant to law, is as follows:
   (a)   Outside of an urban district, the maximum is 65 mph; and
   (b)   In an urban district the maximum is 30 mph; however, in an alley the
maximum is 15 mph.
(Ord. No. 65-7-1432, § 1)
§ 23-75.4 SAME - SPECIFIC STREETS AND ZONES.
   Pursuant to the authority vested in the board of trustees of the village by
§ 11-604, 625 ILCS 5/11-601 et seq. (1998), it is hereby determined upon the
basis of engineering studies and traffic investigations of the department of
public works of the village and the public safety department of the village,
that the speed permitted by §§
23-75.2 and
23-75.3 (as well as by 625 ILCS 5/11-601 et seq.) upon the public streets,
thoroughfares, areas and zones thereof in the village hereinafter described is
more than reasonable or sound with respect to the conditions found to exist
along such streets, thoroughfares, areas and zones, and it is hereby declared
that the maximum speed limit along such streets or thoroughfares, or within
such areas or zones, shall be as herein stated, which speeds so declared shall
be effective at the times specified when signs giving notice thereof are
erected along such streets or thoroughfares, or within the areas or zones of
affected streets or thoroughfares, by the village manager or the manager's
designee:
   (a)   Maximum speed limits for specific streets.
Name of Street Zone Maximum Speed Limit Times
Name of Street     Zone                              Maximum Speed Limit Times
Dell Place         Entire length                     15 mph              All
Elm Ridge Drive    Entire length                     25 mph              All
Euclid Avenue      Entire length                     25 mph              All
Green Bay Road     Lake Cook Road to Northwood Drive 40 mph              All
Green Bay Road     Northwood Drive to Old Elm Lane   35 mph              All
Green Bay Road     Old Elm Lane to Woodlawn Avenue   30 mph              All
Green Bay Road     Woodlawn Avenue to Scott Avenue   20 mph              All
Oak Ridge Drive    Entire length                     25 mph              All
Old Green Bay Road Fairview Road to Harbor Street    25 mph              All
Old Green Bay Road Mortimer Road to Fairview Road    20 mph              All
Old Green Bay Road South Avenue to Mortimer Road     25 mph              All
Skokie Ridge Drive Dundee Road to Green Bay Road     25 mph              All
Sunset Lane        Hohlfelder Road to Bluff Road     25 mph              All
 
(Ord. No. 65-7-1432, § 1; Ord. No. 73-6-1503, § 1; Ord. No. 98-8-2051; Ord. No.
2000-5-2087)
   (b)   Transition speed limits. The village manager or the manager's designee
may provide for transition speed limits through the posting of appropriate
signs in any area where the speed limit changes by at least ten mph between
zones.
   (c)   Special speed zones. The village manager may, upon the posting of
appropriate signs in accordance with 625 ILCS 5-11-605 (1998), establish
"school zones" upon the streets and thoroughfares of the village within which a
maximum speed limit of 20 mph shall apply. The locations of such "school zones"
and the times when such special maximum speed limit applies shall be in
accordance with the applicable statutes.
(Ord. No. 2000-5-2087)
§ 23-76 DRIVING WITH VIEW OBSTRUCTED; WHEN MIRROR REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of such vehicle. Any vehicle that is so
constructed or in such condition as to obstruct the operator's view of the
roadway to the rear of such vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so attached
that it will afford the operator a view of the roadway behind him or her.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to mirror requirements, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 95 ½, §
12-502
§ 23-77 OPERATING NOISY VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise.
§ 23-78 APPROACHING RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (a)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a
signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than ten feet from the nearest track of such
railroad and shall not proceed until he or she can do so safely.
   (b)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade
crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman or automatic signal
warns of the approach of a train.
Cross-reference:
   As to railroads generally, see
ch. 27
§ 23-79 DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSIONS.
   No driving of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers.
Cross-reference:
   As to parades and processions generally, see §§
23-6,
23-7
§ 23-80 APPROACHING AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   (a)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the
right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop
and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (b)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
Statutory reference:
   For similar state law, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½, § 169
§ 23-81 APPROACHING FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE.
   Upon the approach of a fire department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of §
23-80 relating to the approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
Cross-reference:
   As to fire department generally, see §§
2-98
§ 23-82 FOLLOWING, ETC., FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm
closer than one block, or to park any vehicle within a block where fire
apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to following fire apparatus, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch.
95 ½, § 193
§ 23-83 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any
unprotected hose of the fire department without the consent of the fire
department officer in command.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to crossing fire hose, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 95 ½,
§ 194
ARTICLE VII. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
§ 23-84 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (a)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such
vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb, except for
angle parking.
   (b)   Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or
signs, with the nearest corner of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb.
§ 23-84.1 PARKING ON SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS AND DRIVEWAY APRONS.
   No person shall park any vehicle on any portion of a parkway, including
sidewalks and driveway aprons. Driveway aprons are defined as that portion of a
parkway connecting a private driveway and an improved roadway. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, persons may park vehicles classified as first division vehicles
pursuant to §
23-67 of this code on driveway aprons serving their own residence or residences
that they are visiting.
(Ord. No. 77-1-1543A, § 2; Ord. No. 99-12-2077)
§ 23-84.2 LIMITATIONS ON PARKING MANEUVERS.
   No driver of a vehicle shall turn such vehicle to the left upon any street
in the business district for the purpose of standing, stopping or parking along
a curb on such street regardless of whether parallel or angle parking is
otherwise permitted, and no driver of a vehicle upon any other street shall so
turn such vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
(Ord. No. 85-11-1716)
§ 23-85 PARKING IN ALLEYS OR ROADWAYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley or on any roadway in such a
manner or under such conditions as to obstruct the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 77-1-1543A, § 1)
§ 23-86 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
   (a)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (b)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle for compensation, except
repairs necessitated by an emergency.
§ 23-86.1 HANDICAPPED AND MEDICAL EMERGENCY PARKING.
   (a)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park a
vehicle or to leave a vehicle unattended in any area designated by the owner
thereof or the village as "handicapped parking," unless either the driver or a
passenger in the vehicle is a handicapped person or disabled veteran.
      (2)   It shall further be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to park a
vehicle or to leave a vehicle unattended in any area designated by the owner
thereof or the village as "medical emergency parking," unless either the driver
or a passenger in the vehicle is in urgent need of medical attention at the
medical office for which such space is provided.
      (3)   Any property owner reserving a portion of a parking area for
handicapped or medical emergency parking is deemed to have granted the village
the right to enforce these parking restrictions. A HANDICAPPED PERSON for the
purpose of this section shall be any person who is defined as HANDICAPPED
pursuant to Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 95-1/2, § 1-159.1, and whose vehicle possesses
handicapped license plates issued by the State of Illinois or who has obtained
a sticker for display on the vehicle from the State of Illinois to be issued to
handicapped persons.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any penalty provisions in this chapter or this code,
any person violating subsection
23-86.1(a) hereof shall be assessed a fine in the amount of not less than $250
for each offense and any such person may have his or her vehicle towed from any
parking area designated as handicapped or medical emergency parking as provided
by article X of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 96-4-2000; Ord No. 08-05-3216)
   (c)   Any property owner may reserve a portion of the owner's parking area
for handicapped or medical emergency parking, or both, by causing appropriate
signs to be posted and maintained. The village manager may reserve any village-
owned or leased parking space for handicapped or medical emergency parking, or
both, by causing appropriate signs to be posted and maintained.
   (d)   A motor vehicle bearing a sticker or registration plates issued to a
handicapped person shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and
exempt from any time limitation in parking, except for limitations of one-half
hour or less on any street, road or parking lot or parking place owned or
leased by the village
(Ord. No. 85-12-1717; Ord. No. 86-10-1731)
§ 23-87 PARKING BETWEEN 2:00 A.M. AND 6:00 A.M. PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park any vehicle on any street between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
§ 23-87.1 PARKING PROHIBITED ON SHERIDAN ROAD.
   No person shall park any vehicle on Sheridan Road at any time without the
express permission of the village manager.
(Ord. No. 78-1-1563, § 1)
§ 23-88 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE MANAGER - TO PROHIBIT PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS;
PARKING IN VIOLATION OF SIGNS.
   (a)   The village manager is hereby authorized to prohibit the parking of
vehicles at all times, or between certain hours, on any street or portion of
any street when in his or her discretion such parking may impede the free flow
of traffic on such streets, and shall cause appropriate signs to be created and
maintained giving notice thereof.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle during the time prohibited at places so
indicated by official signs.
Cross-reference:
   As to village manager generally, see §§
2-20 to
2-27
§ 23-89 SAME - TO RESTRICT PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS; OVERTIME PARKING.
   (a)   The village manager may designate either side, or both sides, or any
portion of either side, of any street as a restricted parking area, and shall
determine the time of the day any such parking restriction shall be effective
as well as the duration of time allowed for continuous vehicular parking, and
shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained in such areas
designating the effective time of day of such parking restriction as well as
the duration of time that continuous vehicular parking is allowed. Such
designation shall be evidenced by the physical presence of such signs or
legends or notices on or near the parking lane of the streets or portions
thereof where such restrictions are to be effective.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle for any period of time in excess of the
time posted on the officially erected sign or legend or notice effective for
the parking space for which it is erected during the effective time thereof.
§ 23-90 LIABILITY OF PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of the
provisions of any ordinance prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty thereof.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, it is the intent of the president
and board of trustees of the Village of Glencoe that vicarious liability shall
be imposed upon the registered owner of the vehicle and it shall not be a
defense that someone other than the registered owner was in control of the
vehicle when the violation occurred.
(Ord. No. 78-17-1573)
§ 23-91 STANDING VEHICLE GENERALLY; STANDING FREIGHT CARRYING VEHICLE IN
LOADING ZONE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed three minutes, and for the driver to
stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in
any place designated by the village manager as a loading zone and marked as
such.
§ 23-92 PARKING OF BUSSES AND TAXICABS.
   (a)   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand
respectively; except, that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any
such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers.
   (b)   The driver of an intercity bus shall not stop, stand, or park upon any
street in the village for the purpose of making an unscheduled stop, as defined
in Section
32-31 of this Code, to allow passengers to disembark, except that this
provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations.
(Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
Cross-reference:
   As to taxicabs and other vehicles for hire generally, see
ch. 32
§ 23-93 USE OF BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS BY VEHICLES OTHER THAN BUSSES AND
TAXICABS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed; except, that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily defense that someone other than
the registered owner was in control of the vehicle when the violation occurred.
(Ord. No. 78-17-1573)
Cross-reference:
   As to taxicabs and other vehicles for hire generally, see
ch. 32
§ 23-93.1 SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (a)   No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
portion of any public street, highway or roadway in the village at a time when
a snow emergency, as defined in subsection
23-93.1(b) of this section, exists.
   (b)   A SNOW EMERGENCY shall exist whenever there has been an accumulation
of new snow or ice or two inches or more in any period of time of 24 hours or
less. A snow emergency shall terminate with respect to any one-block portion of
any public street, highway or roadway whenever such street area has become
substantially clear of snow and ice for the length of an entire block to a
width sufficient to allow passage of traffic in two directions.
   (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any
time or place where it is otherwise forbidden by another provision of law.
§ 23-93.2 PROLONGED PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle at the same
location on any public street, highway or roadway for a period of 24 or more
consecutive hours.
§ 23-93.3 ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave, or to
permit the parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed motor
vehicle or part thereof upon any private property within the village for more
than seven days if the motor vehicle or part thereof, whether attended or not,
is in a discarded, wrecked, partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned
condition. Any motor vehicle or part thereof found to be parked, stored or left
in violation of this section shall be deemed "abandoned" and subject to towing
and removal pursuant to article IX of this chapter.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or part thereof that
is parked, stored or left in a fully enclosed building.
§ 23-93.4 VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE - PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
fined for each offense in the amount set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2018-09-3440)
ARTICLE VIII. BUSINESS DISTRICT PARKING
§ 23-94 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
(Ord. No. 89-10-1803)
   COIN BOX.  A non-mechanical device located in a parking zone into which
payment can be made for parking privileges.
   DAYTIME PARKING ZONE. A parking zone designated for parking in excess of 120
consecutive minutes and located on streets or property owned by the village or
by the METRA/Union Pacific Railroad Companies and leased to the village.
   PARKING PASS. Any of various types of stickers, passes or similar devices
officially issued by the village for a designated fee that authorizes a vehicle
displaying such device to park in a daytime or standard parking zone during the
time allowed by the pass and by this article.
   PARKING ZONE. A designated and marked section of a public street or other
publicly owned or leased property within the marked boundaries of which a
vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain.
   STANDARD PARKING ZONE. A parking zone in which a vehicle may be temporarily
parked and allowed to remain for a time not to exceed 120 consecutive minutes.
   VEHICLE. Any device by which any person or property may be transported upon
a highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks, or motivated by the
power of horses or kindred animals.
(Ord. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-95 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING ZONES AND COIN BOXES.
   (a)   The village manager shall provide for the installation and maintenance
of parking zones and the painting of marking lines to designate the parking
spaces within which a vehicle may be temporarily parked. The village manager
shall also provide for the installation and maintenance of appropriate signage
to inform persons of any limitations in the use of such parking spaces.
   (b)   The village manager shall provide for the installation and maintenance
of coin boxes in reasonable proximity to the parking spaces for which such coin
boxes are to be used.
(Ord. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-96 IMPROPER PARKING GENERALLY; COIN TO BE DEPOSITED IN COIN BOX; PROPER
PARKING PASS TO BE DISPLAYED.
   No vehicle parked in a parking zone shall be parked across any marking line
designating a parking space or in any position other than entirely within the
area designated by such marking lines. Failure to park entirely within such
designated area shall be a violation of this article and shall subject the
vehicle operator to the penalty prescribed by this article. When, during the
times specified in § 23-98 of this article, any vehicle shall be parked in any
parking zone requiring that a fee be deposited in a coin box, the operator of
such vehicle shall, immediately upon parking in such zone, deposit or cause to
be deposited in the coin box serving the parking space being occupied the
appropriate amount necessary for complete payment of the specified fee. Failure
to deposit the required payment for the parking space in the coin box shall
constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the vehicle operator
to the penalty prescribed by this article. When, during the times specified in
§ 23-98 of this article, any vehicle shall be parked in any parking zone
requiring that a proper parking pass be displayed, the operator of such vehicle
shall have a proper parking pass displayed upon the vehicle in the manner
prescribed for the pass. Failure to display the proper parking pass shall
constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the vehicle operator
to the penalty prescribed by this article.
(Ord. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-96.1 SPECIFIC PROHIBITION; BUSINESS (B) PERMIT PARKING.
   (a)   Employees, independent contractors, and other persons performing work
for local businesses are prohibited from parking in the standard parking zone
during business hours, 7:00 a.m. - 5:30 p.m., and must obtain from the Village
"B Permit" parking passes and park their vehicles in designated B permit
parking areas outside the central business district.
   (b)   B Permits shall be provided by the Village on an annual basis and,
upon receipt, must be displayed on the rearview mirror and visible through the
front windshield of the vehicle.
   (c)   B Permit holders that park vehicles in the central business district,
in violation of this section, are subject to penalties as described in § 23-
102.
   (d)   In addition, at all times during which a B Permit holder is working on
behalf of the business in question, business district employers shall be
jointly and severally responsible for any of their workers' violations of this
section.
(Ord. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-97 MAXIMUM PARKING TIME PERMITTED; PARKING FEES; OVERTIME PARKING.
   (a)   Standard parking zone. Upon parking a vehicle in a parking space
located in a standard parking zone, such vehicle shall be permitted to occupy
such parking space for not more than the time period posted, or, if no time
period is posted for such parking space, not more than 120 consecutive minutes.
   (b)   Daytime parking zone. Upon displaying a proper parking pass in a
daytime parking zone as required by § 23-96, the parking space may be lawfully
occupied until required to be vacated pursuant to § 23-98 of this article.
Subject to the approval by motion of the board of trustees, the village manager
shall from time to time establish a schedule that designates the fees and
duration for parking passes then in effect.
   (c)   Overtime parking. Except as provided in § 23-98 of this article, if
any vehicle shall remain in any parking zone beyond the time limits herein
established, or without payment of the fees herein specified, such vehicle
shall be considered to be parked overtime in violation of this article and the
owner or operator thereof shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this
article.
(Ord. No. 2001-15-3032; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-98 DESIGNATION OF “OVERNIGHT” DAYTIME PARKING ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or permit a vehicle to remain
parked in any daytime parking zone between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
on any day. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village manager may, in his or
her discretion, designate certain daytime parking zones as “overnight” daytime
parking zones so as to allow overnight parking within such parking zones;
provided, however, that in no event may any vehicle remain in a designated
“overnight” daytime parking zone for a period of more than 48 consecutive
hours. Designated "overnight" daytime parking zones are located in the Temple
Court municipal parking lot, the South East commuter parking lot, and the off-
street parking spaces on the west side of Greenwood between Hazel and Park
Avenues.
(Ord. No. 2001-15-3032; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-98.1 RESERVED.
§ 23-99 PARKING LONGER THAN MAXIMUM TIME PERMITTED.
   In any standard parking zone, no person shall park in a parking space for
longer than the time period posted, or, if no time period is posted for such
parking space, for longer than 120 minutes.
(Ord. No. 2001-15-3032; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-100 TAMPERING WITH COIN BOXES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the board of trustees
to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any coin box installed or maintained under the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-101 DEPOSITING SLUGS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any coin box a slug or any other fraudulent substitute for a coin or currency
of the United States.
(Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-102 VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE - PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article
shall be fined for each offense as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee
and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 98-3-2046; Ord. No. 06-14-3156; Ord. No. 08-05-3216; Ord. No. 2014-
05-3357)
   (b)   Where the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule provides for
increases in fines based on the number of previous violations of a section of
this article, the number of violations shall be calculated on a continuing
rolling basis.
(Ord. No. 91-6-1847; Ord. No. 92-9-1875; Ord. No. 98-3-2046; Ord. No. 06-14-
3156; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402; Ord. No. 2018-09-3440)
§ 23-103 RESERVED.
§ 23-104 PARKING FEES GENERALLY.
   The fees required to be deposited in coin boxes and to be collected for
issuing parking passes as provided in this article are hereby levied and
assessed to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the
public streets and in parking zones; for the cost of the supervision and
regulation of the parking of vehicles in parking zones; for the cost of
purchasing, leasing, acquiring, installing, operating, maintaining,
supervising, regulating and controlling the coin boxes and parking zones
described herein, or such other facilities as are now or may hereafter be
authorized by laws of the state; for the cost of issuing, supervising,
regulating and controlling the parking passes; and for the costs authorized by
the lease from the METRA/Union Pacific Railroad companies of land for a daytime
parking zone.
(Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 23-105 CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE.
   This article shall be deemed to be an additional and supplementary provision
for the regulation of traffic and parking in parking zones and not in conflict
with other ordinances of the village.
(Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
ARTICLE IX. TOWING
§ 23-110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings stated in this section. Any term not defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in other sections of this code or ordinances of the
village, and if not defined in any other section or ordinance, it shall have
the meaning ascribed in the Illinois Vehicle Code, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 95 ½.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle on the
public way or in a public parking lot in such a state of disrepair that it is
incapable of being driven;
      (2)   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle on the
public way or in a public parking lot that has been unmoved for a period of at
least seven days and appears to have been abandoned by its owner based on:
         A.   Its condition;
         B.   The period during which it has not been moved; or
         C.   Other circumstances indicating abandonment.
      (3)   A vehicle in a private parking lot without the consent of the lot
owner, proprietor or agent, which person has requested that the vehicle be
towed; or
      (4)   A vehicle, other than a "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicle, defined
as abandoned, or subject to being towed, by any other code sections or
ordinances of the village.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle;
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of members of the public;
      (3)   A vehicle on a public street, way or alley that is impeding the
orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to pedestrians and
operators of other vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that is parked in such a way as to block access to a fire
hydrant.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or the right to
possession of a vehicle.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A.   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a
search and seizure by the department of public safety; or
         B.   A vehicle parked in violation of any statute or ordinance that
authorizes the vehicle to be towed, but only when signs posted at the location
in question indicate that vehicles may be subject to towing.
      (2)   A vehicle driven by the subject of a custodial arrest that has been
parked on any village street for more than 24 hours after the arrestee has been
given express notice that such vehicle will be towed if not moved within 24
hours thereafter.
   VEHICLE. Any device or part thereof including trailers and other devices
designed to be pulled by a propelled device, in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported upon a street, highway or any public way.
(Ord. No. 88-25-1792)
§ 23-111 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.
   (a)   Abandoned vehicles may be towed after prior notice and the affording
of an opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
23-112 and
23-113 of this article.
   (b)   Hazardous and unlawful vehicles may be towed without notice. Within 24
hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this subsection, a notice shall be
sent to the owner of the vehicle affording the opportunity for a hearing as
provided in §§
23-114 and
23-116 of this article.
   (c)   The towing of vehicles by the village or its approved towing service
operators pursuant to this section shall be authorized only by the department
of public safety and only under the circumstances herein provided.
   (d)   Towed vehicles shall be impounded only at facilities designated by the
department of public safety until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to
provisions of this article or the laws of the State of Illinois.
§ 23-112 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Not less than seven days prior to towing any abandoned vehicle
pursuant to §
23-111(a) hereof, the village shall forward written notice of its intent to tow
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of
the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of
the Secretary of State of the state in which such vehicle is registered. The
notice shall be in the form provided in §
23-112(b) of this article.
   (b)   The following form shall be utilized for the purposes of giving pre-
tow notice to owners pursuant to §
23-112(a) of this article:
TO ______________________      DATE OF CERTIFIED
(name)                  OR REGISTERED MAILING:__________________
______________________, ______________________
(address)
YOU ARE LISTED AS THE REGISTERED OWNER OF THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED VEHICLE:
MAKE _________ MODEL ___________ YEAR_________ COLOR______
LICENSE NUMBER AND STATE ___________ VIN NUMBER ___________
THE ABOVE VEHICLE IS LOCATED AT:                                                                      
THIS VEHICLE IS IN AN APPARENTLY ABANDONED CONDITION AS DEFINED IN GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE SECTION
23-110 IN THAT SAID VEHICLE:                                                                              
                        (facts forming basis of proposed tow)
THE VILLAGE OF GLENCOE WILL TOW THE VEHICLE OR CAUSE IT TO BE TOWED AFTER 7 DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE OF MAILING UNLESS YOU MOVE THE VEHICLE TO A LAWFUL
LOCATION OR REQUEST A HEARING AS SET FORTH BELOW. IF THE VEHICLE IS TOWED, YOU WILL BE REQUIRED TO PAY ALL TOWING AND STORING CHARGES BEFORE THE VEHICLE
IS RELEASED.
FAILURE TO CLAIM THE TOWED VEHICLE WILL RESULT IN ITS SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE.
THIS TOWING IS AUTHORIZED BY SECTION
23-93.3 (strike if inapplicable) AND ARTICLE IX OF
CHAPTER 23 OF THE GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE, COPIES OF WHICH ARE ATTACHED.
IF YOU WISH TO REQUEST A HEARING ON THE LEGALITY OF THE PRESENT LOCATION AND CONDITION OF YOUR VEHICLE, YOU MUST CONTACT THE GLENCOE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY, 675 VILLAGE COURT, GLENCOE, ILLINOIS 60022 (312) 835-4111, AND FILE A WRITTEN REQUEST FOR SUCH HEARING WITHIN 7 DAYS OF THE ABOVE DATE OR MAILING.
REPORTING OFFICER ___________________ STAR #_______________
 
   (c)   On or before the day of mailing of the aforesaid written notice, a
notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which the tow may
take place and the address and phone number of the department of public safety
shall be placed on the vehicle.
§ 23-113 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (a)   The owner of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle pursuant to
§
23-111(a) hereof shall have seven days after the date of mailing of notice
pursuant to §
23-112 hereof to request, in writing, a pre-tow hearing. The written request
shall be delivered to the department of public safety within the seven-day
period. Unless such a request is received within the seven-day period, the
vehicle may be towed and any hearing rights under the provisions of this
section shall be deemed waived.
   (b)   In the event that a pre-tow hearing is not requested as provided
herein, a post-tow hearing shall, upon written request of the owner of a
vehicle towed as an abandoned vehicle, be provided pursuant to §
23-116 of this article.
   (c)   Upon any request for a pre-tow hearing being made, the village shall
schedule a date and time, not later than 15 days following receipt of such
request, for such hearing. Upon receipt of such request, but not less than 48
hours before such hearing, the village shall notify the owner of the date and
time for such hearing by telephone, by mail, or in person as the circumstances
require. Pending a final disposition of such hearing, the vehicle shall not be
towed except pursuant to the procedures of this article applicable to hazardous
or unlawful vehicles.
   (d)   Upon any request for a pre-tow hearing being made, the village shall
choose an officer or employee of the village to serve as hearing officer. In no
case shall that hearing officer be an individual who was involved in the
initial decision to tow the vehicle. The hearing officer shall have the
authority to require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the
proposed tow or any other village personnel and to request the presence of
other witnesses at the hearing.
   (e)   After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make
a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether
towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the State of Illinois or the
ordinances of the village; with a specific statutory or ordinance section cited
in the decision. The owner shall be provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing
decision.
   (f)   If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing as authorized in
this article, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with
any towing and storage costs to be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to
be charged for towing and storage services shall be at the rates established in
§§
23-114 and
23-115 of this article. The owner of the vehicle having had such a hearing may
avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location
to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the
vehicle.
   (g)   If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support towing of the
vehicle, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle shall not be towed.
The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the owner, who may display
it inside the vehicle. No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered
shall be towed by the village unless:
      (1)   The circumstances under which the decision was rendered have
changed; and
      (2)   The procedures for towing similarly-situated vehicles under this
article are followed.
   (h)   All pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any associated
police reports or documents shall be retained by the department of public
safety for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after each
tow if no hearing was requested or held.
   (i)   Any such hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any
citation issued relative to the vehicle.
§ 23-114 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (a)   Not more than seven days after towing any hazardous or unlawful
vehicle pursuant to §
23-111(b) of this article, the village shall forward written notice of the
towing by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State of the state in which such vehicle
is registered. The notice shall be in the forms provided in subsections
23-114(c) and
23-114(d) of this article.
   (b)   All approved towing service operators shall prominently post two large
signs, with dimensions of at least 12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the
opportunity and procedures for a hearing to contest the validity of any vehicle
tow. These signs, the form for which is set out in subsection
23-114(c) of this article, shall be placed in locations readily visible to the
public transacting business at any towing facility.
   (c)   The following form shall be utilized for the purpose of giving post-
tow notice to owners pursuant to subsections
23-114(a) and
23-114(b) of this article by posting in towing establishments and mailing to
owners:
NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS
   BEFORE THE OWNER OF ANY IMPOUNDED VEHICLE SHALL BE PERMITTED TO REMOVE THE SAME
FROM CUSTODY OF THE GLENCOE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR ITS AUTHORIZED TOWING
SERVICE OPERATOR, SUCH OWNER SHALL FURNISH EVIDENCE OF HIS OR HER IDENTITY AND
OWNERSHIP OF THE VEHICLE AND RIGHT OF POSSESSION THERETO, SHALL SIGN A RECEIPT FOR
THE VILLAGE, AND SHALL PAY A FEE OF $_______ FOR A PASSENGER VEHICLE OF NOT MORE THAN
7 PASSENGERS, AND $_______ FOR ANY OTHER VEHICLE TO COVER THE COST OF TOWING OR
REMOVAL TO A VEHICLE POUND OR AUTHORIZED GARAGE, AND IN ADDITION THEREOF, THE COST OF
STORAGE OF $_______ PER DAY FOR A PASSENGER VEHICLE OF NOT MORE THAN 7 PASSENGERS,
AND $_________ PER DAY FOR ANY OTHER VEHICLE.
   FAILURE TO CLAIM A TOWED VEHICLE WILL RESULT IN ITS SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION
PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE.
   ANY OWNER WISHING TO CONTEST THE VALIDITY OF THE TOW MAY OBTAIN A HEARING UNDER
THE CONDITIONS OF EITHER PARAGRAPH (A) OR (B) BELOW:
TO OBTAIN A HEARING
   (A)   IF THE VEHICLE HAS BEEN RELEASED, THE OWNER MAY, WITHIN 15 DAYS OF THE
RELEASE OF THE VEHICLE OR THE MAILING OF THE NOTIFICATION OF THE TOW, WHICHEVER
OCCURS FIRST, REQUEST A HEARING BY DELIVERING A REQUEST FOR HEARING IN WRITING TO THE
GLENCOE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY, 675 VILLAGE COURT, GLENCOE, ILLINOIS 60022. THE
RIGHT TO ANY HEARING SHALL BE DEEMED WAIVED AFTER SUCH 15 DAY PERIOD.
   (B)   IF THE VEHICLE IS STILL IMPOUNDED, THE OWNER SUBMIT A WRITTEN REQUEST TO THE
ABOVE OFFICE AND OBTAIN A HEARING WITHIN 24 HOURS AFTER THE REQUEST, EXCLUDING
WEEKENDS AND HOLIDAYS, UNLESS THE REQUEST IS MADE AFTER 3:00 P.M. IF A REQUEST FOR A
HEARING IS MADE AFTER 3:00 P.M., THE HEARING WILL TAKE PLACE ON THE SECOND WORKING
DAY THEREAFTER, EXCLUDING WEEKENDS AND HOLIDAYS.
NATURE OF HEARING
THE HEARING SHALL BE CONDUCTED ACCORDING TO VILLAGE ORDINANCE PROVISIONS AND SHALL
DETERMINE THE VALIDITY OF THE TOWING AND IMPOUNDING OF THE VEHICLE AND THE IMPOSITION
OR REFUND OF ANY TOWING OR STORAGE CHARGES, BUT THE HEARING WILL NOT DETERMINE OR
ADJUDICATE ANY CITATIONS ISSUED. IF THE HEARING OFFICER SUSTAINS THE VALIDITY OF THE
TOW AND IMPOUNDING, THE OWNER SHALL PAY ALL UNPAID TOWING AND STORAGE FEES BEFORE
OBTAINING THE RELEASE OF THE VEHICLE.
 
   (d)   The following form, along with the form in subsection
23-114(c) of this article, shall be utilized for the purpose of giving post-tow
notice to owners pursuant to subsection
23-114(a) of this article:
TO________________________         DATE OF CERTIFIED OR REGISTERED
   (name)                  MAILING:____________________
_________________________, _________________________
   (address)
YOU ARE LISTED AS THE REGISTERED OWNER OF THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED VEHICLE:
MAKE                   MODEL                   YEAR                   COLOR                  
THE ABOVE LISTED VEHICLE HAS BEEN IMPOUNDED AT: _______________________________
THE VEHICLE WAS TOWED FROM _____________________
                  (location)
ON ___________, BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF GLENCOE,
   (date)
AS AN UNLAWFUL OR HAZARDOUS VEHICLE AS DEFINED IN GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE SECTION 23-110 IN THAT
________________________________________________________________,
            (facts forming basis of tow)
THIS TOWING WAS AUTHORIZED BY ARTICLE IX OF CHAPTER 23 OF THE GLENCOE VILLAGE CODE, A COPY OF WHICH IS
ATTACHED.
YOU HAVE THE RIGHTS AND PAYMENT OBLIGATIONS AS SET FORTH IN THE ENCLOSED NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE
REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS.
REPORTING OFFICER______________ STAR #____________________
 
§ 23-115 PROCEDURES FOR RELEASING TOWED VEHICLES.
   (a)   Before the owner of any towed vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
vehicle from a vehicle pound or authorized garage, the owner shall furnish
evidence of his or her identity and ownership and right to possession of the
vehicle, sign a receipt for the vehicle, and pay an amount as set forth in
subsection
23-115(b) of this article. The director of public safety is authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to
establish these facts.
   (b)   The owner shall pay fees not to exceed the tow company fee for a
passenger vehicle of not more than seven passengers, or for any other passenger
vehicle, to cover the cost of towing or removal of the vehicle; and in addition
thereto, the tow company fee per day for storage for a passenger vehicle of not
more than seven passengers, or for any other passenger vehicle; and thereupon
must take possession of the vehicle within 24 hours of payment. The owner may
pay the full amount of fees and subsequently request a hearing pursuant to §
23-116 of this article.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
   (c)   Upon release of a towed vehicle as provided in this section, towing
service personnel shall direct the owner's attention to the signs concerning
notice and hearings posted pursuant to §
23-114(b) of this article.
   (d) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, an owner
may remove a towed vehicle without paying towing or storage fees upon
presentation of an order for release issued pursuant to §
23-116(g)(2)B. of this article.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statutory provisions to the
contrary, any towing service operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of
the village must perform its services subject to the provisions of this
article. However, the towing company shall have the right to recover the
reasonable value of its services, not paid by the vehicle owner, from the
village.
§ 23-116 POST-TOW HEARINGS.
   (a)   The owner of a vehicle towed as a hazardous or unlawful vehicle
pursuant to §
23-111(b) of this article shall have 15 days after the date of mailing of
notice or release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first, to request in writing
a post-tow hearing to determine the validity of such tow and any towing or
storage charges. The written request shall be delivered to the department of
public safety within the 15-day period, or the right to a post-tow hearing
under the provisions of this article shall be deemed waived. The hearing will
not be determinative of, or adjudicative, any citation issued relative to any
towed vehicle.
   (b)   Upon any request for a post-tow hearing being made, the village shall
schedule a date and time for such hearing as follows:
      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
full payment of towing and storage charges, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the receipt of such request for such hearing. Upon receipt of
such request, but not less than 48 hours before such hearing, the village shall
notify the owner of the date and time for such hearing by telephone, by mail,
or in person as the circumstances require.
      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle has not been released, the
hearing shall take place at the option of the owner:
         A.   Within 24 hours after such request for such hearing, excluding
weekends and holidays; except that if such request is made after 3:00 p.m.,
then a hearing shall be held on the second working day following the request.
Upon receipt of such request, the village shall notify the owner of the date
and time of such hearing by telephone or in person.
         B.   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of such request on a
date convenient to all parties. Upon receipt of such request, but not less than
48 hours before such hearing, the village shall notify the owner of the date
and time for such hearing by telephone, by mail, or in person as the
circumstances require.
   (c)   Upon any request for a post-tow hearing being made, the village shall
choose an officer or employee of the village to serve as hearing officer. In no
case shall the hearing officer be an individual who was involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle. The hearing officer may be the same person
designated for pre-tow hearings pursuant to §
23-113 of this chapter. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require
the presence of the enforcement officer who ordered the tow, or any other
village personnel, and to request the presence of other witnesses at such
hearing.
   (d)   The hearing officer shall review all evidence presented by the vehicle
owner and the police department and make a finding based on the evidence
presented as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
The village must establish such authority by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (e)   For each hearing, the hearing officer shall complete a vehicle tow
hearing decision and attach such decision to the original vehicle towing report
of the department of public safety, and supply a copy of the vehicle tow
hearing decision to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is present,
otherwise by mail.
   (f)   After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make
one or more of the following written findings, which must be incorporated into
the vehicle tow hearing decision:
      (1)   The towing and storage of the vehicle was authorized by the laws of
the State of Illinois or any village ordinance. One or more specific statutory
or ordinance sections and the amount owed for towing and storage shall be
stated in such a finding.
      (2)   There was no authority in law for the towing and storage of the
vehicle, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed did not
comply with the requirements of the statute or ordinance authorizing the tow.
      (3)   The towing of the vehicle was authorized by law, but the owner was
caused to incur additional storage charges because of late notification of
towing or other reasons not the fault of the owner. The specific amount owned
by the owner, and the specific amount excused, shall be stated in the decision.
      (4)   The request for hearing was not made within 15 days of the mailing
of notice of towing or the date the vehicle was released from the vehicle pound
or authorized garage, whichever was earlier.
      (5)   A hearing was requested by the person requesting the hearing failed
to appear and failed to request a continuance.
   (g)   The hearing officer shall advise the owner of his or her findings at
the conclusion of the hearing to-wit:
      (1)   If the towing and storage was authorized by law, and is not
otherwise reimbursable, the owner shall be so informed and further advised as
to the amount due.
      (2)   Should the towing and/or storage be found to be unauthorized or
reimbursable, the hearing officer shall:
         A.   If the vehicle has been released to the owner:
            1.   Note the amount of the cash deposit or towing and storage fees
prepaid by the owner on the vehicle tow hearing decision;
            2.   Complete a printed voucher form for the amount to be
reimbursed;
            3.   Transmit the decision and voucher form to the director of
public safety for his or her authorization for payment;
            4.   Advise the owner that a refund of the cash deposit of fees
will be transmitted to the village treasurer of the village for payment;
            5.   Transmit a copy of the hearing decision, along with the
original voucher and original payment receipt to the village treasurer of the
village within 48 hours of the hearing;
            6.   Unless the village files a lawsuit to contest the decision of
the hearing officer, the owner shall be paid the money due within 28 days after
the decision of the hearing officer.
         B.   If the vehicle is still impounded at the time of the hearing, the
following procedure shall be followed:
            1.   An order for the release of the vehicle shall be prepared in
duplicate; the owner shall be provided with the original, and a copy shall be
attached to the vehicle tow hearing decision;
            2.   Upon presentation by the owner to the towing service operator
of the order for release, the vehicle shall immediately be released to the
owner upon payment of the towing and storage fees, if any, found to be due.
   (h)   All vehicle tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any associated
police reports or documents shall be retained by the department of public
safety for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after each
tow if no hearing was requested or held.
   (i)   The village or the owner may contest the decision of the hearing
officer in any manner provided by law.
§ 23-117 SALE OF TOWED VEHICLE.
   (a)   Any vehicle towed pursuant to this article may be sold by the
department of public safety of the village to the highest bidder at either a
private or public sale.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be sold under this section until at least 30 days
after the latter of:
      (1)   If a hearing is requested, the date of a vehicle tow hearing
decision; or
      (2)   If no hearing is requested, the expiration of the period for
requesting a vehicle tow hearing.
   (c)   Notice of any sale pursuant to this section shall be forwarded by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the
Secretary of State of the state in which the vehicle is registered. Notice of
sales under this section shall be given to the owner as described herein at
least 30 days in advance of a sale and shall be published at least 20 days in
advance in a newspaper of general circulation in Cook County, Illinois.
(Ord. No. 84-10-1696)
§§ 23-118 - 23-119 RESERVED.
ARTICLE X. OTHER MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
§ 23-120 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section, except when the context requires otherwise. Any term not defined
herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in other sections of this code or
ordinances of the village. If not defined in any other section or ordinance, it
shall have the meaning ascribed in the Illinois Vehicle Code, Ill. Rev. Stat.
ch. 95½.
   ELECTRIC SCOOTER. A device weighing less than 100 pounds, with two or three
wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that
is solely powered by an electric motor and human power. ELECTRIC SCOOTERS, for
the purpose of this article, include both low-speed electric scooters, as
defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-140.11), as well as electric
scooters with maximum speeds in excess of ten miles per hour.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A legally designated guardian appointed or assigned to care
for another person.
   LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one
of the following classes, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-140.10: Class 1 low-speed
electric bicycle, Class 2 low-speed electric bicycle, or Class 3 low-speed
electric bicycle.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE. Any vehicle for which the State of Illinois does not
issue a title document, does not issue license plates or registration
documents, and is a wheeled or tracked vehicle equipped with an electric or gas
motor, a motor-driven cycle, or other similar vehicle, regardless of whether
the vehicle is operated by pedals with a chain or throttle assist, including
low-speed electric bicycles and electric scooters.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled
vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable
of a speed in excess of eight miles per hour on level ground.
   TOY VEHICLE, Any battery-powered ride-on toy that is designed to not exceed
ten miles per hour; that includes any number of wheels, handlebars, steering
wheel, seat, or platform; and is designed for children under the age of eight
years (including Razor® kick-start scooters and Power WheelsTM).
(Ord. No. 2025-16-3620)
§ 23-121 OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years, or who does
not possess a valid driver’s license, to operate a motor-driven vehicle upon
any public street, parking lot, or any other public property within the
corporate limits of the village, unless accompanied by that person’s parent or
legal guardian.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years, or who does
not possess a valid driver’s license, to operate an electric scooter upon any
public street, parking lot, or any other public property within the corporate
limits of the village.
   (c)   Every person operating a motor-driven vehicle on any public street,
sidewalk, parking lot, or any other public property within the corporate limits
of the village must comply with all applicable regulations set forth in
Sections 11-1501 through 11-1518 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11 et
seq., as may be amended from time to time.
   (d)   No person operating a motor-driven vehicle upon a public street may
exceed the posted speed limit on that street.
   (e)   It is unlawful for any person to use a motor-driven vehicle in the
village that has been altered from its original manufactured design to change
the vehicle's speed, method of propulsion, braking, or other operations, such
as by removing pedals or chains, or adding a throttle.
   (f)   No more than one person at a time may ride on a motor-driven vehicle.
(Ord. No. 2025-16-3620)
§ 23-122 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person may operate a motor-driven vehicle on public sidewalks,
parks, public parking lots, and any other public property within the corporate
limits of the village, or within publicly-accessible, privately-owned parking
lots for which the village has entered into an agreement with the property
owner.
   (b)   No person may operate a toy vehicle except in accordance with the
regulations set forth in Section
23-12 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2025-16-3620)
§ 23-123 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (a)   Every motor-driven vehicle, when in use after sunset, must be equipped
with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear that must be
visible from all distances from 50 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly
in front of lawful lower beam of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting
a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used as an
alternative to the red reflector.
   (b)   Every motor-driven vehicle must be equipped with a brake to enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on a dry, level, clean pavement.
   (c)   No person may operate a motor-driven vehicle while carrying a package,
bundle, or article in a manner that prevents the operator from keeping both
hands upon the handle bars or steering device.
   (d)   Adult responsibility. No parent or legal guardian of a minor under the
age of 16 may permit that minor to violate any provision of this article.
(Ord. No. 2025-16-3620)
§ 23-124 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the prohibitions contained in this article:
   (a)   Any motor-driven vehicle owned by a unit of state or local government,
operated by an employee unit of state or local government in the course of
their duties, and any such employee; provided that:
      (1)   The person operating the vehicle has a valid driver's license; and
      (2)   Operation of the vehicle is in accordance with Section 1426.l of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1
   (b)   Motorized wheelchairs; and
   (c)   Toy vehicles.
(Ord. No. 2025-16-3620)
§§ 23-125 - 23-130 RESERVED.
CHAPTER 24: OFFENSES – MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
24-1   Affrays and riots
   
24-2   Aircraft - landing
   
24-3   Assemblage - disturbance of
   
24-4   Barbed wire - prohibited
   
24-5   Bathing - use of suit required
   
24-6   Repealed by Ord. No. 71-9-1489, § 1
   
24-7   Repealed by Ord. No. 71-9-1489, § 1
   
24-8   Cigarettes, etc. - sale, possession and use of tobacco products by
minors
   
24-9   Concealing identity by hood, mask, etc.
   
24-10   Destruction of property
   
24-10.1   Vandalism
   
24-11   Disorderly conduct - unlawful
   
24-12   Same - improper noise; riot; breach of peace, etc.
   
24-13   Same - unlawful assemblies
   
24-14   Same - idle or dissolute persons; beggars; exercising unlawful games
   
24-15   Same - persons found in houses of ill fame or gaming houses
   
24-16   Same - lodging in vacant buildings, etc.
   
24-17   Same - assault, etc.
   
24-18   Same - seeking, etc., to obtain money, etc., by fraud, etc.
   
24-19   Same - touts, cappers, etc., for gambling house
   
24-20   Same - persons loitering in blocks, disorderly houses, etc., without
lawful means of support
   
24-21   Same - known criminals loitering, etc., around certain places
   
24-22   False alarms
   
24-23   Gambling - prohibited
   
24-24   Same - gambling places and devices
   
24-25   Same - seizure of gaming devices
   
24-26   Same - lotteries and punchboards
   
24-27   Houses of ill fame and disorderly houses
   
24-28   Hunting
   
24-29   Illumination of structures
   
24-30   Impersonating police officer
   
24-31   Indecent conduct generally
   
24-32   Indecent exposure, etc.
   
24-33   Interfering with, etc., firefighters; duty to assist firefighters
   
24-34   Intoxication
   
24-35   Loafing, congregating, etc., on public property generally
   
24-36   Loitering, etc., in fire engine rooms, etc.
   
24-37   Meters - tampering with, defacing, etc.
   
24-38   Nuisances - enumerated
   
24-39   Nuisances - abatement; costs; penalties
   
24-40   Obscene or indecent pictures, books, etc.
   
24-41   Profanity
   
24-42   Prostitution - prohibited
   
24-43   Same - soliciting prohibited
   
24-44   Public records - removing, damaging, etc.
   
24-45   Resisting, etc., police officer; assisting, etc., persons in custody
   
24-46   Trespass - prohibited
   
24-47   Weapons - carrying concealed prohibited
   
24-48   Same - discharge prohibited
   
24-49   Same - sale of weapons that can be concealed
   
24-50   Same - sale, etc., to minors
   
24-51   Same - exemptions
   
24-52   Cannabis - control of
   
24-53   Curfew - minors
§ 24-1 AFFRAYS AND RIOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to incite or participate in any riot or
affray within the village.
§ 24-2 AIRCRAFT - LANDING.
   No person shall land any aircraft at any location within the village, except
for an emergency landing necessary to prevent possible loss of life; except,
that the board of trustees may authorize specific persons to land aircraft at
specific locations for specific purposes. The regulations in this section shall
not apply to emergency medical service operations and training determined to be
necessary or beneficial to the public health, safety, and welfare by the
Director of Public Safety.
(Ord. No. 2017-20-3428)
Statutory reference:
   As to authority of village as to airports, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24,
§ 11-101 et seq.
   For state law as to aviation generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 15 ½
§ 24-3 ASSEMBLAGE - DISTURBANCE OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the village.
§ 24-4 BARBED WIRE- PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use barbed wire on fences or
railings fronting on any of the streets within the village.
Cross-reference:
   As to fences generally, see §§
9-74 to
9-81
§ 24-5 BATHING - USE OF SUIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe at any public place or in any
place open to public view unless such person is adequately garbed in a bathing
suit.
(1929 Code, § 775)
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with
establishment of rules and regulations for bathing, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 29
Cross-reference:
   As to indecent exposure, etc., generally, see §
24-32
§ 24-6 REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 71-9-1489, § 1.
§ 24-7 REPEALED BY ORD. NO. 71-9-1489, § 1.
§ 24-8 CIGARETTES, ETC. - SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY
MINORS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the terms, phrases and
words shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection. All terms,
phrases and words used in this section but not defined in the subsection shall
have meaning given to them elsewhere in the village code.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any item, project, or substance containing or made from
tobacco leaf, including specifically, but without limitation, cigarettes,
cigars, snuff and pipe, chewing or dipping tobacco.
   (b)   Sale by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell, dispense,
furnish or otherwise distribute any tobacco product to any person or business
within the corporate limits of the village.
   (c)   Sale to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give,
dispense, furnish or otherwise distribute tobacco product to any minor within
the corporate limits of the village.
   (d)   Purchase by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase or
otherwise acquire any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the
village.
   (e)   Possession and use by minors. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
possess or use a tobacco product within the corporate limits of the village;
provided, however, that the possession or use of any tobacco product by any
minor under the direct supervision and control of the parent or guardian of any
minor in the privacy of such parent's or guardian's home shall not be unlawful.
   (f)   Penalties and enforcement.
      (1)   The department of public safety is encouraged and directed to work
with the schools and other youth service organizations in the village to
develop programs designed to prevent the use of tobacco products by minors and
to assist parents in their efforts to discourage minors from using tobacco
products.
      (2)   Whenever a minor has been found to violate any of the provisions of
this §
24-8, the public safety department shall assign a youth officer to such case
for purposes of adjusting the violation. It is the expectation that such
adjustments shall use a variety of methods to discourage the minor from future
violations of this section, including techniques such as parental notification,
attendance at educational sessions regarding the adverse consequences from the
use of tobacco products, and community service projects that enhance the
minor's understanding of the adverse consequences of the use of tobacco
products. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if parents or guardians do not consent
to an adjustment process with a youth officer within 21 days after written
notice, no such adjustment shall occur, but violations shall nevertheless be
subject to fines as provided in this section.
      (3)   In the instance of a first offense by any minor, the youth officer
will provide the minor and the minor's parent or guardian information regarding
the community programs relating to tobacco use, but shall allow the parent/
guardian to resolve such violation. This first violation will be recorded by
the youth officer in consideration of any further violations by such minor.
      (4)   If a minor repeatedly violates the provisions of this section, the
youth officer may determine that, in addition to or in lieu of the adjustment
techniques described in §
24-8(f)(2) and (3), a monetary fine shall be levied. In such cases, the first
fine so imposed shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule.
      (5)   Any violation of this section by a person other than a minor shall
be subject to a fine as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2000-9-2091; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 24-9 CONCEALING IDENTITY BY HOOD, MASK, ETC.
   Whoever with an evil or wicked purpose appears in any public place hooded,
robed or masked so as to conceal his or her identity shall be punished as
provided in §
16-1.
§ 24-10 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall injure, destroy, deface, render inoperative or assist in
injuring, destroying, defacing or rendering inoperative any bridge, fence,
building, sign, traffic signal, bulleting board, street light, fire alarm box,
post office box, police box, hydrant, subway, pavement, curb, public tree or
shrubbery or any equipment or other public or private property within the
village, nor place any goods, boxes, work or any other material upon or against
any of the foregoing, nor shall any person extinguish or cause to be
extinguished, or light or cause to be lighted, any public lamp, light or street
light unless duly authorized to do so.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with prevention,
etc., of injury to property, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 23
§ 24-10.1 VANDALISM.
   No person shall:
   (a)   Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without
his or her consent; or
   (b)   Knowingly or without authority enter into or obtain control over any
motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of another
person without his or her consent.
(Ord. No. 76-8-1542, § 1)
§ 24-11 DISORDERLY CONDUCT - UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to do any act in such
unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of
the peace.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with prevention,
etc., of disorderly conduct, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 22
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to disorderly conduct generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963,
ch. 38, § 26-1
§ 24-12 SAME - IMPROPER NOISE; RIOT; BREACH OF PEACE, ETC.
   All persons who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to
a breach of the peace within the village shall be deemed guilty of disorderly
conduct.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with prevention,
etc., of riots, disturbances of the peace, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 22
§ 24-13 SAME - UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   All persons who shall collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes, or
for any purpose, to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons shall be
deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to mob action, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, § 25.1
§ 24-14 SAME - IDLE OR DISSOLUTE PERSONS; BEGGARS; EXERCISING UNLAWFUL GAMES.
   All persons who are idle or dissolute and go about begging and all persons
who use or exercise any juggling or other unlawful games or plays shall be
deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
Charter reference:
   For charter provisions as to power of village in connection with beggars,
see char.,
art. IV, § 22
§ 24-15 SAME - PERSONS FOUND IN HOUSES OF ILL FAME OR GAMING HOUSES.
   All persons who are found in houses of ill fame or gaming houses shall be
deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 24-16 SAME - LODGING IN VACANT BUILDINGS, ETC.
   All persons lodging in or found at any time in garages, sheds, barns or
unoccupied buildings or lodging in the open air and not giving a good account
of themselves shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 24-17 SAME - ASSAULT, ETC.
   All persons who shall willfully assault another in the village, or be
engaged in or aid or abet in any fight, quarrel or other disturbance in the
village, shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with prevention,
etc., of assaults, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 22
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent fighting, etc., see Ill.
Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-5-3
§ 24-18 SAME - SEEKING, ETC., TO OBTAIN MONEY, ETC., BY FRAUD, ETC.
   All persons who stand, loiter or stroll about in any place in the village
waiting or seeking to obtain money or other valuable things from others by
trick or fraud or to aid or assist therein and all persons who shall engage in
any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing
in any place in the village, or who shall aid or abet or in any manner be
concerned therein shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with suppression,
etc., of swindling, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 27
§ 24-19 SAME - TOUTS, CAPPERS, ETC., FOR GAMBLING HOUSE.
   All touts, ropers, steerers or cappers, so-called, for any gambling room or
house who shall ply or attempt to ply their calling on any public street in the
village shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 24-20 SAME - PERSONS LOITERING IN BLOCKS, DISORDERLY HOUSES, ETC., WITHOUT
LAWFUL MEANS OF SUPPORT.
   All persons found loitering about in any block, gambling house or disorderly
house or wandering about the streets either by night or day without any known
lawful means of support, or without being able to give a satisfactory account
of themselves, shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 24-21 SAME - KNOWN CRIMINALS LOITERING, ETC., AROUND CERTAIN PLACES.
   All persons who are known to be thieves, burglars, pickpockets, robbers or
confidence men, either by their own confession or otherwise, or by having been
convicted of larceny, burglary or other crime against the law of the state, who
are found lounging in or prowling or loitering around any railroad depot,
banking institution, place of public amusement, auction room, hotel, store,
shop, thoroughfare, car, omnibus, public conveyance, public gathering, public
assembly, courtroom, public building, private dwelling house, house of ill
fame, gambling house, tippling shop or any public place, and who are unable to
give a reasonable excuse for being so found, shall be deemed guilty of
disorderly conduct.
§ 24-22 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false
alarm in the village.
(1929 Code, § 767)
§ 24-23 GAMBLING - PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to play for money or other valuable
thing at any game with cards, dice, chips or checks, or at billiards or pool,
or with any other article, instrument or thing whatever which may be used for
the purpose of playing or betting upon or winning or losing money or anything
of value, or to bet on any game others may be playing or to participate in any
wager or lottery.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with suppression,
etc., of gambling, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 27
Cross-reference:
   As to gambling, etc., in poolrooms, etc., see §
5-18
Statutory reference:
   As to gambling generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, §§ 28-1 to 28-8
   For authority of the village to suppress gaming, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 24, § 11-5-1
§ 24-24 SAME - GAMBLING PLACES AND DEVICES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a place for gambling in
any building, booth, yard, garden, boat or float used or occupied by himself or
herself or his or her agent, or to procure or permit any persons to frequent or
to come together to play for money or other valuable thing at any game in any
such building, booth, yard, garden, boat or float. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to possess or use any table, device or paraphernalia or other
apparatus for playing at any game or sport for money or any valuable thing, or
keep or allow to be used or rented any such place for gambling purposes.
   (b)   For purposes of the foregoing sentence, a DEVICE for gambling purposes
includes without limitation any video gaming terminal, as defined in the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or
other device designated primarily for use in a gambling place.
   (c)   A DEVICE for gambling purposes does not include:
      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which
device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation
thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the
player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property.
(Ord. No. 2009-17-3250)
      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
(Ord. No. 2009-17-3250)
§ 24-25 SAME - SEIZURE OF GAMING DEVICES.
   Any member of the police department of the village may seize any instrument,
device or thing used for the purpose of gaming or gambling and all instruments,
devices or things shall be demolished or destroyed under the supervision of the
chief of police.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to seizure of gambling devices, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963,
ch. 38, § 28-5
§ 24-26 SAME - LOTTERIES AND PUNCHBOARDS.
   No person shall keep, maintain, direct or manage or aid in the keeping,
maintaining, directing or managing, within the village, of any lottery or
punchboard for the drawing or disposing of money or any other property or thing
whatsoever.
§ 24-27 HOUSES OF ILL FAME AND DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation
or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness, or keep an ill-governed
disorderly house, to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking,
fornication or other misbehavior. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
patronize or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation house or
place, or own, rent or allow any premises to be used for any such purposes. It
shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or patronize any house of ill fame or
house of prostitution in the village.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village to prohibit, etc., boarding
houses, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 26
Statutory reference:
   As to prostitution generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, § 11-14 et
seq.
   For state law as to power of village to suppress houses of ill fame and
disorderly houses, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-5-1
§ 24-28 HUNTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or to engage in killing any
animal, other than as prescribed by law or ordinance, in the village.
(1929 Code, § 770)
§ 24-29 ILLUMINATION OF STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to illuminate any property, including
places of amusement or recreation, with floodlights or other lights that shine
or glare into or toward any private dwelling house or into any street or
avenue. Intensity of illumination shall in no event be greater than presently
permitted for tennis courts. All lights used for the illumination of places
shall be directed toward the ground or toward the structure to be illuminated,
and shall be equipped with reflectors and shields that shall prevent glare in
the direction of any private dwelling house or into any street or avenue.
(Ord. No. 92-26-1892)
§ 24-30 IMPERSONATING POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or herself
to be a member of the police department of the village or maliciously or with
intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the signs or signals of the police
department, or to wear the uniform accepted as the police uniform. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use or wear a badge or other similar device like
that of a police officer except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
Cross-reference:
   As to resisting, etc., police officer, see §
24-45
§ 24-31 INDECENT CONDUCT GENERALLY.
   No person shall openly conduct himself or herself in a lewd, lascivious or
indecent manner within the village.
Cross-reference:
   As to profanity, see §
24-41
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to public indecency, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, §
11-9
§ 24-32 INDECENT EXPOSURE, ETC.
   No person shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity, or make an
indecent exposure of his or her person; and no person shall undress in any
place within the village other than in an enclosed building, house or
bathhouse, and no person shall undress in any place within the village in any
wagon, truck, motor vehicle or tent whether closed and curtained or not.
§ 24-33 INTERFERING WITH, ETC., FIREFIGHTERS; DUTY TO ASSIST FIREFIGHTERS.
   No person shall in any manner hinder, delay or interfere with any member of
the fire department in the performance of his or her duty at any time or place,
and all persons attendant upon a fire shall be subject to the order of the fire
chief or the firefighter in command at such fire for the purpose of rendering
any assistance to the members of the fire department in the execution of their
duties, and all such persons shall upon demand render such reasonable services
so required.
(1929 Code, § 140)
§ 24-34 INTOXICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition on any
street, alley or public place in the village, or in any private house or place
to the disturbance of another.
Cross-reference:
   As to alcoholic beverages generally, see
ch. 4
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to the power of the village to prevent intoxication, see
Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-5-3
§ 24-35 LOAFING, CONGREGATING, ETC., ON PUBLIC PROPERTY GENERALLY.
   No person shall obstruct, lounge or loaf on or congregate upon any public
street, alley, avenue, park, parkway or any other public place within the
village after being requested to move on by any public officer.
§ 24-36 LOITERING, ETC., IN FIRE ENGINE ROOMS, ETC.
   No person other than a firefighter, police officer or public official shall
loiter or assemble with any other person in any engine house or room for the
sheltering or housing for the fire department apparatus without the permission
of the officer in charge thereof.
(1929 Code, § 139)
Cross-reference:
   As to loitering, etc., in roadway, see §
23-47
§ 24-37 METERS - TAMPERING WITH, DEFACING, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface, disturb, tamper or
interfere with, carry away or in any other way injure or destroy any water
meter, gas meter or electric meter, or any seal attached to any portion of any
such water, gas or electric meter, or any appliance connected therewith. It
shall also be unlawful for any person to make, attempt to make or cause to be
made any connection between any water, gas or electric meter and any water or
gas main, or any cable or wire supplying electric current, at any place within
the village without a permit therefor.
Cross-reference:
   As to unauthorized interference, etc., with water meters, see §
36-22
§ 24-38 NUISANCES - ENUMERATED.
   The following things, actions and conditions are declared nuisances:
   (a)   Offensive noises - audio, musical and similar equipment. To maintain
or operate or cause or permit to be operated, in any building or on any public
or private premises in the village any television, radio, phonograph, tape
player, amplified musical instrument, loudspeaker or any similar device capable
of receiving, transmitting, amplifying or projecting sound or noise, in such
manner as to be plainly audible:
      (1)   At a distance of 1,000 feet from such boundary at any time;
      (2)   At a distance of 150 feet from the boundary of the premises upon
which such device is operated between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that in its discretion the board of trustees may, upon request from an
eleemosynary or community service organization to conduct a specific event or
activity having a civic purpose (as defined in article II, § 12, of the Village
of Glencoe’s zoning ordinance), permit such audio, musical or similar equipment
or devices to be operated between 11:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. upon a
determination that such event or activity will be in the best interest of the
village; provided further that the issuance of any such permit shall give no
right or entitlement to any person or group for any renewal or re-issuance of a
similar permit for any future or similar event or activity; or
      (3)   Within any adjacent schoolhouse, house of public worship or public
office or assembly hall while such facility is in use for school, worship or
public business purposes.
(Ord. No. 91-14-1855)
   (b)   Same - work operations.
      (1)   To conduct any construction operations, tree removal or trimming,
or to operate or use any generator, compressor, pile driver, power shovels,
pneumatic hammers, derricks, steam or electrical hoists, or other building or
construction tool or apparatus (“work operations”), the use of which is
attended with noise that is audible on any public or private property adjoining
the premises on which such tool or apparatus is operated or such work
operations are conducted, except:
         A.   In cases of emergencies;
         B.   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through
Fridays; and
         C.   Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays.
      (2)   No work operations, as defined in this section, shall be permitted
on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to deem work operations performed by or on behalf of the village as a
nuisance wherever conducted.
(Ord. No. 04-09-3098; Ord. No. 2011-16-3297)
   (c)   Same - lawn maintenance activities.
      (1)   To conduct any lawn maintenance activities involving the operation
of any lawn maintenance equipment, including without limitation mowers,
tractors, trimmers, vacuums, tillers or hedge clippers, the use of which is
attended with noise that is plainly audible beyond the boundaries of the
premises upon which such equipment is operated or used, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, inclusive, and
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No such lawn
maintenance activities involving the operation of any lawn maintenance
equipment shall be permitted on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. These
limitations shall not apply to the operation of lawn maintenance equipment by
occupants of the property on which such equipment is in use.
(Ord. No. 91-17-1858; Ord. No. 97-7-2030; Ord. No. 07-14-3191)
      (2)   The use of gasoline-powered leaf blowers shall be prohibited at all
times except between April 1 and April 30 and between October 1 and November 30
of each year; provided, however, that the Village Manager may, in their sole
discretion, postpone or extend these limited permitted usage periods by no more
than two weeks total per spring or fall season. The Village Manager will take
all reasonable steps to notify all landscapers holding valid Village Landscape/
Tree/ Lawn Care Professionals Licenses of any changes to the limited permitted
usage periods via contact information provided on the landscapers' license
applications. During the limited permitted usage periods set forth in this
section the use of gasoline-powered leaf blowers shall be subject to the day
and time restrictions set forth in the preceding subsection for lawn
maintenance activities involving lawn maintenance equipment.
(Ord. No. 98-2-2045; Ord. No. 2000-23-3005; Ord. No. 07-14-3191; Ord. No. 2023-
09-3554)
      (3)   In the event of a storm or other emergency, upon determining that
it is in the best interest of the safety and welfare of the village, the
village manager may waive enforcement of the foregoing restrictions.
      (4)   Nothing in these restrictions shall be construed to deem lawn
maintenance operations on golf courses or on publicly owned property as
nuisances, wherever or however conducted.
   (d)   Same - offensive noises. To produce or project by any means at any
time any noise audible beyond the boundary of the premises from which it
emanates which is, by reason of loudness, pitch, intensity, frequency or time
of day unreasonably offensive to the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or any
person residing in the vicinity;
   (e)   Same - persons liable; exception. The owner of the property from which
any noise declared a nuisance hereunder is being produced, the person or
persons in actual control of such property and the person or persons producing,
or in control of the device producing, any such noise shall be liable for
violation of this section; provided, however, the village and its officers,
employees and agents shall be exempt for all liability in regard to such
nuisances when such noise is produced in the course of official village
business or services;
   (f)   Keeping cattle and swine. To own, keep or use any railroad car, yard,
pen, place or premises, in or upon which cattle or swine shall be confined or
kept, so as to be offensive to those residing in the vicinity, or to be an
annoyance to others;
   (g)   Noisome substances and matter - depositing, etc. To cause or suffer
the carcass of any animal, or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be
collected, deposited or to remain in any place, or to deposit any night soil,
dead animal, or filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot, street,
alley, highway, park or other place;
   (h)   Same - importation and transportation. To bring into or transport
through the village, the body or carcass of any unslaughtered dead animal,
offal, blood, bones, rank stuff in a state or decomposition or any putrid or
offensive animal matter;
   (i)   Same - spilling, etc. To permit any swill, brine, urine or other
offensive animal substance, or any stinking liquid or other filthy matter of
any kind, to run or fall from or out of any building, vehicle or erection into
or upon any street or public place;
   (j)   Same - time for removal. For any person to permit any offal, filth,
refuse, animal or vegetable matter, which is liable to become putrid or
offensive, or injurious to health, to remain on any premises used or occupied
by him or her for a longer period than four hours at any one time;
   (k)   Offensive smells - generally. To conduct any business or use any
premises so as to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and
render it unwholesome or disagreeable to others;
   (l)   Same - business, etc., premises. To erect, continue or use any
building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or
manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or
otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or of the
public;
   (m)   Watercourses, etc. - throwing offensive matter. To throw or deposit
any offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any animal, in any
watercourse, lake, pond, spring or well;
   (n)   Same - polluting. To corrupt, or render unwholesome or impure the
water of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of
others;
   (o)   Same - obstructing navigable waters. To obstruct or impede, without
legal authority, the passage of any navigable river or waters; and
   (p)   Unscheduled stops by intercity busses. To make an unscheduled bus stop
of an intercity bus, in violation of Article II of Chapter 32 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 80-23-1623; Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
§ 24-39 NUISANCES - ABATEMENT; COSTS; PENALTIES.
   (a)   Whenever any nuisance shall be found within the village contrary to
the provisions of this code or any other ordinance of the village, the village
manager is hereby authorized and directed to cause the same to be summarily
abated, in such manner as he or she may direct. The costs and expenses of such
abatement shall be charged against the owner of the property in questions;
shall, where provided by state law or this code, be made in lien upon the
property in question; shall be collected by suit or other appropriate
procedure; and shall be in addition to any fine or penalty.
   (b)   The owner of the property in question or other person responsible for
causing, permitting or maintaining any nuisance defined in §
24-38 of this code (other than building operation noise offenses) shall, upon
conviction therefor, be subject to a fine as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each such violation and for each day
each such violation exists; provided, however, that the minimum fine
hereinabove specified for any of the foregoing violations shall be increased as
set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each
violation of which any such person is convicted after the first violation in
each calendar year.
(Ord. No. 99-11-2076; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
   (c)   The owner of the property in question or other person responsible for
causing, permitting or maintaining any building operation noise offense as
defined in §
24-38 of this code shall, upon conviction therefor, be subject to a fine as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each such
violation. Upon the occurrence of two or more such building operation noise
violations at the same property within any one-year period, the village may
notify the owner of the property that any further violations shall result in a
suspension of work on such property; whereupon any further violation after such
notice shall be subject to, as an alternative or additional remedy, issuance of
a stop work order to the violator and the owner of the property in question,
which stop work order shall remain in effect as to any building activity on
such property for a period of two business days or until the noise has been
abated to the satisfaction of the village, whichever shall occur later.
(Ord. No. 99-11-2076; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 24-40 OBSCENE OR INDECENT PICTURES, BOOKS, ETC.
   No person shall, within the village, exhibit, publish, sell or offer to
sell, give away or offer to give away or have in his or her possession, with or
without intent to sell or give away, any obscene or indecent book, pamphlet,
paper, drawing, lithograph, engraving, picture, film, photograph, model, cast
figure or other object or article of indecent or immoral use.
Cross-reference:
   As to exhibition of criminals, etc. see §
5-9
   As to indecent shows, etc., see §
5-8
   As to obscene advertisement, see §
3-2
   As to prohibited motion pictures, see §
5-29
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to suppress obscene literature, see
Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-5-1
   For state law as to obscenity generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, §
11-20
§ 24-41 PROFANITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any profane language in any
street, alley or public place in the village.
Cross-reference:
   As to indecent conduct, see §
24-31
§ 24-42 PROSTITUTION - PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to practice prostitution in the village.
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with prostitutes,
etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 22
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent prostitution, see Ill.
Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 38, § 11-14 et seq.
§ 24-43 SAME - SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any street, alley or
public place in the village for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in
prostitution or any unlawful sexual intercourse of any kind.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to soliciting for a prostitute, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963,
ch. 38, § 11-15
§ 24-44 PUBLIC RECORDS - REMOVING, DAMAGING, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage or destroy any
records kept or maintained by or in the custody of any village officer or
employee, unless so authorized by the board of trustees.
§ 24-45 RESISTING, ETC., POLICE OFFICER; ASSISTING, ETC., PERSONS IN CUSTODY.
   No persons shall resist any member of the police department in the discharge
of his or her duty, nor in any way interfere with, hinder or prevent such
discharge, nor offer or endeavor to do so; nor in any manner assist any person
in custody of any member of the police force to escape or attempt to escape,
nor rescue or attempt to rescue any person in custody.
Cross-reference:
   As to escape from village jail, see §
16-6
§ 24-46 TRESPASS - PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person either:
      (1)   To knowingly and without lawful authority enter or remain within or
on a building;
      (2)   To enter upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
      (3)   To remain upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart.
   (b)   A person shall be deemed to have received notice from the owner or
occupant within the meaning of this section if:
      (1)   He or she has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing; or
      (2)   A printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.
   (c)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes or under other circumstances
recognized under Illinois law as not constituting a trespass.
(Ord. No. 2001-16-3033)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to criminal trespass, see 720 ILCS 5/21-3
§ 24-47 WEAPONS - CARRYING CONCEALED PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to carry or wear
under his or her clothes, or conceal about his or her person, or within ready
access in his or her automobile or vehicle, any revolver, pistol, slingshot,
blackjack, cross knuckles or knuckles or lead, brass or other metal, or Bowie
knife, dirk, razor, dagger or sawed-off gun, machine gun, submachine gun, or
any device for releasing or discharging tear gas or any other obnoxious or
poison gas or for laying a smoke screen, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon.
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to deadly weapons generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch.
38, §§ 24-1 to 24-6
§ 24-48 SAME - DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, revolver, pistol, fowling
piece or other firearm, or any air gun, within the village, except in a rifle
or revolver range under the supervision of the police department.
§ 24-49 SAME - SALE OF WEAPONS THAT CAN BE CONCEALED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell any firearms that can be concealed on or about
the person in the village.
(1929 Code, § 774)
§ 24-50 SAME - SALE, ETC., TO MINORS.
   No person shall sell, loan or furnish to any minor any gun, pistol or other
firearm, or any air gun or ammunition for any firearm or air gun within the
village.
Cross-reference:
   As to minors under 16 years of age in poolrooms, etc., see §
5-19
   As to sale of cigarettes, etc., to minors under 18 years of age, see §
24-8
§ 24-51 SAME - EXEMPTIONS.
   The prohibitions of this chapter relating to the discharge of weapons or the
carrying of the same concealed shall not apply to the officers or members of
the police force of the village, nor to any officer of any court whose duty may
be to serve warrants or to make arrests, nor to persons authorized under the
statutes or the state of the United States to carry concealed weapons, nor to
special police officers appointed as watchmen.
§ 24-52 CANNABIS - CONTROL OF.
   (a)   Cannabis defined. As used in this section cannabis includes marijuana,
hashish and other substances that are identified as including any part of the
plant Cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin
extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt
derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other canncabinol derivatives, including its
naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced by
means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber
produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake or the
sterilized seed of such plant that is incapable of germination.
   (b)   Possession prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to grow,
possess, sell, give away, barter, deliver, exchange, distribute or administer
any cannabis.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person who violates this section with respect to less
than ten grams of cannabis shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $250
for each offense.
(Ord. No. 81-1-1627; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
§ 24-53 CURFEW - MINORS.
   (a)   It is unlawful for a person under 17 years of age to be present at or
upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway within the
geographic boundaries of the Village of Glencoe at the following times unless
one of the exceptions listed in subsection
24-53(b) applies:
      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
      (2)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
      (3)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to any person under 17 years of age who
is:
      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of Illinois
authorize a person under 17 years of age to perform;
      (3)   Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or
civic activity;
      (4)   Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a
permit has been lawfully issued;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage; or
      (6)   Traveling between states or internationally from a location outside
of Illinois to another location outside of Illinois.
   (c)   A police officer shall not take any enforcement action under this
section unless he or she reasonably believes that a violation of this section
has occurred and that no exception listed in subsection
24-53(b) is applicable.
(Ord. No. 04-08-3097)
   (d)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate
subsection
24-53(a) of this section.
   (e)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section
shall be subject to the fines set forth in §
16-1 of
chapter 16 of this code.
(Ord. No. 83-26-1686)
CHAPTER 25: SOLICITATION, SECONDHAND STORES AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
Article I. Solicitation
   
25-1   Definitions
   
25-2   Permit required
   
25-3   Exemptions for individuals under the age of 18
   
25-4   Solicitation permit
   
25-5   Regulations applicable to all solicitations
   
25-6   Solicitation on streets
   
25-7   Violations declared to be nuisances
   
25-8   Effective period
   
25-9   Revocation
   
25-10   Appeal of denial or revocation
   
25-11   Change in information
   
25-12   Administrative record
   
25-13   Penalty
Article II. Secondhand Stores
   
25-14   License required; fee
   
25-15   Application; investigation of applicant; certain persons not to be
licensed
   
25-16   Record of purchases; inspections
Article III. Itinerant Merchants
   
25-17   License required; fee
   
25-18   Fraud
ARTICLE I. SOLICITATION
§ 25-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them.
   APPLICANT. Any person that files an application for a solicitation permit as
provided for in this article.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary purpose under the Illinois Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS
460/1 et seq.
   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION. Solicitation engaged in for a charitable purpose.
   ENTITY. A corporation, organization, association, or similar entity of any
form on whose behalf one or more individuals engage in solicitation.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. A business that is properly licensed and operated
from a permanent, fixed location in the village.
   MANAGER or VILLAGE MANAGER. The Glencoe village manager or his or her
appointee or designee.
   PERSON. Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, trust, or any combination of the foregoing.
   PREMISES. Any occupied building or structure, or any separate dwelling unit
contained within any occupied building or structure, of any type within the
village.
   SOLICIT or SOLICITING. The act of engaging in solicitation.
   SOLICITATION. Engaging in any of the following activities anywhere within
the village, other than from a fixed place of business:
      (1)   Seeking or offering to sell, offering for sale, selling and
delivering, peddling, bartering, exchanging, or obtaining, for profit or any
kind of consideration any goods or services;
      (2)   Distribution to the public - by leaving at a store, office, or
residence or on any public property anywhere within the village - of any
solicitation material;
      (3)   Asking for or seeking to collect contributions of money, gifts, or
goods of any kind for any purpose, except only for a purely political purpose;
      (4)   Selling tickets;
      (5)   Seeking to obtain customers for application, purchase of, or
enrollment in any public utility service or program; and
      (6)   Going upon any public property, public street or other right-of-
way, or private property within the village for the purpose of engaging in any
of the activities described in subsections (1) through (5) of this section;
Religious proselytizing or political canvassing are not defined as solicitation
and are not regulated by the provisions of this article.
   SOLICITATION MATERIAL. Cards, circulars, handbills, samples, merchandise,
newspapers, advertising materials, documents or articles of a commercial
nature, and other types of publications, or any other items used in conjunction
with solicitation.
   SOLICITOR. A person engaged in solicitation.
   STREET. The area of a public roadway or right-of-way that is designated for
primarily vehicular traffic, including all through lanes, turning lanes, bike
lanes, shoulders, medians, roundabouts, and on- or off-ramps. Street does not
mean portions of the right-of-way in which vehicular traffic is not permitted,
such as the parkway or sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 2002-20-3065; Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except only as provided in §
25-3 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
solicitation in the village without having first applied for and obtained a
valid solicitation permit therefor.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-3 EXEMPTIONS FOR INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 18.
   Individuals under the age of 18 are not required to obtain a solicitation
permit, and are not required to pay fees or submit fingerprint records pursuant
to § 25-4 of this article, for the following limited solicitation purposes,
provided that such solicitation complies in all other respects with the
provisions of this article:
   (a)   Charitable solicitation on behalf of an entity that has submitted
advance notice to the village’s department of public safety of the time, date,
and location of such charitable solicitation and a listing of the names of all
individuals under the age of 18 who will conduct charitable solicitation on
behalf of the entity; and
   (b)   Solicitation on the individual’s own behalf, and not on behalf of any
other person or entity, for services the individual will personally provide
(e.g., babysitting, lawn mowing).
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-4 SOLICITATION PERMIT.
   (a)   Application procedure. Each applicant for a solicitation permit shall
file with the village manager a properly completed application therefor on a
form provided for such purpose by the village manager. Every such application
shall be filed at least seven days in advance of the first day for which
authorization to solicit is sought. Each applicant shall verify under oath all
statements made on or in connection with the application. Every individual
identified in an application who seeks to engage in solicitation other than
exempt minors described in §
25-3 of this article must present him or herself at the village department of
public safety to be fingerprinted and photographed for a fee of $ 65 per
applicant. A new application shall be required to solicit after the expiration
of any permit issued hereunder. Each application shall contain, at a minimum,
the following information and materials:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, business address (if any) and current
residence address, and, if the applicant is an individual, the length of time
the applicant has resided at such address;
      (2)   The name and address of the entity on whose behalf the applicant
will be soliciting, if different from the information in subsection (1) above;
      (3)   If the applicant is an individual, each of the applicant’s
residence addresses in the previous three years, if other than the applicant’s
current residence address;
      (4)   If the applicant is an individual, a copy of a government-issued
photo identification card for the applicant;
      (5)   The name and address of the entity, if any, that employs the
applicant for the purpose of conducting solicitation in the village, and the
length of the applicant’s employment with such employer;
      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of a principal officer or
director of applicant’s business or organization who has authority to act on
matters related to the application, and the business’s or organization’s
registered agent for service in Illinois, if any;
      (7)   If more than one solicitor shall be soliciting on behalf of an
entity, then the names(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the person(s)
who will be in direct charge of the solicitors on behalf of such entity;
      (8)   A description of the subject matter and purpose of the applicant’s
solicitation;
      (9)   The date(s) on which the proposed solicitation would be conducted;
      (10)   Information regarding the use or revocation, within the previous
five years, of any prior solicitation permit issued by the village or any other
municipality to the applicant or the business or organization the applicant
represents;
      (11)   Information regarding the applicant’s violation, currently or at
any time in the previous five years, of any of the provisions of this article,
or of any local, state or federal solicitation regulation;
      (12)   Information regarding whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois, any other state
or the United States, and the nature of any such conviction;
      (13)   A statement of whether the applicant is authorized by any other
governmental entity to solicit;
      (14)   If the applicant is a corporate entity, evidence that the
applicant is registered to conduct business in the State of Illinois and is in
good standing with the state;
      (15)   If the applicant is a charitable organization, as defined by the
Illinois Solicitation for Charity Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.,
evidence that the applicant is registered with the Illinois Attorney General;
and
      (16)   If the applicant will use a vehicle in connection with the
proposed solicitation, a description of the applicant’s vehicle including the
make, model, year of production, and license plate number.
   (b)   Issuance.
      (1)   The village manager shall issue a solicitation permit to an
applicant within three business days after the village manager receives a
complete application, if but only if the manager finds and determines all of
the following:
         A.   The applicant has properly provided all information required by
this article or reasonably requested by the village manager and the application
and the material statements made in the application are true;
         B.   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony under the laws
of the State of Illinois, any other state or the United States within five
years immediately prior to the date of filing of the application;
         C.   The village has not revoked or suspended the applicant’s right to
solicit in the village within five years immediately prior to the date of
filing of the application, nor has any other municipality revoked or suspended
the applicant's right to solicit within its jurisdiction during the same
period; and
         D.   The applicant has not been found in violation of any provision of
this article, or of any provision of any previous village solicitation
regulation or other local, state, or federal solicitation regulations, within
five years immediately prior to the date of filing of the application.
      (2)   The village manager may issue a permit based solely on the
information contained in an application, but the manager shall retain the right
(without the obligation) to conduct investigations with respect to any
applicant or the information contained in any application.
   (c)   Denial. If the village manager determines that the applicant has not
met one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this §
25-4, then the village manager shall deny issuance of the solicitation permit
and shall give the applicant a written notification and explanation of such
denial. The village manager’s notice of denial shall be delivered in person or
by first class United States mail addressed to the applicant’s current
residence address as set forth in the application, or by e-mail if the
applicant has requested to receive communications by e-mail. The solicitation
permit shall be deemed denied on the day that the notice of denial is delivered
or is placed in the United States mail as provided in this subsection
25-4(c), or is sent by e-mail to the e-mail address provided by the applicant.
If the village manager does not issue or deny the solicitation permit within
five days after the village manager receives the application, then the permit
applied for shall be deemed to have been issued. The applicant may appeal the
denial of a solicitation permit pursuant to the provisions of §
25-10 of this article.
   (d)   Form and display of permit. A solicitation permit shall be issued on a
form established by the village manager. The name of the solicitor and the
business or organization the solicitor represents, if any, the date(s)
solicitation shall occur under the permit, and the effective dates of the
permit shall be printed on the solicitation permit in easily readable form.
Solicitation permits also shall bear the name of the village, the signature of
the village manager or the manager’s duly authorized designee, and the relevant
permit application number. Each solicitor shall prominently display the
solicitation permit issued to the solicitor pursuant to this article on the
front of his or her person at all times while soliciting within the village.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-5 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITATIONS.
   All solicitors shall comply with the following regulations:
   (a)   Valid solicitation permit required. No person may engage in
solicitation without a valid solicitation permit as provided in this article.
   (b)   “No solicitation” notices and list.
(Ord. No. 07-08-3185)
      (1)   No person shall solicit at or in any premises that has posted on or
near its principal entrance a sign bearing the words “No Trespassing,” “No
Peddlers,” “No Solicitors” or any other similar notice indicating in any manner
that the occupants of such premises desire not to be solicited or to have their
right to privacy disturbed, unless the occupants have specifically requested
such solicitation. The manager or the manager’s duly authorized designee may
make available weatherproof cards bearing a notice of the type herein described
for posting on or near the principal entrance to any premises.
      (2)   The manager or the manager’s duly authorized designee shall be
authorized to maintain a list of premises within the village whose owners or
tenants have notified the village manager, in writing, that they desire not to
be solicited. The village manager shall provide a copy of any such list to all
solicitors at the time of permit issuance. No solicitor shall solicit at any
premises included on the “No Solicitation List,” irrespective of whether such
premises displays signage of the type described in §
25-5(a)(1) of this code. The owner or tenant of a premises may remove their
premises from the “No Solicitation List” by notifying the village manager in
writing.
(Ord. No. 07-08-3185)
   (c)   Principal approach and entrance only. Every solicitor shall approach a
premises only by using the principal approach route thereto, and every
solicitor shall attempt to make contact with the occupants thereof only at the
principal entrance to such premises.
   (d)   Discontinuance on request. No solicitor shall solicit any person or
premises at any time after any such person or the occupant of such premises
requests that the solicitor leave the premises or otherwise cease soliciting.
   (e)   Hours when solicitation prohibited. Except only as provided in
subsection (c) of §
25-6 of this article, no person shall solicit anywhere in the village at any
time between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
   (f)   Immediate identification. Every solicitor shall immediately identity
himself or herself and the purpose of the solicitation to each person being
solicited.
   (g)   Prominent display of permit. Every solicitor shall prominently display
the solicitation permit issued to the solicitor pursuant to this article on the
front of his or her person, and the outside of all clothing, at all times while
soliciting within the village.
   (h)   Impeding traffic prohibited. No person shall solicit anywhere in the
village in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on, or around any sidewalk or public
property, way or place. No person engaged in solicitation shall have the
exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public property, way or place, nor the
right to establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation in any
such public place.
   (i)   Soliciting on streets. No person shall stand in a public street within
the village for the purpose of soliciting except in compliance with § 25-6 of
this article.
   (j)   Fraud or misrepresentation. No person shall perpetrate a fraud or
misrepresentation of any kind while engaged in solicitation within the village.
   (k)   Public health and safety. No person shall engage in solicitation
within the village in such a manner that creates a danger or threat of any kind
to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (l)   Soliciting in train station prohibited. No person may solicit within
the station building or on the platform of any train station within the
village.
   (m)   Soliciting from motorized vehicle or pushcart prohibited. No person
may solicit from a motorized vehicle or pushcart at any time, at any location
within the village.
   (n)   Advertisements of solicitation. No person may advertise soliciting by
the use of any sign, flag, banner, or similar device with a face greater than
two feet by three feet or that is attached to a stick or standard extending
more than two feet beyond the face of the sign. No person may advertise
soliciting by carrying or displaying any sign that is internally or externally
illuminated.
   (o)   Electronic amplification prohibited. No person may use electronically
amplified voice, music, or other sound in connection with soliciting.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-6 SOLICITATION ON STREETS.
   The following additional restrictions apply to solicitation on any street or
any intersection of two or more streets within the village:
   (a)   Solicitation may be conducted only the purpose of conducting
charitable solicitation.
   (b)   No person may engage in solicitation in a manner that poses an undue
risk to the safety of that person or any other person, whether a pedestrian or
driver. No person may solicit in a manner that interferes with the ability of
traffic to proceed safely and as directed by traffic signs or signals. No
person engaged in solicitation may stand in any lane designated for vehicular
traffic when that lane has a green light or similar traffic signal directing
vehicles to proceed.
   (c)   No person may use any sound-producing or sound-amplifying device while
engaging in solicitation.
   (d)   No person may use a sign, flag, banner, balloon, or any other
attention-getting device of any type while engaged in solicitation.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person may
engage in solicitation before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m.
   (f)   Each solicitor must be covered by, and provide to the village a
certificate of insurance and additional insured endorsement, on a form at least
as broad as Insurance Service Office (ISO) CG 20 10, as evidence of general
liability insurance against bodily injury and property damage arising out of or
in connection with the solicitation with a coverage limit of at least
$1,000,000 per occurrence and naming the village as an additional insured.
   (g)   No more than four individuals may solicit at one time within an
intersection, and no more than two individuals may solicit the same lane of
traffic.
   (h)   A permitted solicitor who intends to solicit in a street must present
himself or herself at the village department of public safety and sign the
registration book provided for that purpose. This sign-in requirement applies
to each day of solicitation and must be complete before solicitation has begun
for that day. If an entity is registered to solicit in the street, only one
representative of that entity is required to present himself or herself at the
department of public safety to sign in. That representative must identify the
intersections at which individuals will solicit on behalf of the entity on that
day.
   (i)   No person who is less than 18 years old may solicit in the street.
   (j)   Each solicitor must dress in a manner that is visible to motorists and
reasonably identifies or distinguishes the person as a solicitor. Examples of
appropriate clothing are: light- or bright-colored matching shirts, hats, or
jackets; reflective vests or jackets; or light- or bright-colored apparel
clearly displaying the name or logo of the soliciting entity.
   (k)   The village manager, at his or her sole discretion, may prohibit or
restrict solicitation at any intersection on any date and time if he or she
determines that the solicitation would create a hazardous condition; create
undue risk to the safety and welfare of motorists, pedestrians, or solicitors;
or interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. The village manager
may determine that the prohibition or restriction of solicitation in the street
is necessary due to conditions such as, but not limited to, the condition of
roadway lighting or visibility, construction work or detours, special events,
traffic congestion, or adverse weather.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-7 VIOLATIONS DECLARED TO BE NUISANCES.
   Every violation of any term, provision, condition, restriction or duty
stated in this article or in any solicitation permit issued pursuant thereto is
hereby declared to be unlawful and to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-8 EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   Each solicitation permit issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for
a period of time set by the village manager but not to exceed 60 consecutive
calendar days. An expiration date shall be printed on the face of each
solicitation permit.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-9 REVOCATION.
   The village manager shall revoke immediately any solicitation permit issued
pursuant to this article if the village manager determines that the solicitor
is in violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this article or of
the solicitation permit issued pursuant hereto, or if the solicitor made a
false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified
for the issuance of a solicitation permit under the terms of this article.
Immediately after such revocation, the village manager shall take custody of
the solicitation permit and shall give written notice of the revocation to the
solicitor that states the reason for the permit revocation or such other form
approved by the village manager that clearly states the reason for such
revocation. The village manager shall serve notice on the solicitor in person
or by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
residence address set forth in the solicitor’s application or by e-mail if the
applicant has requested to receive communications by email. The permit shall
become null and void immediately on service of the notice of revocation as
provided in this §
25-9.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-10 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   Any person aggrieved by the village manager’s denial or revocation of a
solicitation permit shall have a right to appeal such decision to the village
president as provided in this §
25-10. Within ten days after receipt of the village manager’s notice of denial
or revocation, the applicant or permit holder may make a written request for a
hearing regarding the denial or revocation. The village president, after
receipt of the written request for a hearing, shall set a time and date certain
for such hearing within ten days after such receipt. The village president
shall give written notice of such hearing to the applicant or permit holder at
least five days in advance of the hearing date. At the hearing, the applicant
or permit holder may present and submit evidence and witnesses to rebut the
reasons cited by the village manager for revoking or denying the permit. Within
five days after the close of the hearing, the village president shall render a
decision in writing. The village president may reinstate a revoked permit,
grant the requested permit or a renewal thereof, or affirm the village
manager’s decision. The action taken by the village president shall be final,
unless review is sought pursuant to the Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-11 CHANGE IN INFORMATION.
   During the pendency of an application for, or during the term of, any
solicitation permit, the applicant or permit holder shall promptly notify the
village manager in writing of any change in any material information given by
the applicant or permit holder in the application for such permit.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-12 ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD.
   The village manager shall cause to be kept in the village manager’s office
an accurate record of every solicitation permit application received and acted
on, together with all relevant information and material pertaining thereto.
Permit applications shall be numbered as determined by the village manager, and
every permit issued pursuant to this article and any renewal thereof shall be
identified with the number of the application on which it was issued.
(Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
§ 25-13 PENALTY.
   (a)   Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with, or
assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this article, or of any
order, solicitation permit, or notice issued pursuant hereto, shall be deemed
to have committed a misdemeanor and shall be fined as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each such violation. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The village
manager shall give written notice to any such person of any such violation and
the fine imposed by serving a citation or other appropriate documentation (the
“violation notice”) in person or by certified United States mail, return
receipt requested.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2018-07-3438)
   (b)   Payment without prosecution. Within ten days after the date of the
violation notice, any person served with a violation notice issued by the
village manager pursuant to subsection (a) of this §
25-13 may avoid prosecution for the violation(s) identified in the violation
notice by surrendering the violation notice to the village and paying at the
same time to the village an amount as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule. After such ten-day period but before legal action is
brought against the violator, the violator may avoid prosecution by
surrendering the violation notice to the village and paying at the same time to
the village an amount as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule. The village shall issue a receipt to any person making payment
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection
25-13(b).
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
ARTICLE II. SECONDHAND STORES
§ 25-14 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall operate or conduct a secondhand or resale store in the
village without first having obtained a license therefor or without complying
with the provision of this article. The annual license fee for a secondhand or
resale store shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 25-15 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; CERTAIN PERSONS NOT TO BE
LICENSED.
   Applications for licenses required by this article shall be made to the
village manager in writing, and shall state the location intended to be
occupied. Upon receipt of any such application, the village manager, or any
person authorized by him or her or the village president to do so, shall
investigate the character of the applicant and shall report to the village
manager the result of such investigation. No such license shall be issued to
any person of bad character or to any person who shall have been convicted of
receiving stolen goods, burglary or robbery.
§ 25-16 RECORD OF PURCHASES; INSPECTIONS.
   Every person operating a secondhand or resale store shall keep a record of
all articles purchased, which record, together with the articles themselves,
shall be open to inspection by any member of the police department at all
reasonable hours.
ARTICLE III. ITINERANT MERCHANTS
§ 25-17 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No itinerant merchant shall do business in the village without first having
obtained a license therefor. The fee for doing business as an itinerant
merchant shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 25-18 FRAUD.
   No itinerant merchant shall make any fraudulent statements in regard to the
articles or merchandise with which such merchant deals.
CHAPTER 25A: PLANNING
Section
   
25A-1   Short title; purpose
   
25A-2   Comprehensive plan adopted by reference
   
25A-3   Material adopted by reference
   
25A-4   Availability of copies of planning ordinance
§ 25A-1 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.
   (a)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "comprehensive
plan ordinance."
   (b)   It is the purpose of this chapter to adopt a comprehensive plan for
the development of the Village of Glencoe. Such plan shall be advisory and in
and of itself shall not be construed to regulate or control the use of private
property in any way, except as to such part thereof as is hereinafter
implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the president and board of trustees.
Such plan does not commit the village or any other governmental agency to the
expenditure of public funds.
(Ord. No. 74-1-1509, §§ 1, 2)
§ 25A-2 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The following maps, drawings and other descriptive material contained in
such plan, and as heretofore modified, are hereby incorporated by reference and
adopted as a part of this chapter and shall be known as the comprehensive plan
for Glencoe:
   (a)   Goals of the comprehensive plan;
   (b)   Comprehensive plan for Glencoe;
   (c)   Background for the plan; and
   (d)   Tables and plates.
(Ord. No. 74-1-1509, § 4)
§ 25A-3 MATERIAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Previously printed maps, drawings and other descriptive material contained
in the aforesaid comprehensive plan for Glencoe are incorporated herein by
reference and hereby made a part of this chapter and they shall be identified
by the following statement marked or stamped thereon.
"Adopted by reference as part of the Comprehensive Plan Ordinance passed on
January 10, 1974 by the president and board of trustees of the Village of
Glencoe, Illinois, approved by R. B. Calhoun, Village President, attest D. C.
Duranso, Village Clerk."
(Ord. No. 74-1-1509, § 3)
§ 25A-4 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES OF PLANNING ORDINANCE.
   The village clerk shall keep in his or her office for inspection by
interested persons at least three copies of the planning ordinance including
such maps and other printed material this chapter adopts by reference and any
amendments thereof. The clerk shall also make available copies of the planning
ordinance at a price of $25 either for duplication in advance of contemplated
demand or upon order as required. The foregoing copies of the planning
ordinance shall be in addition to the original copy which the statutes require
the clerk to keep as part of the official record of enacted ordinances.
(Ord. No. 74-1-1508, § 5; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
CHAPTER 26: PLUMBING CODE
Editor's note:
   The plumbing regulations of the village are found in the building code
adopted by §
9-18.
Cross-reference:
   As to buildings and construction generally, see
ch. 9
   As to plumbers generally, see §§
11-5,
11-6
   As to powers and duties of director of public works in connection with
plumbing installations, etc., see §
2-76
CHAPTER 26A: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
Section
Article I. Statement of Purpose and Goals
   
26A-1   Purpose
   
26A-2   Goals
Article II. Definitions
   
26A-3   Definitions
   
26A-4   Interpretation
Article III. Preservation Commission
   
26A-5   Commission created
   
26A-6   Commission members
   
26A-7   Qualifications
   
26A-8   Terms of office
   
26A-9   Removal and vacancy
   
26A-10   Secretary
   
26A-11   Meetings
   
26A-12   Authority and duties
   
26A-13   Surveys and research
   
26A-14   Depository
   
26A-15   Reserved
Article IV. Establishment of Certified Landmarks and Certified Historic
Districts
   
26A-20   Criteria
   
26A-21   Review and approval procedures
   
26A-22   Withdrawal of landmark or historic district status
Article V. Reserved
   26A-30 - 26A-39 Reserved
Article VI. Financial Benefits
   
26A-40   Intent; cooperation with Illinois Historic Preservation Agency
   26A-41 - 26A-42 Reserved
Article VII. Certificate of Appropriateness
   
26A-50   Certificate of appropriateness
   
26A-51   Procedure
   
26A-52   Appeal
   
26A-53   Criteria
Article VIII. General Provisions
   
26A-60   Violations
   
26A-61   Interpretation
ARTICLE I. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND GOALS
§ 26A-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote historic and architectural
preservation in the village. The village seeks to protect, enhance and
perpetuate those historical structures, buildings, objects and sites valued by
the village and its residents that are significant to the village’s
archaeology, history, culture and architecture.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-2 GOALS.
   This chapter is created in order to:
   (a)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past as
represented in the village’s landmarks and historic districts;
   (b)   Preserve, promote and maintain the village’s historic resources;
   (c)   Protect and enhance the village’s attractiveness to residents,
visitors and prospective homebuyers;
   (d)   Maintain and improve property values in the village;
   (e)   Protect, preserve and enhance the village’s aesthetic appearance and
character;
   (f)   Encourage the designation of landmark and historic district status
upon structures, buildings, objects and sites on a local, state and national
level; and
   (g)   Educate the general public as to the significance of historic
preservation.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
§ 26A-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms, shall be
construed as set forth in this article.
   ADDITION. Any act or process that changes the exterior architectural
appearance of a structure by adding to, joining with or increasing the size or
capacity of the structure.
   ALTERATION. Any act or process other than demolition that changes the
exterior architectural appearance of a certified landmark or any certified
structure, building, object or site in an historic district, including without
limitation the erection, construction, reconstruction, addition, repair,
rehabilitation, removal, restoration or relocation of any structure.
   AREA. A specific geographic division of the village.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The president and board of trustees of the Village of
Glencoe.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof that is supported by columns or walls
for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate issued by the commission and
signed by the chairperson or designee approving plans for the alteration or
demolition of a certified landmark or a certified structure, building, object
or site within an historic district established under this chapter.
   CERTIFIED HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area established as a certified historic
district by ordinance duly passed and published by the board of trustees and
which may contain within definable  geographic boundaries one or more landmarks
and which may have within its boundaries other structures, buildings, objects
or sites that, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to
be identified as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within such historic
district.
   CERTIFIED LANDMARK. A structure, building, object and/or site established as
a certified landmark by ordinance duly passed and published by the board of
trustees which has a special character or historical and/or architectural
interest or value as part of the development, heritage or culture of the
village, the State of Illinois or the United States, and as such is worthy of
preservation, restoration and/or rehabilitation.
   CERTIFIED STATUS.  A structure, building, object, site, or area that has
been approved pursuant to this Chapter 26A as a certified landmark, a certified
historic district, or a certified structure, building, object or site in an
historic district.
   COMMISSION. The Glencoe historic preservation commission.
   COMMISSIONERS. The members of the commission.
   CONSTRUCTION.   The act of adding an addition to, reconstructing or
otherwise altering an existing structure or the act of erecting a new principal
or accessory structure on a site.
   DECLARATION. A notarized instrument executed by the legal and, if
applicable, beneficial owner or owners of property, which instrument identifies
the property and sets forth such owner's agreement to accept the certification
of such property as a certified landmark or as a certified structure, building,
object or site within an historic district established in accordance with
article VI of this chapter.
   DEMOLITION.  Any act or process that destroys a structure, building or
object in whole or in part to the extent of 50% of its volume.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES. Standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic and architectural appearance and character of a structure, building,
object, site or area.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE.  The architectural character, general
composition and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure, building,
object or site, including without limitation the kind, color and texture of the
building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area established as a certified historic district or a
recognized historic area within the village (including, without limitation, any
area identified as an Historic Preservation District by the United States
Secretary of Interior in the National Register of Historic Sites and Places).
   OBJECT. A material or natural thing of functional, architectural, cultural,
historical, aesthetic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design,
movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a structure, building, object or
site to a state of utility, through repair, construction or alteration, which
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions
and features of the property which are significant to its historic,
architectural and cultural values.
   RELOCATION. The process of moving a structure, building or object on its
site or to another site.
   RESTORATION. The process of restoring, repairing or reconstructing a
property, through repair, construction or alteration, to a former or original
condition that enhances those portions and features of the property that are
significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
   SITE. A single lot or parcel of property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on or in the ground.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-4 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE III. PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 26A-5 COMMISSION CREATED.
   There is hereby created the preservation commission of the Village of
Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340; Ord. No. 2022-15-3535, § 2)
§ 26A-6 COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   The commission shall consist of seven members who shall be residents of the
village appointed by the village president and approved by the board of
trustees. The president shall appoint one commissioner as chairperson.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340; Ord. No. 2022-15-3535, § 2)
§ 26A-7 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The commissioners shall be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience
or interest in historic preservation or architectural history, building
construction or engineering, architecture or landscaping, finance, neighborhood
organization or real estate.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-8 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office for commissioners shall be five years.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340; Ord. No. 2022-15-3535, § 2)
§ 26A-9 REMOVAL AND VACANCY.
   The board of trustees shall have the power to remove any commissioner for
cause after a public hearing. Vacancies in the commission shall be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner herein provided for the
appointment and approval of a commissioner.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-10 SECRETARY.
   The board of trustees shall appoint a secretary to the commission. The
secretary shall have the following duties:
   (a)   To record the minutes of each commission meeting and public hearing;
   (b)   To be responsible for the publication and distribution of copies of
the minutes, reports and decisions of the commission to the commissioners, the
board of trustees, the building official and the village clerk;
   (c)   To cause notice to be sent or published for all public hearings
conducted by the commission;
   (d)   To advise the village president of vacancies on the commission and the
expiring terms of the commissioners; and
   (e)   To prepare and submit to the board of trustees a complete record of
the proceedings before the commission pertaining to any matter requiring
consideration by the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-11 MEETINGS.
   (a)   Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established
by resolution of the commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at
any time upon the call of the chairperson. There shall be a minimum of four
meetings per year.
   (b)   A quorum shall consist of three commissioners. A concurring vote of a
majority of those members present and constituting a quorum is necessary to
render a decision on any matter upon which the commission is authorized to act;
provided, however, that the affirmative vote of at least three commissioners
shall be required to recommend that a structure, building, object, site or area
be established as a certified landmark, a certified historic district, or a
certified structure, building, object and/or site within an historic district.
   (c)   The chairperson shall preside over all meetings and hearings of the
commission. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall
assume the duties and responsibilities of the chair.
   (d)   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings
Act of the State of Illinois.
   (e)   No member of the commission shall vote on any matter involving any
property in which such commissioner has a legal or beneficial ownership
interest or any other matter where such commissioner's interest would violate §
3-14-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code or any other law.
   (f)   The commission may adopt its own rules of procedures. In the absence
of such rules, the commission shall conduct its business, as nearly as
practicable, in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
   (g)   The commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-12 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   Subject to the laws of the State of Illinois, the Glencoe village code and
any other ordinances and resolutions of the village, the commission shall have
and may exercise the authority and duties herein described:
   (a)   To conduct a survey of structures, buildings, sites, objects and areas
in the village in order to identify those with architectural, historical,
archaeological or cultural significance;
   (b)   To provide information and assistance relevant to the establishment of
certified landmarks and historic districts;
   (c)   To assist persons in the preparation of an application for
certification of landmarks and historic districts and the alteration or
demolition of the same;
   (d)   To hold public hearings, review applications, make recommendations or
decisions regarding the recognition of a structure, building, object and/or
site as a certified landmark of a certified historic districts, the alteration
or demolition of the same, the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for
such actions (including certificates of appropriateness issued based on the
economic hardship criteria in Section 26A-53 of this chapter);
   (e)   To keep a register of all structures, buildings, objects, sites and
areas that have been certified as a landmark or an historic district, including
all information required for the approval of each landmark or district;
   (f)   To determine an appropriate design of markers for certified landmarks
and historic districts;
   (g)   To develop and maintain technical information relating to
preservation, rehabilitation and restoration, and to provide assistance
relating to such matters to architects, contractors, tradespersons,
craftspersons, property owners and others;
   (h)   To inform and educate the village residents concerning the historic
and architectural heritage of the village by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars;
   (i)   To review, upon request of the board of trustees, the zoning board of
appeals, the zoning commission or the plan commission, proposed zoning
amendments, applications for special use permits, applications for zoning
variations or applications for appearance review that affect proposed or actual
certified landmarks and certified historic districts;
   (j)   To request technical advice and assistance from village staff members,
and to retain specialists or consultants when expressly authorized by the board
of trustees;
   (k)   To seek certified local government status for the village pursuant to
the United States Department of Interior's standards so as to take advantage of
financial and other assistance which may become available through that
Department and other sources;
   (l)   To seek certification of the village's historic preservation ordinance
with the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency and the United States Department
of the Interior so as to qualify structures, buildings, objects or sites
certified as landmarks pursuant to this chapter as an "historic building" under
the Revenue Act, 35 ILCS 200/10-40 et seq. or as a "certified historic
structure" under the Tax Reform Act of 1986, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq. or under
other legislation subsequently passed into law by the State of Illinois or the
United States;
   (m)   To submit an annual written report to the board of trustees; and
   (n)   To perform such other functions as directed by the board of trustees,
including, without limitation, regulatory, acquisitive, informational and
incentive-oriented functions.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-13 SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.
   The commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and research effort in the
village to identify areas, sites, structures, buildings and objects that have
historic, cultural, architectural or aesthetic importance, interest or value.
As part of the survey, the commission may review and evaluate any prior surveys
and studies by any unit of government or private organization and compile
appropriate descriptions, facts and photographs.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-14 DEPOSITORY.
   The office of the village clerk shall be the depository for all
applications, maps, reports, records of proceedings, decisions and other
materials created by and in conjunction with the commission. These historic
preservation materials shall be made available to the public.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-15 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 05-17-3137; Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 10-01-3259; Ord. No. 2013-
10-3340)
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTIFIED LANDMARKS AND CERTIFIED HISTORIC
DISTRICTS
§ 26A-20 CRITERIA.
   The commission shall consider the criteria provided herein in order to
recommend a structure, building, object or site for approval as a certified
landmark, or an area for approval as a certified historic district.
   (a)   General considerations.
      (1)   The structure, building, object, site or area has significant
character, interest or value as part of the historic, cultural, aesthetic or
architectural characteristics of the village, the State of Illinois or the
United States.
      (2)   The structure, building, object, site or area is closely identified
with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture or
development of the village, the State of Illinois or the United States.
      (3)   The structure, building, object, site or area involves the notable
efforts of, or is the only known example of work by, a master builder,
designer, architect, architectural firm or artist whose individual
accomplishment has influenced the development of the village, State of Illinois
or the United States.
      (4)   The unique location or singular physical characteristics of the
structure, building, object, site or area make it an established or familiar
visual feature.
      (5)   The activities associated with a structure, building, object, site
or area make it a current or former focal point of reference in the village.
      (6)   The structure, building or object is of a type or is associated
with a use once common but now rare, or is a particularly fine or unique
example of a utilitarian structure and possesses a high level of integrity or
architectural significance.
      (7)   The structure, building, object or site is in an area that has
yielded or is likely to yield historically significant information or even
prehistoric data.
      (8)   The structure, building, object or site is located within an
historic district and exhibits features, characteristics, or lineage that
contributes to the criteria upon which the historic district was established or
recognized.
   (b)   Architectural significance.
      (1)   The structure, building, object, site or area represents certain
distinguishing characteristics of architecture inherently valuable for the
study of a time period, type of property, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials.
      (2)   The structure, building, object, site or area embodies elements of
design, detail, material or craftsmanship of exceptional quality.
      (3)   The structure, building, object, site or area exemplifies a
particular architectural style in terms of detail, material and workmanship and
has undergone little or no alteration since its original construction.
      (4)   The structure, building, object, site or area is one of the few
remaining examples of a particular architectural style and has undergone little
or no alteration since its original construction.
      (5)   The structure, building, object, site or area is, or is part of, a
contiguous grouping that has a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a
similarity of style characteristics, time period, type of property, method of
construction or use of indigenous materials and accents the architectural
significance of an area.
      (6)   The detail, material and workmanship of the structure, building,
object or site can be valued in and of themselves as reflective of or similar
to those of the majority of the other visual elements in the area.
      (7)   The structure, building, object or site is located within an
historic district and exhibits features of architectural significance.
   (c)   Historic significance.
      (1)   The structure, building, object, site or area is an exceptional
example of an historic or vernacular style or is one of the few such remaining
properties of its kind in the village.
      (2)   The structure, building, object, site or area has a strong
association with the life or activities of a person or persons who have
significantly contributed to or participated in the historic or cultural events
of the United States, the State of Illinois or the village.
      (3)   The structure, building, object, site or area is associated with an
organization or group, whether formal or informal, from which persons have
significantly contributed to or participated in the historic or cultural events
of the United States, the State of Illinois or the village.
      (4)   The structure, building, object, site or area is associated with a
notable historic event.
      (5)   The structure, building, object, site or area is associated with an
antiquated use due to technological or social advances.
      (6)   The structure, building, object, site or area is a monument to or a
cemetery of an historic person or persons.
      (7)   The structure, building, object or site is located within an
historic district and exhibits features of historic significance.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-21 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Nominations. Nominations for approval as a certified landmark or a
certified historic district may be submitted by a commissioner, the owner of
the nominated site, or 50% or more of the owners of property within an area to
be nominated.
   (b)   Preliminary review. Prior to submitting a complete application for
landmark or historic district certification approval, an applicant may request
the commission to conduct a preliminary review of whether a structure,
building, object, site or area could qualify as a certified landmark or
historic district. An applicant can seek preliminary review by submitting a
request therefor to the village clerk that includes at least the information
required in either §
26A-21(c)(1)A.1. through 7., or §
26A-21(c)(1)B.1. through 7., as applicable, and any other information that the
applicant wishes to provide. The commission may then review the information and
advise the applicant of its preliminary recommendation regarding certified
landmark or historic district status based on the information provided. These
preliminary review procedures shall be informal and shall not bind either the
applicant or the commission in any way.
   (c)   Application.
      (1)   The application for nomination shall include as least the following
information and specifications:
         A.   For a certified landmark.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owner's name and address;
            3.   Street address, legal description or real estate index number
(s) of the site;
            4.   A written statement describing the structure, building, object
or site and setting forth reasons in support of the requested certification;
            5.   Written documentation that the owner or occupant has consented
to the requested approval of landmark status;
            6.   Brief description of the structures, buildings and objects on
the nominated site and the structures, buildings and objects on sites adjacent
to and across from such site; and
            7.   A declaration signed by the owner(s) of record of the
nominated structure, building, object or site setting forth, at a minimum, an
intent to further promote and preserve the historic and architectural
appearance and character of property affected by such certification and an
agreement to be subject to and bound by the provisions of article VII of this
Chapter regarding certificates of appropriateness, including any amendments
thereto.
            8.   Whatever additional materials the commission requests.
         B.   For a certified historic district.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owners' names and addresses;
            3.   A vicinity map delineating the boundaries of the area
nominated for approval as an historic district;
            4.   A written statement describing the area and the structures,
buildings, objects and sites located therein and setting forth reasons in
support of the establishment of an historic district;
            5.   Written documentation that the owners or occupants have been
notified of or consent to the proposed establishment of an historic district;
            6.   Brief description of the structures, buildings, objects and
sites in the nominated area and the structures, buildings, objects and sites,
adjacent to and across from such area; and
            7.   A declaration signed by at least 51% of the owners of record
of properties within the proposed certified historic district setting forth, at
a minimum, an intent to further promote and preserve the historic and
architectural appearance and character of property affected by such
certification and an agreement to be subject to and bound by the provisions of
article VII of this Chapter regarding certificates of appropriateness,
including any amendments thereto.
            8.   Whatever additional materials the commission requests.
         C.   For a certified structure, building, object or site in an
historic district.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owners' names and addresses;
            3.   A vicinity map delineating the location of the structure,
building, object or site and the boundaries of the historic district in which
it is located;
            4.   A written statement setting forth reasons in support of the
certifying the structure, building, object or site, including the manner in
which the structure, building, object or site contributes to the historic
district;
            5.   Written documentation that the owners or occupants of the
structure, building, object or site have been notified of or consent to the
proposed certification;
            6.   Brief description of the nominated structure, building, object
or site and the structures, buildings, objects and sites, adjacent to and
across from such structure, building, object or site; and
            7.   A declaration signed by the owners of record of the structure,
building, object or site setting forth, at a minimum, an intent to further
promote and preserve the historic and architectural appearance and character of
the structure, building, object or site affected by such certification and an
agreement to be subject to and bound by the provisions of article VII of this
chapter regarding certificates of appropriateness, including any amendments
thereto.
            8.   Whatever additional materials the commission requests.
         D.   For an honorary landmark as provided in Chapter 26B of the
village code.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owners' names and addresses;
            3.   Information regarding the conferring of honorary landmark
status upon the structure, building, object or site in question; and
            4.   A declaration signed by the owners of record of the structure,
building, object or site setting forth, at a minimum, an intent to further
promote and preserve the historic and architectural appearance and character of
the structure, building, object or site affected by such certification and an
agreement to be subject to and bound by the provisions of article VII of this
chapter regarding certificates of appropriateness, including any amendments
thereto.
      (2)   Complete application forms shall be filed with the village clerk,
who shall forward each application to the commission and its secretary for
action.
   (d)   Notice. Within 15 days after the filing of a nomination on a completed
application form, the secretary of the commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the whether such application should be recommended for approval by
setting forth a date, time and place for such hearing. Such hearing shall be
scheduled for the next available regular meeting of the commission. The
secretary of the commission shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant, the owner or owners of record, the occupants (either by name or to
"occupants" of the site or sites in question), and, if known, to other persons
having a legal or equitable interest in the site or sites nominated for
certified status and shall also cause notice to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village. Such notice shall be given not less than 15
days prior to the scheduled hearing and shall set forth the nature of such
hearing, the site or area involved, and the date, time and place of such
hearing. If, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or
owners of record or legal or equitable interest holders is not ascertainable,
notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such site was last
assessed is sufficient notice under this chapter.
   (e)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall afford all
persons present an opportunity to be heard and to express their views
pertaining to the nomination for certified status. The secretary of the
commission shall record these proceedings. The commission may adjourn or
continue such public hearing without further public notice.
   (f)   Recommendations.
      (1)   The commission shall review all information presented to it at the
public hearing and shall adopt a recommendation that the nominated landmark,
district, or structure, building, object or site does or does not meet the
criteria herein prescribed. The recommendation shall be accompanied by a report
that shall contain the following information:
         A.   The commission's rationale for recommending either approval or
rejection of the nomination;
         B.   In the case of a nominated landmark meeting the criteria for
landmark status, the significant feature of features in the exterior
architectural appearance of the landmark that should be protected and
preserved;
         C.   In the case of an area nominated as a certified historic district
and meeting the criteria for certified historic district status, the
significant features in the exterior architectural appearance of any
structures, buildings, objects or sites within such historic district that
should be protected and preserved;
         D.   In the case of a the case of a nominated structure, building,
object or sites within an historic district, the significant features in the
exterior architectural appearance of such structure, building, object or site
that contributes to such historic district and that should be protected and
preserved; and
         E.   Any other pertinent comments related to the nomination for
certified status.
      (2)   The commission shall submit its recommendations on each nomination
to the board of trustees, which shall promptly act upon such recommendation.
All recommendations by the commission shall be filed with the village clerk and
made available to persons requesting the same in writing.
   (g)   Establishment of certified status. An ordinance passed by the
affirmative vote of at least four members of the board of trustees shall be
required to approve a certified landmark, a certified historic district, or a
certified structure, building, object or sites within an historic district.
Upon passing an ordinance approving the nomination for certified status, the
board of trustees shall direct that notice be sent to the building official,
the owners of record, the occupants (either by name or to "occupants" of the
site or sites in question), and, if known, to other persons having a legal or
equitable interest in the approved site or sites, advising them of such
approval and informing them that any structure, building, object, site or area
granted certified status under this chapter shall thereafter be subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The board of trustees shall also direct that the
ordinance approving such certified status be recorded in the office of the Cook
County Recorder of Deeds, along with the declaration executed by the owner(s)
of record pursuant to section
26A-21(c)(1)(A)(7),
26A-21(c)(1)(B)(7), or
26A-21(c)(1)(C)(7).
   (h)   Denial of certified status. An applicant whose nomination for
certified status is denied by the board of trustees may request reconsideration
by filing a written request within ten days after a decision denying the
application is rendered; provided, however, that the board of trustees shall
reconsider a nomination only if substantial new evidence or information
regarding the nomination for certified status is provided. Once a nomination
has been denied by the board of trustees, no further nominations involving any
site whose nomination was denied may be filed for 90 days.
   (i)   Stay of proceedings. No building, demolition, sign or other permit
shall be issued for a structure, building, object, site or area nominated for
certified status from the date when the nomination form is filed with the
village clerk until the final disposition of the nomination, except upon
completion of the procedures set forth in article V of chapter 26B of the
village code.
   (j)   Special procedures for certifying honorary landmarks. Notwithstanding
the procedures set forth in subsections
26A-21(d-g) for certifying a structure, building, object, or site as a
landmark, for any structure, building, object, or site that has previously been
conferred honorary landmark status as provided for in chapter 26B of the
village code and for which an application has been filed in accordance with
subsection
26A-21(c)(1)(D), the following procedures shall apply in considering the
certification of such honorary landmark:
      (1)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the commission shall
review the building permit files relating to the structure, building, object,
or site that seeks certification to determine whether any permits have been
issued relating to such structure, building, object, or site or alterations
have been made to such structure, building, object, or site since it obtained
honorary landmark status.
      (2)   If no permits have been issued or alterations made to the
structure, building, object, or site since it obtained honorary landmark
status, then the board of trustees may adopt an ordinance granting certified
status to such structure, building, object, or site, which shall thereafter be
subject to the requirements of this Chapter. If such ordinance is adopted, the
board of trustees shall also direct that the ordinance approving such certified
status be recorded in the office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, along
with the declaration executed by the owner(s) of record pursuant to section
26A-21(c)(1)(D)(4).
      (3)   In the event that permits have been issued or alterations made to
the structure, building, object, or site since it obtained honorary landmark
status, the commission shall conduct a meeting with the applicant to review the
nature of any alterations and whether the alterations were consistent with the
criteria set forth in section
26A-53.
         (a)   If the commission determines that any alterations to the
structure, building, object, or site were consistent with the criteria set
forth in section
26A-53, then the commission shall recommend that the board of trustees adopt an
ordinance granting certified status to such structure, building, object, or
site. Upon adoption of such ordinance by the board of trustees, the structure,
building, object, or site shall thereafter be a certified landmark and shall be
subject to the requirements of this chapter. The board of trustees shall also
direct that the ordinance approving such certified status be recorded in the
office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, along with the declaration
executed by the owner(s) of record pursuant to section
26A-21(c)(1)(D)(4).
         (b)   If the commission determines that any alterations to the
structure, building, object, or site were not consistent with the criteria set
forth in section
26A-53, then the commission shall direct the applicant to file an application
for certified status pursuant to section
26A-21(c)(1)(A) or
26A-21(c)(1)(C).
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-22 WITHDRAWAL OF LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION.
   (a)   Conditions for withdrawal. The approval of a structure, building,
object, site or area for certified status or as a certified historic district
(or a part thereof) may be rescinded, and such certified status withdrawn,
under any of the following conditions:
      (1)   The structure, building, object, site or area has ceased to meet
the criteria for certified status because the qualities which caused it to be
originally approved have been lost or destroyed or such qualities were lost
subsequent to nomination, but before conferral of certified status;
2013 S-4
512   Glencoe - Code of Ordinances
      (2)   Additional information shows conclusively that the structure,
building, object, site or area does not possess sufficient significance to meet
the criteria for approval of certified status;
      (3)   The original conferral of certified status was clearly in error; or
      (4)   There was prejudicial procedural error in the process of reviewing
an application for certified status.
   (b)   Requests for withdrawal. Any commissioner, the owner of any structure,
building, object or site having certified status, or 50% or more of the
property owners in an area approved as a certified historic district may
initiate a procedure to withdraw the certified status from such structure,
building, object, site or area.
   (c)   Application and hearing. A procedure to withdraw the certified status
from a structure, building, object, site or area shall be initiated by filing
an application in accordance with subsection 26A-21(c) hereof. Upon the filing
of a completed application, notice shall be given and a public hearing shall be
held in accordance with subsections 26A-21(d) and (e) hereof.
   (d)   Recommendation; determination.
      (1)   Promptly after the close of the public hearing, the commission
shall either:
         A.   Determine that withdrawal of certified status is not warranted,
which determination shall be final; or
         B.   Recommend to the board of trustees that the certified status
should be withdrawn.
      (2)   Such determination or recommendation shall be in writing and shall
set forth the reasons therefor. Any determination or recommendation shall be
submitted to the board of trustees, sent to the applicant and filed with the
village clerk.
   (e)   Board action. The board of trustees shall promptly act upon a
recommendation for withdrawal of certified status. An ordinance passed by the
affirmative vote of at least four members of the board of trustees shall be
required to rescind the approval of, and withdraw the certified status of a
structure, building, object, site or area (which withdrawal in the case of a
certified historic district may affect all or part of such district). Upon
passing an ordinance approving the withdrawal of such certified status, the
board of trustees shall direct that notice be sent to the building official,
the owners of record, the occupants (either by name or to "occupants" of the
site or sites in question), and, if known, to other persons having a legal or
equitable interest in the site or sites, advising them that such certified
status has been withdrawn. The board of trustees shall also direct that the
ordinance withdrawing the certified status from a structure, building, object,
site or area be recorded in the office of Cook County Recorder of Deeds.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE V. RESERVED
§ 26A-30 - 26A-39 RESERVED.
(Ord. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE VI. FINANCIAL BENEFITS
§ 26A-40 INTENT; COOPERATION WITH ILLINOIS HISTORIC PRESERVATION AGENCY.
   To the extent that any tax advantages or public funds are made available to
maintain or encourage historic preservation, it is the intent of this chapter
that only (i) certified landmarks, (ii) certified structures, buildings,
objects, or sites within an historic district, and (iii) properties within a
certified historic districts for which a declaration has been signed and
recorded as provided in this chapter shall be eligible for such advantages or
funds. Any structures, buildings, objects, or sites previously identified under
this chapter as a "designated landmark" shall no longer be deemed a landmark
under this chapter, except for such designated landmarks for which a
construction permit had been issued as of March 21, 2013, but only with respect
to exterior alterations that the commission had previously made a favorable
determination through advisory review. The village manager or the manager's
designee shall cooperate with the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency (or any
other department or officials providing or overseeing the granting of financial
benefits in furtherance of historic preservation) to effect the intent of this
chapter as set forth in this section 26A-40.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-2340)
§ 26A-41 - 26A-42 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-2340)
ARTICLE VII. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
§ 26A-50 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (a)   Unless expressly exempted herein, no alteration shall be allowed to,
and no permits shall be issued for the alteration, demolition, signage or any
other physical modifications of, the exterior architectural appearance of a
structure, building, object, site or area having certified status under this
hapter 26A without the prior issuance of a certificate of appropriateness in
accordance with the procedures and criteria specified in this article. This
article shall not apply to individual structures, buildings, or sites within a
certified historic district unless a declaration has been signed and recorded
with respect to the affected property as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required in connection
with permits necessary for compliance with a lawful order of a village,
including without limitation any permit necessary to correct what is determined
by the issuing officer to be an immediate health or safety problem; provided
such order expressly exempts the alteration, demolition, signage or other
physical modifications from certificate of appropriateness procedures; and
provided further that such order may be subject to appropriate conditions to
advance the purpose and goals of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-51 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Application. Any person proposing an alteration to or seeking a
building, demolition, sign or other permit for, any structure, building, object
or site having certified status shall submit an application for and obtain a
certificate of appropriateness as a precondition to commencing such alteration
or to obtaining such building, demolition, sign or other permit. The
application for the certificate of appropriateness shall include at least the
following information and specifications:
      (1)   Applicant's name;
      (2)   Owner's name, if different from applicant;
      (3)   Street address and legal description of the site;
      (4)   An overall site plan of the site, including front, side and rear
elevation drawings in the case of alteration or partial demolition;
      (5)   Brief description of the structures, buildings and objects on the
site and the structures, buildings and objects on site adjacent to and across
from such original site;
      (6)   Detailed description of the proposed alteration or demolition,
together with any architectural drawings, sketches and photographs indicating
how and to what extent such alteration or demolition shall affect a landmark or
historic district;
      (7)   Names and addresses of the owners of property adjacent to and
across from the site;
      (8)   A list and photographs of significant architectural features in
relation to the structures, buildings or objects on the site previously
identified by the commission as being worthy of protection and preservation;
      (9)   Identification of any architect or developer involved in the
alteration or demolition; and
      (10)   Whatever additional materials the commission requests. Complete
application forms shall be filed with the village clerk, who shall forward such
application to the commission and its secretary for action.
   (b)   Notice. Within 15 days after the filing of a complete application for
a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall schedule a public
hearing to consider the application. Such hearing shall be scheduled not sooner
than 20 nor more than 45 days after the complete application is filed. The
secretary of the commission shall cause written notice by certified or
registered mail to be sent to the applicant, the legal and, if applicable,
beneficial owner or owners of the site, the occupants (either by name or to
"occupants" of the site or sites in question), and the owner or owners of
property adjacent to or across from the site, and shall also cause notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Glencoe. Such
notice shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing and
shall set forth the nature of such hearing, the site involved, and the date,
time and place of such hearing.
   (c)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall afford all
persons present an opportunity to be heard, to express their views, and to
present evidence pertaining to the proposed alteration or demolition. The
secretary of the commission shall record these proceedings. The commission may
adjourn or continue such hearing without further public notice. Within 30 days
after the close of such hearing, the commission shall review all information
presented to it and shall either approve the certificate of appropriateness,
approve the certificate of appropriateness with conditions, deny the
certificate of appropriateness, or, in cases involving demolition, postpone the
decision to approve or deny the certificate of appropriateness.
   (d)   Approval. If the application is approved without conditions, the
commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness permitting the
building official to proceed with other required reviews and approvals.
   (e)   Approval with conditions. If the application is approved with
conditions, the commission shall notify the applicant in writing and shall
specify the conditions to be imposed and the reasons therefore in light of the
criteria applicable to this article. If the applicant notifies the commission
in writing that the conditions are acceptable, or if the applicant does not
appeal the approval with conditions within the prescribed period of time, the
commission shall issue the certificate of appropriateness, subject to the
conditions.
   (f)   Denial. If the application is denied, the commission shall notify the
applicant in writing and shall specify the particulars in which the application
is inconsistent with the criteria applicable to this article.
   (g)   Postponement. In cases involving demolition where the commission
decides to postpone action on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the commission shall notify the applicant in writing. The
period for postponement set forth by the commission shall not extend more than
12 months beyond the close of the public hearing. During the period set forth
for postponement of the requested action, the commission shall explore
alternatives to demolition. Such alternatives may include consultation with
private civic groups, interested private citizens, and other public boards or
agencies in an effort to find a means of preserving the certified landmark or
the certified structure, building, object or site located within an established
historic district. If no alternative has been accepted by the applicant upon
expiration of the period for postponement, the commission shall, within 15 days
after such expiration date, either approve, approve with conditions or deny the
certificate of appropriateness.
   (h)   Validity. A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if the
plans approved by the commission are changed, if any conditions of the
certificate are not satisfied, or if any building permit issued for the
approved work becomes invalid. A certificate of appropriateness shall remain
valid for a period of one year.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-52 APPEAL.
   In the event the commission denies the application, approves the application
with conditions, or, in cases involving demolition, decides to postpone action
on an application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decisions
directly to the board of trustees.
   (a)   Time for filing appeal. An applicant may appeal the commission's
decision by filing an appeal in writing with the village clerk within 15 days
after the applicant is served with notice by certified or registered mail of
the commission's decision. For purposes of this section, the date of service
shall be the date that notice by certified or registered mail is posted.
   (b)   Hearing date. Within 15 days after applicant files an appeal, the
village clerk shall notify the village president, who shall set a date for
hearing the appeal. Such hearing date shall be scheduled no later than 45 days
after the filing of the appeal. After a hearing date has been scheduled, the
village clerk shall notify the applicant in writing, by certified or registered
mail, at least seven days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the
date, time and place of the hearing.
   (c)   Record on appeal. Upon the filing of an appeal, the village clerk
shall obtain from the secretary of the commission a written summary of the
proceedings from the commission's public hearing. The village clerk shall also
notify the building official and chairperson of the commission of the appeal,
who shall forward to the village clerk any other relevant records and materials
regarding the application for a certificate of appropriateness. The foregoing
shall constitute the record on appeal and shall be delivered to the board of
trustees before the hearing date on the appeal.
   (d)   Hearing. At the hearing on appeal, the board of trustees shall permit
the applicant to speak in support of the application and to present any
additional evidence relating thereto. The board of trustees may also consider
testimony from village employees or officials, members of the commission, or
other interested persons. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of
trustees shall consider the record on appeal, the testimony presented on
appeal, and any other evidence and shall determine whether the commission's
decision is consistent with the criteria applicable to this article. The board
of trustees shall then vote whether to affirm or reverse the decision of the
commission in whole or in part, or to remand the application to the commission
for further review. The village clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of
the decision of the board of trustees on appeal. Except for decisions to
postpone in cases involving demolition, or to remand to the commission for
further consideration, such notice shall state that the decision of the board
of trustees is final.
   (e)   Approval. If the application is approved without conditions on appeal,
the board of trustees shall instruct the building official to issue the
certificate of appropriateness.
   (f)   Approval with conditions. If the application is approved with
conditions on appeal, the board of trustees shall specify the conditions to be
imposed and the reasons therefore in light of the criteria applicable to this
article. If the applicant notifies the board of trustees in writing that the
conditions are acceptable, or if the applicant does not further appeal the
approval with conditions, the board of trustees shall instruct the building
official to issue the certificate of appropriateness, subject to the
conditions.
   (g)   Denial. If the application is denied, the board of trustees shall
notify the applicant in writing and shall specify the particulars in which the
application is inconsistent with the criteria set forth in this article.
   (h)   Postponement. In cases involving demolition where the board of
trustees affirms the postponement of action on an application for a certificate
of appropriateness, the board of trustees shall notify the applicant in
writing. The period for postponement as affirmed or modified by the board of
trustees shall not extend more than 12 months beyond the close of the
commission's public hearing.
   (i)   Remand. If the board of trustees votes to remand an application to the
commission for further proceedings, the chairperson of the commission shall be
notified and shall set a date for a new hearing. Such date shall be no later
than 45 days after the board's decision to remand, unless the applicant waives
or extends the 45-day period in writing. If the hearing is not commenced within
such period, the commission shall instruct the building official to issue the
certificate of appropriateness. In all other instances, the hearing on remand
shall be conducted in the same manner as the original hearing before the
commission.
   (j)   Final decision; administrative review. Any final decision on a
certificate of appropriateness by the board of trustees shall be deemed a
decision directing the owner of a structure, building, object, site or area
having certified status to do or refrain from doing any specific thing, or
refusing to permit such owner to do some specific thing he or she desires to
do, in connection with such owner's property. As such, any final decision on a
certificate of appropriateness by the board of trustees may be further appealed
in accordance with the administrative review procedures of the Illinois Code of
Civil Procedure, as may be amended from time to time.
   (k)   Validity. A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if any
plans approved by the board of trustees are changed, if any conditions of such
certificate are not satisfied, or if any building permit issued for the
approved work becomes invalid. A certificate of appropriateness shall remain
valid for a period of one year.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-53 CRITERIA.
   In determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness, the
commission and, if applicable, the board of trustees shall consider the
following criteria, as applicable.
   (a)   General standards.
      (1)   Reasonable efforts should be made to use a property for its
originally intended purpose or to provide a compatible use that requires
minimal alteration of a structure, building, object or site and its
environment.
      (2)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a structure,
building, object or site and its environment should not be destroyed. No
alteration or demolition of any historic material or distinctive architectural
feature should be permitted except when necessary to assure an economically
viable use of a site.
      (3)   All structures, buildings, objects, sites and areas should be
recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical
basis and that seek to create an earlier appearance than the true age of the
property are discouraged.
      (4)   Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a structure, building, object or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their
own right, and this significance should be recognized and respected when
dealing with a specific architectural period.
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a structure, building, object, site or area should ordinarily
be maintained and preserved.
      (6)   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
      (7)   The surface cleaning of structures, buildings and objects should be
undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning
methods that will damage the structures, buildings or objects should be
avoided.
      (8)   New structures, buildings or objects or alterations to sites should
not be discouraged when such structures or alterations do not destroy
significant historical, architectural or cultural features and are compatible
with the size, scale, color, material and character of the site, neighborhood
or environment.
      (9)   Wherever possible, new structures, buildings or objects or
alterations to the existing conditions of sites should be done in such a manner
that, if such new structures or alterations were to be removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the original structure, building, object,
site or area would be unimpaired.
      (10)   Alterations that do not affect any essential architectural or
historic features of a structure, building or object as viewed from the public
way ordinarily should be permitted.
      (11)   Any permitted alteration or demolition should promote the purposes
of this ordinance and general welfare of the village and its residents.
      (12)   Demolition should not be permitted if a structure, building,
object or site is economically viable in its present condition or could be
economically viable after completion of appropriate alterations, even if
demolition would permit a more profitable use of such site.
   (b)   Design guidelines.
      (1)   Height. The height of a certified landmark after alteration should
be compatible with the height of the original landmark. The height of a
structure, building or object after alteration within an historic district
should be compatible with the height of surrounding structures, buildings and
objects within such historic district.
      (2)   Relationship between mass and open space. The relationship between
a landmark and adjacent open space after its alteration should be compatible
with such relationship prior to such alteration. The relationship between a
structure, building or object and adjacent open spaces after alteration within
an historic district should be compatible with the relationship between
surrounding structures, buildings and objects and adjacent open spaces within
such historic district.
      (3)   Relationship among height, width and scale. The relationship among
the height, width and scale of a landmark after alteration should be compatible
with such relationship prior to such alteration. The relationship among height,
width and scale of a structure, building or object after an alteration within a
historic district should be compatible with the relationship among height,
width and scale of surrounding structures, buildings and objects within such
historic district.
      (4)   Directional expression. The directional expressions of a landmark
after alteration, whether its vertical or horizontal positioning, should be
compatible with the directional expression of the original landmark. The
directional expression of a structure, building or object after alteration
within an historic district should be compatible with the directional
expression of surrounding structures, buildings and objects within such
historic district.
      (5)   Roof shape. The roof shape of a landmark after alteration should be
compatible with the roof shape of the original landmark. The roof shape of a
structure, building or object after alteration within an historic district
should be compatible with the roof shape of surrounding structures, buildings
and objects within such historic district.
      (6)   Architectural details, general designs, materials, textures and
colors. The architectural details, general design, materials, textures and
colors of a landmark after alteration should be compatible with the
architectural details, general design, materials, textures and colors of the
original landmark. The architectural details, general design, materials,
textures and colors of a structure, building or object after alteration within
a historic district should be compatible with the architectural details,
general design, materials, textures and colors of surrounding structures,
buildings and objects within such historic district.
      (7)   Landscape and appurtenances. The landscape and appurtenances,
including, without limitation, signs, fences, accessory structures and pavings,
of a landmark after alteration should be compatible with the landscape and
appurtenances of the original landmark. The landscape and appurtenances of a
structure, building or object after alteration within an historic district
should be compatible with the landscape and appurtenances of surrounding
structures, buildings and objects within such historic district.
      (8)   Construction. New construction in an historic district should be
compatible with the architectural styles and designs within such historic
districts.
   (c)   Additional guidelines. In addition to the foregoing guidelines, the
commission may consider the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (revised 1983),
and any amendments thereto, in conducting an advisory review.
   (d)   Economic hardship. Notwithstanding the foregoing criteria, if an
applicant seeks a certificate of appropriateness on the grounds of economic
hardship, the applicant shall present sufficient evidence to the commission
and, if applicable, to the board of trustees to establish that no economically
viable use of a site can be made unless the requested change is permitted. In
order to evaluate fully a claim of economic hardship, the commission and, if
applicable, the board of trustees may require an applicant to provide any
relevant data or studies or may itself undertake or cause to undertake studies
relating to the economic viability of the site. Economic hardship shall be but
one criterion to be considered by the commission and, if applicable, by the
board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 26A-60 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of chapter 16 of the Glencoe village code. In addition,
the village may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter by suit or
action seeking injunctive or other judicial relief.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26A-61 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules,
regulations or permits; provided, however, that where there is a conflict
between any provision of this chapter and provisions of any other law or
ordinance, the provision that imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises shall control.
(Ord. No. 90-32-1841; Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
CHAPTER 26B:
HISTORIC RECOGNITION
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
Section
Article I. Statement of Purpose and Goals
   
26B-1   Purpose
   
26B-2   Goals
Article II. Definitions
   
26B-3   Definitions
   
26B-4   Interpretation
Article III. Historic Preservation Commission
   
26B-5   Commission to implement
   
26B-6   Vote required
   
26B-7   Additional authority and duties
   26B-8 - 26B-19   Reserved
Article IV. Establishment of Landmarks and Historic Districts
   
26B-20   Criteria
   
26B-21   Review and approval procedures
   
26B-22   Withdrawal of honorary status
Article V. Advisory Review
   
26B-30   Advisory review
   
26B-31   Procedure
   
26B-32   Criteria
   26B-33 - 26B-39 Reserved
Article VI. Financial Benefits
   
26B-40   Intent
   26B-41 - 26B-42 Reserved
Article VII. Reserved
   26B-50 - 26B-59 Reserved
Article VIII. General Provisions
   
26B-60   Violations
   
26B-61   Interpretation
ARTICLE I. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND GOALS
§ 26B-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the recognition of structures,
buildings, objects, sites, and areas in the village having historic and
architectural interest and value. The village seeks to recognize such
structures, buildings, objects, sites, and areas in order to encourage their
protection, enhancement, and perpetuation for the benefit of the village and
its residents because of their significance to the village's archaeology,
history, culture and architecture.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-2 GOALS.
   This chapter is created in order to:
   (a)   Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past as
represented in the village's honorary landmarks and recognized historic areas;
   (b)   Encourage the preservation, promotion and maintenance of the village's
historic resources;
   (c)   Encourage the protection and enhancement of the village's
attractiveness to residents, visitors and prospective homebuyers;
   (d)   Encourage the maintenance and improvement property values in the
village;
   (e)   Encourage the protection, preservation and enhancement of the
village's aesthetic appearance and character;
   (f)   Encourage the conferring of honorary landmark and recognized historic
area status upon structures, buildings, objects and sites on a local level; and
   (g)   Educate the general public as to the significance of historic
preservation.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
§ 26B-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms, shall be
construed as set forth in this article.
   ADDITION.  Any act or process that changes the exterior architectural
appearance of a structure by adding to, joining with or increasing the size or
capacity of the structure.
   ADVISORY REVIEW. The procedure established in article V of this chapter to
consider plans for the alteration or demolition of either a structure,
building, object or site having honorary status as provided under this chapter.
   ALTERATION. Any act or process other than demolition that changes the
exterior architectural appearance of any structure, building, object or site
having honorary status, including without limitation the erection,
construction, reconstruction, addition, repair, rehabilitation, removal,
restoration or relocation of any structure.
   AREA. A specific geographic division of the village.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The president and board of trustees of the Village of
Glencoe.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof that is supported by columns or walls
for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   COMMISSION. The Glencoe historic preservation commission.
   COMMISSIONERS. The members of the commission.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of adding an addition to, reconstructing or otherwise
altering an existing structure or the act of erecting a new principal or
accessory structure on a site.
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys a structure, building or object
in whole or in part to the extent of 50% of its volume.
   DESIGN GUIDELINES. Standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic and architectural appearance and character of a structure, building,
object, site or area.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE.  The architectural character, general
composition and general arrangement of the exterior of a structure, building,
object or site, including without limitation the kind, color and texture of the
building material and the type, design and character of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area established as a recognized historic area under
this
chapter 26B or a certified historic district under chapter 26A of the village
code.
   HONORARY LANDMARK. A structure, building, object and/or site established as
An honorary landmark by ordinance duly passed and published by the board of
trustees pursuant to this
chapter 26B which has a special character or historical and/or architectural
interest or value as part of the development, heritage or culture of the
village, the State of Illinois or the United States, and as such is worthy of
preservation, restoration and/or rehabilitation. Any structure, building,
object or site identified as a Landmark by the United States Secretary of
Interior in the National Register of Historic Places or by the Illinois
Director of Conservation in the Illinois Register of Historic Places shall also
be an honorary landmark as defined herein (unless such landmark has been
certified pursuant to
chapter 26A of the village code).
   HONORARY STATUS. A structure, building, object, site, or area that has been
approved pursuant to this
chapter 26B as an honorary landmark or a recognized historic area, or any
structure, building, object, site, or area within a certified historic
districts (as provided for in
chapter 26A of this code) for which no declaration has been signed or recorded
as provided in
chapter 26A.
   LANDMARK. A structure, building, object and/or site established as an
honorary landmark or a certified landmark.
   LANDMARK, CERTIFIED. A landmark established through the certification
procedures set forth in
chapter 26A of the village code.
   OBJECT. A material or natural thing of functional, architectural, cultural,
historical, aesthetic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design,
movable yet related to a specific setting or environment.
   RECOGNIZED HISTORIC AREA. An area established as a recognized historic area
by ordinance duly passed and published by the board of trustees pursuant to
this chapter 26B and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries
one or more honorary landmarks or certified landmarks (as established pursuant
to
chapter 26A of the village code) and which may have within its boundaries other
structures, buildings, objects or sites that, while not of such historic and/or
architectural significance to be identified as landmarks, nevertheless
contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks
located within such historic area. Any area identified as an Historic
Preservation District by the United States Secretary of Interior in the
National Register of Historic Sites and Places shall also be an recognized
historic area as defined herein (unless otherwise granted certified status
pursuant to
chapter 26A of the village code).
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a structure, building, object or
site to a state of utility, through repair, construction or alteration, which
makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions
and features of the property which are significant to its historic,
architectural and cultural values.
   RELOCATION. The process of moving a structure, building or object on its
site or to another site.
   RESTORATION. The process of restoring, repairing or reconstructing a
property, through repair, construction or alteration, to a former or original
condition that enhances those portions and features of the property that are
significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
   SITE. A single lot or parcel of property.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground or attached to something
having a permanent location on or in the ground.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-4 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE III. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 26B-5 COMMISSION TO IMPLEMENT.
   The commission as established under article III of
chapter 26A of the village code shall implement the provisions of this
chapter 26B except as otherwise expressly provided.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-6 VOTE REQUIRED.
   The affirmative vote of at least three commissioners shall be required to
recommend that a structure, building, object, site or area be recognized as an
honorary landmark, or be established as a recognized historic area. Any
advisory review conference may be conducted by a subcommittee of the commission
consisting of no fewer than three commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-7 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   In addition to the commission's authority and duties as set forth in
chapter 26A, and subject to the laws of the State of Illinois, the Glencoe
village code and any other ordinances and resolutions of the village, the
commission shall have and may exercise the additional authority and duties
herein described:
   (a)   To assist persons in the preparation of an application for recognition
as an honorary landmark or for a recognized historic area and the alteration or
demolition of the same;
   (b)   To hold public hearings, review applications, conduct advisory review
conferences, make recommendations or decisions regarding the recognition of a
structure, building, object and/or site as an honorary landmark or a recognized
historic area, the alteration or demolition of the same;
   (c)   To keep a register of all structures, buildings, objects, sites and
areas that have been approved as an honorary landmark, or a recognized historic
area, including all information required for the approval of each landmark or
district;
   (d)   To determine an appropriate design of markers for honorary landmarks
and recognized historic areas.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§§ 26B-8 - 26B-19 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS
§ 26B-20 CRITERIA.
   The commission shall consider the criteria set forth in section
26A-20 of the village code in order to recommend a structure, building, object
or site for approval as an honorary landmark, or an area for approval as a
recognized historic area.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-21 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES,
   (a)   Nominations. Nominations for approval as an honorary landmark or a
recognized historic area may be submitted by a commissioner, the owner of the
nominated site, or 50% or more of the owners of property within an area to be
nominated.
   (b)   Preliminary review. Prior to submitting a complete application for
honorary landmark or recognized historic area approval, an applicant may
request the commission to conduct a preliminary review of whether a structure,
building, object, site or area could qualify as an honorary landmark or
recognized historic area. An applicant can seek preliminary review by
submitting a request therefor to the village clerk that includes at least the
information required in either §
26B-21(c)(1)A.1. through 7., or §
26B-21(c)(1)B.1. through 7., as applicable, and any other information that the
applicant wishes to provide. The commission may then review the information and
advise the applicant of its preliminary recommendation regarding honorary
landmark or recognized historic area status based on the information provided.
These preliminary review procedures shall be informal and shall not bind either
the applicant or the commission in any way.
   (c)   Application.
      (1)   The application for nomination shall include as least the following
information and specifications:
         A.   For an honorary landmark.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owner's name and address;
            3.   Street address, legal description or real estate index number
(s) of the site;
            4.   A written statement describing the structure, building, object
or site and setting forth reasons in support of the requested approval;
            5.   Written documentation that the owner or occupant has been
notified of or consents to the requested approval of landmark status;
            6.   Brief description of the structures, buildings and objects on
the nominated site and the structures, buildings and objects on sites adjacent
to and across from such site; and
            7.   Whatever additional materials the commission requests.
         B.   For a recognized historic area.
            1.   Applicant's name and address;
            2.   Owners' names and addresses;
            3.   A vicinity map delineating the boundaries of the area
nominated for approval as a recognized historic area;
            4.   A written statement describing the area and the structures,
buildings, objects and sites located therein and setting forth reasons in
support of the establishment of a recognized historic area;
            5.   Written documentation that the owners or occupants have been
notified of or consent to the proposed establishment of a recognized historic
area;
            6.   Brief description of the structures, buildings, objects and
sites in the nominated area and the structures, buildings, objects and sites,
adjacent to and across from such area; and
            7.   Whatever additional materials the commission requests.
      (2)   Complete application forms shall be filed with the village clerk,
who shall forward each application to the commission and its secretary for
action.
   (d)   Notice. Within 15 days after the filing of a nomination on a completed
application form, the secretary of the commission shall schedule a public
hearing on the whether such application should be recommended for approval by
setting forth a date, time and place for such hearing. Such hearing shall be
scheduled for the next available regular meeting of the commission. The
secretary of the commission shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant, the owner or owners of record, the occupants (either by name or to
"occupants" of the site or sites in question), and, if known, to other persons
having a legal or equitable interest in the site or sites nominated for
landmark or historic district status and shall also cause notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. Such notice
shall be given not less than 15 days prior to the scheduled hearing and shall
set forth the nature of such hearing, the site or area involved, and the date,
time and place of such hearing. If, upon diligent search, the identity or
whereabouts of the owner or owners of record or legal or equitable interest
holders is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose
name such site was last assessed is sufficient notice under this chapter.
   (e)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall afford all
persons present an opportunity to be heard and to express their views
pertaining to the nomination for landmark or historic district status. The
secretary of the commission shall record these proceedings. The commission may
adjourn or continue such public hearing without further public notice.
   (f)   Recommendations.
      (1)   The commission shall review all information presented to it at the
public hearing and shall adopt a recommendation that the nominated honorary
landmark or recognized historic area does or does not meet the criteria herein
prescribed. The recommendation shall be accompanied by a report that shall
contain the following information:
         A.   The commission's rationale for recommending either approval or
rejection of the nomination;
         B.   In the case of a nominated honorary landmark meeting the criteria
for honorary status, the significant feature of features in the exterior
architectural appearance of the landmark that should be protected and
preserved;
         C.   In the case of a nominated recognized historic area meeting the
criteria for honorary status, the significant features in the exterior
architectural appearance of any structures, buildings, objects or sites within
the recognized historic area that should be protected and preserved; and
         D.   Any other pertinent comments related to the nomination of the
honorary landmark or recognized historic area.
      (2)   The commission shall submit its recommendations on each nomination
to the board of trustees, which shall promptly act upon such recommendation.
All recommendations by the commission shall be filed with the village clerk and
made available to persons requesting the same in writing.
   (g)   Establishment of honorary status. An ordinance passed by the
affirmative vote of at least four members of the board of trustees shall be
required to approve an honorary landmark or a recognized historic area. Upon
passing an ordinance approving the nomination for honorary status, the board of
trustees shall direct that notice be sent to the building official, the owners
of record, the occupants (either by name or to "occupants" of the site or sites
in question), and, if known, to other persons having a legal or equitable
interest in the approved site or sites, advising them of such approval and
informing them that any structure, building, object, site or area receiving
such honorary status pursuant to this chapter shall thereafter be subject to
the requirements of this chapter. The board of trustees shall also direct that
the ordinance approving such honorary status be recorded in the office of the
Cook County Recorder of Deeds.
   (h)   Denial of honorary status. An applicant whose nomination for a
honorary status is denied by the board of trustees may request reconsideration
by filing a written request within ten days after a decision denying the
application is rendered; provided, however, that the board of trustees shall
reconsider a nomination only if substantial new evidence or information
regarding the nominated honorary landmark or recognized historic area is
provided. Once a nomination has been denied by the board of trustees, no
further nominations involving any site whose nomination was denied may be filed
for 90 days.
   (i)   Stay of proceedings. No building, demolition, sign or other permit
shall be issued for a proposed landmark or a structure, building, object, site
or area in a proposed recognized historic area from the date when the
nomination form is filed with the village clerk until the final disposition of
the nomination unless the advisory review is completed pursuant to article V of
this
chapter 26B.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-22 WITHDRAWAL OF HONORARY STATUS.
   (a)   Conditions for withdrawal. The approval of a structure, building,
object, site or area as an honorary landmark or as a recognized historic area
(or a part thereof) may be rescinded, and such honorary status withdrawn, under
any of the following conditions:
      (1)   The structure, building, object, site or area has ceased to meet
the criteria for honorary status because the qualities which caused it to be
originally approved have been lost or destroyed or such qualities were lost
subsequent to nomination, but before the conferral of honorary status;
      (2)   Additional information shows conclusively that the structure,
building, object, site or area does not possess sufficient significance to meet
the criteria for conferral of honorary status;
      (3)   The original conferral of honorary status was clearly in error; or
      (4)   There was prejudicial procedural error in the process of reviewing
an application for honorary status.
   (b)   Requests for withdrawal. Any commissioner, the owner of any structure,
building, object or site approved as an honorary landmark, or 50% or more of
the property owners in an area approved as a recognized historic area may
initiate a procedure to withdraw the honorary status from such structure,
building, object, site or area.
   (c)   Application and hearing. A procedure to withdraw the honorary status
from a structure, building, object, site or area shall be initiated by filing
an application in accordance with subsection
26B-21(c) hereof. Upon the filing of a completed application, notice shall be
given and a public hearing shall be held in accordance with subsections
26B-21(d) and (e) hereof.
   (d)   Recommendation; determination.
      (1)   Promptly after the close of the public hearing, the commission
shall either:
         A.   Determine that withdrawal of honorary district status is not
warranted, which determination shall be final; or
         B.   Recommend to the board of trustees that the honorary status
should be withdrawn.
      (2)   Such determination or recommendation shall be in writing and shall
set forth the reasons therefor. Any determination or recommendation shall be
submitted to the board of trustees, sent to the applicant and filed with the
village clerk.
   (e)   Board action. The board of trustees shall promptly act upon a
recommendation for withdrawal of honorary status. An ordinance passed by the
affirmative vote of at least four members of the board of trustees shall be
required to rescind the approval of, and withdraw the honorary status of a
structure, building, object, site, or area (or part of a recognized historic
area). Upon passing an ordinance approving the withdrawal of such honorary
status, the board of trustees shall direct that notice be sent to the building
official, the owners of record, the occupants (either by name or to "occupants"
of the site or sites in question), and, if known, to other persons having a
legal or equitable interest in the site or sites, advising them that such
honorary status has been withdrawn. The board of trustees shall also direct
that the ordinance withdrawing the honorary status from a structure, building,
object, site or area be recorded in the office of Cook County Recorder of
Deeds.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE V. ADVISORY REVIEW
§ 26B-30 ADVISORY REVIEW.
   (a)   Unless expressly exempted herein, no permits for the alteration,
demolition, signage or any other physical modifications of an honorary landmark
or a structure, building, object, site or area located within a recognized
historic area or otherwise having honorary status may be issued by the village
without the commission conducting an advisoiy review in accordance with the
procedures and criteria specified in this article.
   (b)   An advisory review shall not be required in connection with:
      (1)   Permit applications not involving any alteration to or demolition
of the exterior architectural appearance of a structure, building, object or
site having honorary status; or
      (2)   Permits necessary for compliance with a lawful order of the
village, including without limitation, any permit necessary to correct what is
determined by the issuing officer to be an immediate health or safety problem;
provided such order expressly exempts the alteration or demolition from the
advisory review procedure; and provided further that such order may be made
subject to appropriate conditions to advance the purpose and goals of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-31 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   Initiation. Within five days after the filing of an application for a
building, demolition, sign or other permit, the building official shall advise
the applicant of the advisory review and shall forward a copy of such
application together with plans pertaining thereto to the commission.
   (b)   Advisory review conference. Upon receipt of an application from the
building official, the commission shall consider the extent to which the
proposed alteration or demolition may be consistent or inconsistent with the
purpose and goals of this chapter and the criteria described in section
26B-32. If the commission determines that the proposed alteration or demolition
adversely affects the purpose and goals of this chapter, the commission shall
request a conference with the permit applicant. The commission shall transmit
its concerns and recommendations to the permit applicant at the time such
request is made, and the commission and the permit applicant shall use such
conference to reach a mutually satisfactory resolution of the commission's
concerns. If the commission determines, either with or without a conference,
that the proposed alteration or demolition will not adversely affect the
purpose and goals of this chapter, the commission shall inform the building
official of such a determination, and the application shall be evaluated
strictly on its merits under village building codes and regulations.
   (c)   Time for review.
      (1)   Except as provided in subsection
26B-31(d) hereof, not sooner than 120 days after filing an application for a
demolition permit, and not sooner than 35 days after filing an application for
a building, sign or other permit, for a building, structure, object, site or
area having honorary status, a permit applicant may notify the commission and
building official in writing that it no longer intends to participate in the
advisory review process.
      (2)   Upon receipt of such notice, and notwithstanding any determination
of the commission, the building official shall evaluate the application
strictly on its merits under village building codes and regulations.
   (d)   Extension of time for advisory review.
      (1)   Any delay in conducting an advisory review conference resulting
from an applicant's inability or failure to attend any conference shall extend
the time before which such applicant can conclude its participation in the
advisory review process.
      (2)   In addition to any other extension, upon request of the commission
and written notice to the permit applicant, the board of trustees may consider
and grant an extension of the time for review of an application for a
demolition permit not exceeding an additional 30 days if the board determines
that the commission's efforts to preserve a structure, building, object, site
or area having honorary status will promote the public welfare without causing
undue hardship on the permit applicant.
   (e)   Other laws and. regulations. The advisory review shall not negate,
modify or supersede other laws or regulations regarding structural and fire
safety.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-32 CRITERIA.
   In conducting an advisory review, the commission shall consider the criteria
described in section
26A-53 of the village code, as applicable.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§§ 26B-33 - 26B-39 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE VI. FINANCIAL BENEFITS
§ 26B-40 INTENT.
   It is the express intention of the board of trustees that this
chapter 26B not be considered for, nor presented to the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency for consideration for, certification by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency or the United States Department of the Interior.
Additionally, it is the express intention of the board of trustees that the
conferral of honorary status shall not qualify structures, buildings, objects
or sites as an "historic building" under the Revenue Act, 35 ILCS 200/10-40 et
seq. or as a "certified historic structure" under the Tax Reform Act of 1986,
26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq. or under other legislation subsequently passed into law
by the State of Illinois or the United States. The village manager or the
manager's designee shall cooperate with the Illinois Historic Preservation
Agency (or any other department or officials providing or overseeing the
granting of financial benefits in furtherance of historic preservation) to
effect the intent of this chapter as set forth in this section
26B-40.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§§ 26B-41 - 26B-49 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE VII. RESERVED
§§ 26B-50 - 26B-59 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
ARTICLE VIII. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 26B-60 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of
chapter 16 of the Glencoe village code. In addition, the village may seek to
enforce the provisions of this chapter by suit or action seeking injunctive or
other judicial relief.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
§ 26B-61 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules,
regulations or permits; provided, however, that where there is a conflict
between any provision of this chapter and provisions of any other law or
ordinance, the provision that imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises shall control. Any structure, building, object or site
established as a "Designated Landmark" under
chapter 26A of the village code on or before March 21, 2013 shall remain a
"Designated Landmark" but shall hereafter be construed as an "Honorary
Landmark" for purposes of
chapters 26A and
26B.
(Ord. No. 2013-10-3340)
CHAPTER 27: RAILROADS
Section
   
27-1   Definitions
   
27-2   Crossings to be kept in repair
   
27-3   Notice to repair crossing - duty of village manager
   
27-4   Same - time for compliance
   
27-5   Protective gates, personnel, etc., at crossings
   
27-6   Obstruction of crossings
   
27-7   Right-of-way fences - required; approval of fencing
   
27-8   Same - notice to install, repair, etc.
   
27-9   Duty of railroads as to streets, etc., in which tracks are laid
   
27-10   Permission required to make certain deposits on streets; loading and
unloading on streets restricted; erections, etc., of structures on streets
   
27-11   Placing tracks, etc., on streets, etc. - generally
   
27-12   Same - flying, etc., switches prohibited
   
27-13   Removal of prohibited tracks and appurtenances
   
27-14   Village may require track elevation
   
27-15   Drainage of rights-of-way and adjacent property
   
27-16   Headlights and backing lights
   
27-17   Sounding whistle
   
27-18   Information as to violations
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to authority of village in connection with
regulations, etc., of railroads, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 30
Cross-reference:
   As to vehicle approaching railroad grade crossing, see §
23-78
Statutory reference:
   As to railroads generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 114
   For state law as to authority of village in connection with railroad safety,
see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, 1 11-57.1
§ 27-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CROSSING. Any intersection of railroad right-of-way with any street, alley,
highway or other public thoroughfare in the village.
   RAILROAD. Any railroad or railway firm, company or corporation and any owner
or lessee of a railroad track.
§ 27-2 CROSSINGS TO BE KEPT IN REPAIR.
   Every railroad within the village shall keep its crossings, and the
approaches thereto, in good repair to the satisfaction of the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 696)
§ 27-3 NOTICE TO REPAIR CROSSING - DUTY OF VILLAGE MANAGER.
   When it shall appear to the village manager that any railroad crossing in
the village is out of repair, he or she shall forthwith give notice to the
railroad to repair the same.
(1929 Code, § 696)
§ 27-4 SAME - TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
   Every railroad receiving notice to repair a crossing pursuant to the
preceding section shall comply with such notice within 48 hours thereafter.
(1929 Code, § 696)
§ 27-5 PROTECTIVE GATES, PERSONNEL, ETC., AT CROSSINGS.
   (a)   Every railroad whose tracks shall cross any street, alley or highway,
shall install and maintain, on each side of the tracks, gates that shall
provide protection against injury to persons and property at such crossings.
Each such pair of gates shall at all times open and close simultaneously. Such
gates shall be operated day and night.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the
construction or maintenance of such gates at any crossing provided with a
subway or viaduct of such a nature that the public is not required to cross the
tracks at grade.
   (c)   Every gate, guard, viaduct, subway and the approaches thereto, or
other protection connected with or adjacent to any railroad in the village,
shall be installed at the sole cost and expense of the railroad company, under
the supervision of the village board of trustees or its agent and shall
thereafter be kept and maintained by such railroad in proper repair and
condition at its own cost and expense and without cost or expense to the
village.
(1929 Code, § 700)
§ 27-6 OBSTRUCTION OF CROSSINGS.
   (a)   No railroad locomotive engine, car or train shall stop in or remain
upon any crossing within the village for a period longer than five minutes at
any one time, under a penalty of $10 for each and every consecutive five
minutes any such locomotive engine, car or train shall be permitted to so
remain in or upon such crossing; provided, however, that in case a wreck should
take place at any such crossing, reasonable time shall be allowed to remove any
obstruction that may be caused by such wreck.
   (b)   Should any crossing in the village remain obstructed, in whole or in
part, by any train for and during the period of five minutes, it shall be the
duty of the railroad, on or before the expiration of five minutes, when from
any cause the entire train cannot be propelled or removed to any one side of
such crossing, to cause such cars as may be on or near such crossing to be
uncoupled and the obstructing cars to be removed from the crossing and leave
the crossing entirely clear. When the train is again coupled it shall be
removed from such crossing immediately.
(1929 Code, § 706)
§ 27-7 RIGHT-OF-WAY FENCES - REQUIRED; APPROVAL OF FENCING.
   Every railroad shall fence its right-of-way within the village with a
substantial fence, to be approved by the village president.
(1929 Code, § 697)
Cross-reference:
   As to fences generally, see §§
9-74 to
9-81
§ 27-8 SAME - NOTICE TO INSTALL, REPAIR, ETC.
   The village president shall notify any railroad that has neglected or
refused to erect any fence required by the preceding section, or has suffered
the same to fall into decay or out of repair, to erect or repair such fence
within ten days from the date or receipt thereof. Such railroad shall comply
with such notice.
(1929 Code, § 697)
§ 27-9 DUTY OF RAILROADS AS TO STREETS, ETC., IN WHICH TRACKS ARE LAID.
   All railroads shall raise or lower their railroad tracks lying within the
village so as to conform to any grade which may at any time be established for
any street, alley or highway by ordinance of the village. Where such tracks run
across or lengthwise on any such street, alley or highway, they shall keep
their railroad tracks on a level with the surface, and keep such streets in
good order, so that such tracks may be crossed at any place in such street,
alley or highway. Where such tracks cross any street, alley or highway, they
shall keep the same planked between the rails.
(1929 Code, § 708)
§ 27-10 PERMISSION REQUIRED TO MAKE CERTAIN DEPOSITS ON STREETS; LOADING AND
UNLOADING ON STREETS RESTRICTED; ERECTIONS, ETC., OF STRUCTURES ON STREETS.
   No railroad shall deposit or place in any street, alley or highway any car,
engine, wagon, lumber, wood, coal or other material except by the written
permission of the board of trustees. No railroad shall load or unload any car
from or upon any street, alley or highway except by the written permission of
the board of trustees. No railroad shall erect or maintain any switchhouse or
other building upon any street, alley or highway within the village, except by
the written permission of the board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 708)
§ 27-11 PLACING TRACKS, ETC., ON STREETS, ETC. - GENERALLY.
   No tracks, sidings, side tracks, switch tracks, turnouts, frogs, switches or
rails shall be placed in or across any portion of a street, alley or highway
without special permission from the board of trustees.
(1929 Code, §§ 702, 703)
§ 27-12 SAME - FLYING, ETC., SWITCHES PROHIBITED.
   No running or flying switches shall be permitted along or across any street,
alley or highway.
(1929 Code, §§ 702, 703)
§ 27-13 REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED TRACKS AND APPURTENANCES.
   The president of the village is hereby authorized to remove immediately any
tracks, sidings, side tracks, switches or switching tracks and other
appurtenances which may be laid in violation of the two preceding sections.
(1929 Code, § 703)
§ 27-14 VILLAGE MAY REQUIRE TRACK ELEVATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the right of the
village at any time to require any railroad to elevate its tracks within the
village.
(1929 Code, § 104)
§ 27-15 DRAINAGE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ADJACENT PROPERTY.
   All railroads shall make and keep open and in repair ditches, side drains,
sewers and culverts along and under their tracks, so that filthy and stagnant
water cannot stand on their grounds or rights-of-way and in such manner that
the natural drainage of the adjacent property shall not be impeded.
(1929 Code, § 698)
§ 27-16 HEADLIGHTS AND BACKING LIGHTS.
   Every locomotive engine, railroad car or train running at night in the
village shall have and keep while so running a brilliant and conspicuous light
on its forward end. If such engine, car or train is backing, it shall have a
conspicuous light in the rear car or engine so as to show the direction in
which it is moving.
(1929 Code, § 707)
§ 27-17 SOUNDING WHISTLE.
   (a)   No railroad shall cause or allow the whistle of any locomotive engine
to be sounded within the village except necessary signals for brakes and
crossings and such as may be absolutely necessary to prevent injury to persons
and to property; except, that locomotives operating through the village shall
sound warning signals between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(1929 Code, § 709) (Ord. No. 1273; Ord. No. 1419, § 1)
   (b)   Notwithstanding the restriction contained in §
27-17A of this code, commencing on September 1, 2005, no railroad shall cause
or allow the whistle of any locomotive engine to be sounded within the village
at any time of the day, except necessary signals for brakes and crossing and
such as may be absolutely necessary to prevent injury to persons and to
property.
(Ord. No. 2005-16-3136)
§ 27-18 INFORMATION AS TO VIOLATIONS.
   Each superintendent of any railroad shall furnish to any officer of the
village applying therefor the name of any person in the employment of such
railroad who shall have been charged with having violated any of the provisions
of this chapter.
(1929 Code, § 710)
CHAPTER 28: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
Section
   
28-1   Imposed; amount
   
28-2   Reports required
   
28-3   Payments to State Department of Revenue
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to taxation generally, see char.,
art. V, §§ 1 to
8
Statutory reference:
   For Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 24, §
8-11-1
§ 28-1 IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail, at the rate of 1% of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while
this chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 24, §
8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 69-3-1468, § 1)
§ 28-2 REPORTS REQUIRED.
   Every such person engaged in such business specified in §
28-1 in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar
month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by § 3 of "An Act
in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible
Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption," approved June 28,
1933, as amended.
(Ord. No. 69-3-1468, § 2)
§ 28-3 PAYMENTS TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Ord. No. 69-3-1468, § 3)
CHAPTER 29: SCAVENGERS
Section
   
29-1   License - required; application; issuance
   
29-2   Same - investigation of applicant; inspection of vehicles
   
29-3   Same - fee
   
29-4   Regulations generally
   
29-5   Vehicles generally
§ 29-1 LICENSE - REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavengers,
or to collect or remove garbage, rubbish or offal, without having first secured
a license therefor. Applications for such licenses, and the issuance thereof,
shall comply with the provisions of
chapter 22 relating to licenses.
(1929 Code, § 549)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 29-2 SAME - INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   Upon the receipt of any application for a license required by §
29-1, the village manager shall make or cause to be made an investigation into
the character of the applicant. No license shall be issued to any person who is
not a person of good character, nor to any company whose officers are not
persons of good character. The village manager shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all vehicles intended to be used by the applicant, and shall not
issue a license unless these vehicles comply with the provisions of this code
and other ordinances of the village.
(1929 Code, § 550)
§ 29-3 SAME - FEE.
   The annual fee for scavengers' licenses plus each vehicle used for the
business shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(1929 Code, § 551) (Ord. No. 1223; Ord. No. 1406, § 10; Ord. No. 90-3-1812;
Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 29-4 REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   All persons doing business as scavengers in the village shall be fully in
compliance with all provisions of this code and other ordinances relating to
the business, or relating to traffic or to the movement of vehicles on the
streets. Care shall be taken when removing any garbage or offal that no waste
material is permitted to fall or remain on any premises. It is unlawful to
employ as driver of any vehicle or as helper therefor any person who is not a
person of good character.
(1929 Code, § 553)
§ 29-5 VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   All vehicles used by scavengers in the conduct of their business shall be
kept in a sanitary condition. The body or box of such vehicle shall be
waterproof, and each vehicle shall be equipped with a suitable cover.
(1929 Code, § 552)
Cross-reference:
   As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see
ch. 23
CHAPTER 30: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Article I. In General
   
30-1   Supervision, etc.
   
30-2   Repairs - generally
   
30-3   Same - barricades, etc., for repairing or laying pavements
   
30-4   Same - pavement defects - officials to report
   
30-5   Same - same - action by village manager
   
30-6   Injuring streets, etc.; interfering with street drainage
   
30-7   Public display of merchandise
   
30-8   Depositing certain articles on streets, etc., prohibited
   
30-9   Playing games
Article II. Sidewalk Construction
   
30-10   Applicability of article to certain work
   
30-11   Permit - required; application
   
30-12   Same - to contain specifications, etc.
   
30-13   Bond
   
30-14   Compliance with official plans and specifications
   
30-15   Width of sidewalks
Article III. Driveway Construction and Alteration
   
30-16   Compliance with article required
   
30-17   Permit generally; fee
   
30-18   Deposit required
   
30-19   Number of driveways allowed
   
30-20   Procedure when permit denied
   
30-21   Width and location of driveways
   
30-22   Material requirements
   
30-23   Grade requirements
   
30-24   Removal of curbs
   
30-25   Drainage
   
30-26   Barriers and lights required
   
30-27   Temporary driveways
Article IV. Excavations and Tunnels
   
30-28   Compliance with article required
   
30-29   Excavation and tunneling permit - required
   
30-30   Same - application
   
30-31   Same - fee
   
30-32   Bond
   
30-33   Permit to use mechanical power driven excavating, etc., equipment -
required
   
30-34   Same - application
   
30-35   Same - fee
   
30-36   Barricades and lights
   
30-37   Work to be done in accordance with permit and application
   
30-38   Restoring street, etc. - generally
   
30-39   Same - when village to carry out restoration
Article V. Parking Cutout Construction
   
30-40   "Parking cutout" defined
   
30-41   Constructors or users to comply with article
   
30-42   Permit - required
   
30-43   Same - application
   
30-44   Same - fee
   
30-45   Same - issuance
   
30-46   Same - revocation
   
30-47   Cash construction and restoration deposit - generally
   
30-48   Same - use on termination permit
   
30-49   Maintenance
   
30-50   Specifications
   
30-51   Number of cutouts permitted per residence; cutouts prohibited under
certain circumstances
   
30-52   Continuance of existing nonconforming cutouts
   
30-53   Variances from article
Article VI. Obstructions, Projections and Encroachments
   
30-54   Awnings and projecting signs
   
30-55   Street, etc., obstructions prohibited generally; removal by village
manager
   
30-56   Projections, signs, etc., from buildings, etc.
   
30-57   Construction, maintenance, etc., of stones, sidewalk approaches, etc. -
prohibited generally; exception
   
30-58   Same - manner of constructing, etc., sidewalk approaches or flagstones
   
30-59   Same - manner of constructing, etc., stones, boulders or other hard
material substances
   
30-60   Permit for placing, constructing, maintaining, etc., stones, sidewalk
approaches, etc.
   
30-61   Removal of unauthorized stones, sidewalk approaches, etc.
   
30-62   Depositing coal or other materials preparatory to delivery
   
30-63   Buildings or structures encroaching on public streets or property
Article VII. Numbering Buildings
   
30-64   Required
   
30-65   Base lines designated; starting numbers; directions of numerical
increase
   
30-66   Assignment of numbers
   
30-67   Size, legibility and placement of numbers
Article VIII. Snow Removal
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
   
30-68   Definition
   
30-69   License required
   
30-70   Same - fee
   
30-71   Same - bond
   
30-71A   Private roadway maintenance agreements
Article IX. Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180, replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
   
30-72   Purpose and scope
   
30-73   Definitions
   
30-74   Annual registration required
   
30-75   Permit required; applications and fees
   
30-76   Action on permit applications
   
30-77   Effect of permit
   
30-78   Revised permit drawings
   
30-79   Insurance
   
30-80   Indemnification
   
30-81   Security
   
30-82   Permit suspension and revocation
   
30-83   Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status
   
30-84   General construction standards
   
30-85   Traffic control
   
30-86   Location of facilities
   
30-87   Construction methods and materials
   
30-88   Vegetation control
   
30-89   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
30-90   Cleanup and restoration
   
30-91   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
30-92   Small wireless facilities
   
30-93   Variances
   
30-94   Right to appeal
   
30-95   Penalties
   
30-96   Enforcement
   
30-97   Severability
Article X. Coal Tar Sealant Prohibition
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
   
30-98   Purpose
   
30-99   Definitions
   
30-100   Sale of coal tar products prohibited
   
30-101   Use of coal tar products prohibited
   
30-102   Penalty
   
30-103   Effective date
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with construction
and repair of bridges, sidewalks, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 7
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with opening,
extending, improving, vacating, etc., streets, alleys, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 6
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with planning,
numbering, etc., lots, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 10
   For charter provision as to special tax assessment or streets, etc., see
char.,
art. V, §§ 6,
7
   For charter provision as to street commissioner, see char.,
art. III, § 6
Cross-reference:
   As to auctions on streets, etc., see §
7-8
   As to compliance by plumbers the regulations relating to excavations in
streets, see §
11-6
   As to designation of one-way streets, etc., see §§
23-60 to
23-62
   As to driving vehicles on sidewalks, etc., see §
23-71
   As to duty of railroads as to streets, etc., in which tracks are laid, see §
27-9
   As to obstructions of sidewalks by pedestrians, see §
23-49
   As to parades and processions generally, see §§
23-6,
23-7
   As to placing railroad tracks, etc., on streets, etc., see §§
27-11,
27-12
   As to powers and duties of director of public works in connection with
streets, etc., see §
2-76
   As to riding bicycles on sidewalks, see §
23-19
   As to street commissioner generally, see §§
2-57 to
2-61
   As to the use of coasters, roller skates, etc., on streets, see §
23-12
   As to vehicles for sprinkling streets, see §
36-33
Statutory reference:
   As to sidewalk construction generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, §§
11-84-1 to 11-84-8
   For state law as to authority of village relative to sidewalks, see Ill.
Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-13
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate the construction, etc.,
of driveways, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-30-8
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate the numbering of
buildings and lots, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-18
   For state law as to general powers of village over streets and public ways,
see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, §§ 11-80-1 to 11-80-22
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 30-1 SUPERVISION, ETC.
   (a)   All streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways in the village shall be
under the supervision of the village manager.
   (b)   He or she shall have general charge of the construction and all other
work done on such places, shall superintend the cleaning thereof; and shall see
to the enforcement of all provisions of this code and other ordinances and laws
relating thereto.
(1929 Code, §§ 186, 208, 220)
§ 30-2 REPAIRS - GENERALLY.
   (a)   All public streets and sidewalks in the village shall be kept in good
repair.
   (b)   Repairs shall be made by order of the village manager and shall be
supervised by him or her.
(1929 Code, § 187)
§ 30-3 SAME - BARRICADES, ETC., FOR REPAIRING OR LAYING PAVEMENTS.
   (a)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, shall maintain suitable barricades and warning signals to
prevent injury to any person by reason of the work, and shall have the
barricades lighted at night.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to disturb any such barricade without proper
authority.
(1929 Code, §§ 187, 209, 244) (Ord. No. 1312A)
§ 30-4 SAME - PAVEMENT DEFECTS - OFFICIALS TO REPORT.
   It shall be the duty of every village official or employee to report to the
village manager every defect observed in the pavement of any street or
sidewalk.
(1929 Code, § 188)
§ 30-5 SAME - SAME - ACTION BY VILLAGE MANAGER.
   It shall be the duty of the village manager either to repair the defects
reported pursuant to the preceding section promptly, or to report the same to
the board of trustees, after just properly barricading the same so as to avoid
injury to any vehicle, person or animal.
(1929 Code, § 188)
§ 30-6 INJURING STREETS, ETC.; INTERFERING WITH STREET DRAINAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or do any injury to any
sidewalk, street, alley or other public place in the village in any manner, or
to interfere with the drainage of any street.
(1929 Code, § 240)
§ 30-7 PUBLIC DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other
public place as a place for the display or sale of goods or merchandise of any
kind.
(1929 Code, § 242)
§ 30-8 DEPOSITING CERTAIN ARTICLES ON STREETS, ETC., PROHIBITED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any
street, alley or public place or to throw or deposit any glass, nails, tacks or
other similar articles on any street, sidewalk or alley in the village.
   (b)   In addition to the above, it shall also be unlawful for any person to
deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the
pavement or any waste material, or anything which might cause injury to any
animal, vehicle or person.
(1929 Code, §§ 189, 777)
§ 30-9 PLAYING GAMES.
   It shall be unlawful to play any games on any street or sidewalk in the
village.
(1929 Code, § 224)
Cross-reference:
   As to use of coaster, roller skates, etc., on streets, see §
23-12
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent and regulate use of
streets for amusements, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-9
ARTICLE II. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 30-10 APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE TO CERTAIN WORK.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to sidewalks which are laid
by the village or by the board of local improvements.
(1929 Code, § 210)
§ 30-11 PERMIT - REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay the pavement for any public
sidewalk within the village without having first obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the village manager
and shall comply with the general provisions relating to applications for
permits as set forth in
chapter 22.
(1929 Code, § 203)
§ 30-12 SAME - TO CONTAIN SPECIFICATIONS, ETC.
   The permit required by §
30-11 shall incorporate the plans and specifications for the sidewalk to be
constructed according to its terms.
(1929 Code, § 207)
§ 30-13 BOND.
   All persons making applications pursuant to §
30-11 shall file a bond in the penal sum of $3,000, conditioned to save the
village harmless from any injury to any person or property which may be caused
by the construction of a sidewalk.
(1929 Code, § 205)
§ 30-14 COMPLIANCE WITH OFFICIAL PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All sidewalks constructed in the village shall be constructed in accordance
with plans and specifications approved from time to time by the president and
board of trustees. It shall be unlawful to deviate in any material way from the
plans and specifications for a sidewalk incorporated pursuant to §
30-12 in the permit therefor required by this article.
(1929 Code, § 207)
§ 30-15 WIDTH OF SIDEWALKS.
   All sidewalks shall be five feet in width, unless specific provision to the
contrary is made authorizing the construction of a particular sidewalk.
(1929 Code, § 206)
ARTICLE III. DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION
§ 30-16 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, build, establish or maintain upon any public
thoroughfare a driveway from any property abutting such public thoroughfare to
the pavement along such public thoroughfare, or use any portion of such parkway
for a private drive, except in compliance with and under the terms of this
article.
(1929 Code, § 212) (Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-17 PERMIT GENERALLY; FEE.
   Any person desiring to construct or alter any private driveway referred to
in the preceding section shall make application for a permit therefor to the
village manager and shall pay a permit fee as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. No construction or work of any kind shall
be done or permitted on such proposed driveway until and unless such permit is
duly applied for and issued. Upon the receipt of such application upon the
forms prescribed by the village manager, if the same shall be found to be in
accordance with the terms of this article, and on the payment of such permit
fee, the village manager shall issue such permit, subject to the conditions and
terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 80-11-1611; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-18 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   On the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this article, the
applicant therefor shall deposit with the village manager a sum as set forth in
the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule as guarantee that the work
under such permit shall be in accordance with the terms of this article. When
such work is completed and shall have been duly found to be in accordance with
this article and shall have been done to the satisfaction of the village
engineer or the village manager, such deposit shall be refunded. If, during the
progress of such work, it shall be determined by the village manager that such
construction work is not in accordance with this article, the applicant
thereupon shall be directed to make such changes and remedy such work as shall
ensure the work to conform to this article within such time and upon the
conditions prescribed by the village. If within such time the work is not
completed according to the directions prescribed by the village, then the
village shall cause the work to be changed and remedied so that the same shall
be in accordance with this article and the expenses and costs thereof shall be
deducted from the deposit and the balance thereof, upon the completion of such
work, shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 80-11-1611; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-19 NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS ALLOWED.
   (a)   The village manager on receiving an application for a driveway permit
may issue a permit for the construction of one driveway to any one lot or
parcel of land concerning which such application shall have been made.
   (b)   The village manager shall, in his or her discretion, upon application
as aforesaid, issue a permit for one additional driveway to any lot or parcel
of land concerning which such application shall have been made or issue a
permit for two additional driveways to any corner lot or corner parcel of land
concerning which such application shall have been made, if, upon investigation,
he or she shall find that the construction and maintenance of such additional
driveway or driveways shall not substantially impair, endanger or interfere
with the public safety.
   (c)   In exercising such discretion the village manager shall consider the
amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the proposed driveways and on the
street or sidewalk adjacent to the property sought to be connected with any
street or thoroughfare. He or she shall also consider the grade or elevation of
the public street with which any such driveways are to be so connected to any
street intersection, railroad or railway crossing, fire or police station or
school or church.
(1929 Code, § 215) (Ord. No. 1392, § 1; Ord. No. 1425, § 1)
§ 30-20 PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   In the event the village manager, in his or her discretion, shall refuse to
issue a permit for a driveway, his or her action in so refusing such permit
shall be subject to review by the board of trustees. If the board of trustees
finds that the construction and maintenance of any such driveway will not
substantially impair, endanger or interfere with the public safety, it shall by
resolution direct the issuance of any such permit for a driveway of such width
and at such location as to the board of trustees shall be considered proper and
in furtherance of public safety; otherwise a permit shall not be issued.
(1929 Code, § 216) (Ord. No. 1392; § 1)
§ 30-21 WIDTH AND LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS.
   Each driveway permitted under this article shall be of such grade and of
such width, not exceeding 16 feet at the lot line and sidewalk, and shall be
constructed in accordance with driveway plans and specifications on file in the
office of the director of public works at such location as the village manager
in his or her discretion shall find proper after making the investigation in
the light of the standards specified in the preceding section.
(1929 Code, § 217) (Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-22 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Driveways connecting with paved streets shall be paved with bituminous
surface, portland cement concrete or other comparable hard surface pavement, in
accordance with plans and specifications on file in the office of the director
of public works. A bituminous surface shall have a minimum depth of one inch
without any loose material on top and shall have a base of water bound macadam
at least six inches in depth. Portland cement concrete driveways shall be at
least six inches in depth and shall be constructed of concrete containing one
part of portland cement, two parts sand and four parts crushed stone or gravel,
on a compact base. That portion of any driveway that crosses any concrete
sidewalk shall be constructed of portland cement concrete six inches thick.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-23 GRADE REQUIREMENTS.
   That portion of a driveway that crosses a sidewalk shall be kept as nearly
as possible at the same grade as the walk, so as to avoid interference with
pedestrian traffic. No steps shall be created in the sidewalk because of any
driveway construction, and at no time shall the gradient of the sidewalk that
crosses a driveway exceed one foot vertical to ten feet horizontal. The
established grade at the gutter or street level shall not be changed by the
driveway, and no part of the driveway shall extend beyond the curb or street
line in such a manner as to change the grade of the gutter or street or
obstruct the free flow of water in the gutter. Where elevations or depressions
are necessary in the parkway strip between the curb or street and the sidewalk
or property line, the parkway shall be graded on both sides of the driveway to
a distance sufficient to create a gradual ascent or descent. At no time shall
the gradient exceed one foot vertical to ten feet horizontal.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-24 REMOVAL OF CURBS.
   Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be entirely removed for
the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line. Any such curb removal
shall be done so as to avoid any injury to the curb remaining in place, which
shall be rounded off and finished under the supervision of the village manager
or his or her representative.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-25 DRAINAGE.
   No driveway shall be so constructed so to interfere with the drainage of the
adjoining street, or so as to permit the forming of pools of water in the
driveway.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-26 BARRIERS AND LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Adequate barriers and lights shall be maintained whenever any sidewalk is
obstructed by construction of a driveway, to prevent injury to any pedestrians.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
§ 30-27 TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS.
   It shall be lawful to establish a temporary driveway for the conveyance of
vehicles across any parkway or sidewalk when no regular driveway is
established; provided, that a permit therefor is obtained from the village
manager. Such temporary driveway shall be properly planked so that the parkway,
sidewalk and curb are adequately protected from injury.
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1)
ARTICLE IV. EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELS
§ 30-28 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street,
parkway, alley or public place, or to tunnel under any street, parkway, alley
or public place in the village without complying with the regulations set forth
in this article.
(1929 Code, § 192) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-29 EXCAVATION AND TUNNELING PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street,
parkway, alley or public place, or to tunnel under any street, parkway, alley
or public place in the village without having obtained a permit therefor.
(1929 Code, § 192) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-30 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Applications for permits required by the preceding section shall be made to
the village manager, and shall state thereon the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the person doing
the actual excavating, and the name of the person for whom the work is being
done.
(1929 Code, § 193) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-31 SAME - FEE.
   The fee for permits required by this article to make any excavation or
tunnel shall be not less than the amount set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for excavation that does not exceed 60
square feet in area, plus an amount as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule for each additional ten square feet or fraction thereof.
The village manager may from time to time publish revised fee amounts for such
permits to ensure that such permit fees are reflective of the costs to the
village relating to such street openings.
(1929 Code, § 194) (Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 06-08-3150;
Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-32 BOND.
   Each person applying for an excavating or tunneling permit pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall also file a bond conditioned that he or she
will suitably guard or protect any excavation or obstruction maintained or
created by him or her, and will indemnify the village for any loss or damage
resulting from injury to any person caused by such excavation or obstruction.
(1929 Code, § 194) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-33 PERMIT TO USE MECHANICAL POWER DRIVEN EXCAVATING, ETC., EQUIPMENT -
REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street,
parkway, alley or public place or to grade or disturb the surface of any
street, alley, parkway or public place or to tunnel under any street, parkway,
alley or public place in the village by means of any mechanical power driven or
operated machine without first having obtained a permit to use such machine for
such purpose.
(1929 Code, § 192) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-34 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Application for a permit to use a mechanical power driven or operated
machine as required by §
30-33 shall be made to the village manager, and shall state thereon the size
and type of machine to be used, the location of the intended excavation, tunnel
or grading, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the name of the person
doing the actual excavating, tunneling or grading and the name of the person
for whom the work is being done.
(1929 Code, § 193) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-35 SAME - FEE.
   The fee for permits to use any mechanical power driven or operated machine
for the purpose of excavating or tunneling or grading shall be as set forth in
the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule in addition to the fee levied
by §
30-31.
(1929 Code, § 194) (Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-36 BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.
   Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect
persons, vehicles and animals from injury by or because of an excavation or
tunnel being made under the provisions of this article.
(1929 Code, § 1965) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-37 WORK TO BE DONE IN ACCORDANCE WITH PERMIT AND APPLICATION.
   Any person making any excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the
terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing the work to be
done.
(1929 Code, § 195) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-38 RESTORING STREET, ETC. - GENERALLY.
   Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street, alley or
public place in the village shall restore such street, alley or public place to
its original condition, except for the surfacing that shall be done by the
village, promptly upon the completion of the work for which the excavation or
tunnel was made.
(1929 Code, § 196) (Ord. No. 1314)
§ 30-39 SAME - WHEN VILLAGE TO CARRY OUT RESTORATION.
   In case of any unreasonable delay in carrying out the requirements of the
preceding section, the village manager shall give notice to the permittee that
unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled properly and the surface relaid so
as to be in the same condition it was prior to the excavation within ten days,
the village will do the work and charge the expense of doing the same to such
person. If at the end of the time mentioned the conditions of the notice have
not been complied with, the work shall be done by the village, and accurate
account of the expense involved shall be kept, and the total cost shall be
charged to the person who made the excavation or tunnel.
(1929 Code, § 196) (Ord. No. 1314)
ARTICLE V. PARKING CUTOUT CONSTRUCTION
§ 30-40 "PARKING CUTOUT" DEFINED.
   As used in this article, the term PARKING CUTOUT shall mean a space, located
on any public thoroughfare adjacent to a village pavement, used primarily for
the parking of vehicles.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-41 CONSTRUCTORS OR USERS TO COMPLY WITH ARTICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to construct upon any street, avenue,
alley, parkway or public thoroughfare within zones A, B, C and D of the
village, as defined in the zoning ordinance, a parking cutout, or to use any
portion of such street, avenue, alley, parkway or public thoroughfare for a
parking cutout, except in compliance with and under the terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-42 PERMIT - REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to construct a parking cutout on any public thoroughfare
shall first obtain a permit therefore from the village manager. No construction
or work of any kind shall be done on such cutout until the permit required by
this section has been issued.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-43 SAME - APPLICATION.
   Application for the permit required by the preceding section shall be made
to the village manager on forms prescribed by him or her.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-44 SAME - FEE.
   The fee for the permit required by §
30-42 shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 1323; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-45 SAME - ISSUANCE.
   If the application submitted under §
30-43 shows conformance with the terms of this article, the village manager
shall, upon payment of the required fee, issue a parking cutout construction
permit.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-46 SAME - REVOCATION.
   Parking cutout construction permits shall be revocable at the will of the
village manager.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-47 CASH CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION DEPOSIT - GENERALLY.
   On the issuance of the permit required by §
30-42 and prior to the commencement of any construction thereunder, the
applicant therefor shall deposit with the village manager the sum of $100 as a
guarantee that the work under such permit shall be in accordance with the terms
of this article and that upon the termination of the permit the area covered by
the cutout will be restored to the condition existing prior to its
construction.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-48 SAME - USE ON TERMINATION PERMIT.
   If the permit issued under this article is terminated by the village, the
deposit made with the village manager provided for in the preceding section
shall be used to restore the parkway to the condition existing prior to its
construction; provided, that the person placing the deposit with the village
fails to restore the parkway in accordance with the provisions of this article
within nine days.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-49 MAINTENANCE.
   The person placing the deposit required by §
30-47 with the village shall be responsible for maintaining the parking cutout
in a condition satisfactory to the village manager.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-50 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (a)   A parking cutout shall be constructed according to the following
specifications, the details of which are on file in the office of the director
of public works.
   (b)   The construction work shall consist of a seven-inch water bound
macadam base and a two-inch State Department of Public Works and Buildings,
Division of Highways, specification known as "bituminous concrete dense fine-
graded aggregate type, subclass I-II" surface.
   (c)   If a curb exists along the edge of the existing pavement across the
location of the proposed parking cutout, the existing curb shall be removed and
a new curb shall be constructed to separate the parking cutout from the
parkway. The curb to be constructed shall be 18 inches in depth, six inches
wide at its upper surface, and eight inches wide at its base. The upper surface
adjacent to the parking cutout shall be rounded at the top to a radius of three
inches. The parking cutout curb shall be connected to the present street curb
with two curves having radii of three feet. This curb shall be constructed of
portland cement concrete containing one part of portland cement, two parts sand
and four parts crushed stone or gravel.
   (d)   The parking cutout shall be no longer than 38 feet either at the
existing curb line or at the gutter line of the existing pavement and shall be
no wider than eight feet measured perpendicular to the present street pavement.
   (e)   Where no curbs exist at the gutter line, the lines of the parking
cutout shall conform to the curb lines as stated in this section.
   (f)   The elevation of the pavement of the parking cutout at the gutter line
of the street shall conform to the elevation of the existing pavement at the
gutter line, and in no case shall the parking cutout be constructed in such a
way as to block, retard or change the direction of any flow of water that might
at any time reach such gutter.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-51 NUMBER OF CUTOUTS PERMITTED PER RESIDENCE; CUTOUTS PROHIBITED UNDER
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Only one parking cutout per residence shall be permitted on any public
thoroughfare. No parking cutout shall be permitted on a public thoroughfare
having a pavement width of more than 20 feet. No parking cutout shall be
permitted that would interfere with or obstruct in any way any village public
improvement, such as water main, hydrant, sidewalk, manhole, catch basin or
sign; that would necessitate removing any trees; or that would create a hazard
or endanger the public safety.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-52 CONTINUANCE OF EXISTING NONCONFORMING CUTOUTS.
   Any parking cutout constructed and in use prior to May 24, 1954, which does
not conform with the conditions of this article may be continued subject to
termination at any time on order of the board of trustees, and such parking
cutout may be reconstructed or altered only in accordance with and in
compliance with the provisions of §
30-50.
(Ord. No. 1323)
§ 30-53 VARIANCES FROM ARTICLE.
   The president and board of trustees may, after notice and public hearing,
waive the payment of fees and the making of deposits and permit the
construction of a parking cutout and authorize a variance in its location,
shape or size whenever such parking cutout is to be adjacent to any premises
used for municipal, park, school or church purposes upon a finding that such
variance is reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare, and
with respect to other cutouts when it is found that there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of this article.
(Ord. No. 1323)
ARTICLE VI. OBSTRUCTIONS, PROJECTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 30-54 AWNINGS AND PROJECTING SIGNS.
   (a)   All movable awnings shall be elevated at least seven feet at the
lowest part of the main wood frame thereof and not less than six feet six
inches at the lowest part of the covering above the top of the sidewalk. They
shall be supported without posts, by an iron bracket or by an iron framework
attached firmly to the building. The bracket or other device for the purpose
used and the method of attaching same to the building shall be such as to clear
the heads of pedestrians at the building line, leave the sidewalk wholly
unobstructed, ensure the safety of pedestrians, and shall be subject to
approval of the director of public works. All movable awnings not heretofore
erected in the manner prescribed in this section shall be removed within a
reasonable time after notice.
(Ord. No. 95-12-1982)
   (b)   Consistent with the safe and unimpeded use of public rights-of-way,
projecting signs that have been authorized by special use permit pursuant to §
4-103F of the zoning code, projecting signs that are authorized pursuant to §
5-1051 of the zoning code, and fixed awnings may be authorized to extend over
the public right-of-way upon such terms and conditions as the village manager
establishes; provided, however, that the terms and conditions of any such
authorization shall be set forth in a written license agreement in which the
licensee shall indemnify and hold the village harmless with respect to such
authorization. Such authorization shall be in the nature of a revocable
license.
(Ord. No. 95-12-1982; Ord. No. 07-28-3205)
§ 30-55 STREET, ETC., OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED GENERALLY; REMOVAL BY VILLAGE
MANAGER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any way any street, alley
or sidewalk, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The village manager
is authorized to remove any obstructions in any such place.
(1929 Code, § 241)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent and remove obstructions,
etc., upon streets, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-3
§ 30-56 PROJECTIONS, SIGNS, ETC., FROM BUILDINGS, ETC.
   (a)   Except as otherwise permitted by §
30-54 of this code, no person shall place or suspend or cause or permit to be
placed or suspended from any building, structure, lot or place any goods, wares
or merchandise whatever, or signs or advertisements or rigid canopies or
awnings of any kind or any other thing so that the same shall project or extend
from the wall, front or side of any such building, structure, lot or place
into, over or upon any public street, alley or sidewalk.
   (b)   The provisions and regulations of this section shall not apply to such
educational, charitable, civic, religious or governmental signs in accordance
with the following standards and as may be approved by the village manager:
      (1)   Erected in a safe and secure manner; and
      (2)   Erected so as not to constitute a traffic hazard because of size,
shape, color, position or wording.
(Ord. No. 95-12-1982)
§ 30-57 CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, ETC., OF STONES, SIDEWALK APPROACHES, ETC. -
PROHIBITED GENERALLY; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, construct, maintain or control
or assist in placing, constructing, maintaining or controlling upon any street,
avenue, alley, parkway or public thoroughfare within the village any stones,
boulders, stepping stones, sidewalk approaches, flagstones or any obstructions
or barricade of any kind whatever, except as authorized and provided in this
article.
(1929 Code, § 232)
§ 30-58 SAME - MANNER OF CONSTRUCTING, ETC., SIDEWALK APPROACHES OR FLAGSTONES.
   Any person owning, using or controlling any property fronting or abutting
upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway or public thoroughfare of the village
may whenever and as permitted and authorized to do so by a permit therefor as
provided for in §
30-60, duly issued by the village, place, construct or maintain sidewalk
approaches or flagstones extending from the sidewalk line or from the lot line
to the curb line where curbs exist at the time of such construction; provided,
that the same shall be placed or maintained at an elevation not exceeding the
level of such curb at that place, or extending from the sidewalk line or the
lot line to the outside line of the pavement or roadway of such thoroughfare
where no curbs exist at the time such construction; provided, that the same
shall be placed or maintained at a level not exceeding four inches above the
edge of the pavement or roadway at that place.
(1929 Code, § 233)
§ 30-59 SAME - MANNER OF CONSTRUCTING, ETC., STONES, BOULDERS OR OTHER HARD
MATERIAL SUBSTANCES.
   Any person owning, using or controlling any property, fronting or abutting
upon any street, avenue, alley or public thoroughfare of the village may,
whenever and as permitted and authorized to do so by a permit therefor as
provided for in §
30-60, duly issued by the village, place, construct or maintain stones,
boulders or other hard material obstructions of like character in the parkway
of any public thoroughfare along and parallel with the curb line or gutter line
of any roadway in such public thoroughfare; provided, that the same shall be so
placed that they shall not be nearer than two feet from such curb line or
gutter line; and, provided further, that they shall be so placed that they
shall not extend more than four inches above the surface of the ground
adjoining their location as herein specified. For the purposes of this section,
the term GUTTER LINE shall be construed to mean the edge of the pavement or
roadway where no curb exists.
(1929 Code, § 234)
§ 30-60 PERMIT FOR PLACING, CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING, ETC., STONES, SIDEWALK
APPROACHES, ETC.
   Any person desiring to place, construct, maintain or control any sidewalk
approaches, flagstones, stones, boulders or other hard material obstructions of
like character in the parkway of any public thoroughfare adjoining or abutting
a property owned or controlled by him or her, shall first make application for
a permit therefor, which application shall be upon forms provided therefor by
the village manager, and shall set forth the location of the property so owned
or controlled and the details or character of the work or installation desired
to be made under this section. Such application shall be submitted to the
village manager for his or her approval or recommendation. If the same is
approved by the village manager, a permit therefor shall be issued by him or
her in the name of the village. It is a condition of all applications and
permits issued under this section that the work of construction of any such
installation or improvement under this section shall be made only upon plans
and specifications that have the approval of the engineer of the village or the
village manager. All applications hereunder shall be accompanied by a payment
as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, which fee
shall be paid into the village treasury for general use on the issuance of the
permit.
(1929 Code, § 235) (Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 30-61 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED STONES, SIDEWALK APPROACHES, ETC.
   (a)   The village manager is hereby authorized and directed to cause the
removal of any stones, boulders, stepping stones, sidewalk approaches,
flagstones or other obstructions or barricades which may be placed,
constructed, maintained or existing in any public thoroughfare in any place or
manner not authorized and permitted by the terms of this article.
   (b)   For the purpose of such removal, the village manager is authorized and
directed to employ, if necessary or expedient in his or her opinion, the
several members of the police department or fire department to assist him or
her in the necessary work of such removal.
   (c)   Prior to the removal of any such obstruction the manager shall cause
to be mailed to the owner, occupant or person in control of the property
immediately adjoining or abutting the public thoroughfare where such
obstruction to be removed is located, notifying him or her that the same must
be removed within a specified time, not less than five days from the date of
such notice.
   (d)   If the obstruction is not so removed by such owner, occupant or person
in control of such premises within the time specified, the village manager is
hereby authorized and directed to immediately remove the same as herein
provided.
   (e)   In the event of such removal, such owner, occupant or person in
control of such premises shall reimburse the village for its expenses and if
the same is not paid within a reasonable time the cost and expense of such
removal shall constitute a claim and demand against such owner, occupant or
person in control of such premises, and shall be recovered in a suit therefor
in the name of the village.
(1929 Code, § 236)
§ 30-62 DEPOSITING COAL OR OTHER MATERIALS PREPARATORY TO DELIVERY.
   Coal or other materials may be deposited in the streets preparatory to
delivery; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the
roadway at the point to less than 18 feet; and provided further, that such
material or coal is not permitted to remain on the street for a longer period
than three hours.
(1929 Code, § 189)
§ 30-63 BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES ENCROACHING ON PUBLIC STREETS OR PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches on any public street or property; except, that the board of trustees
by resolution may authorize, after due notice and public hearing, any
structure, deemed by the board of trustees to be an ornamental feature, to
encroach upon or project over any public street or property a maximum of eight
inches; provided, that such structure is a part of the remodeling of a building
in place on April 20, 1953.
(1929 Code, § 243) (Ord. No. 1312A)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent, etc., encroachments,
etc., upon streets, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-80-3
ARTICLE VII. NUMBERING BUILDINGS
§ 30-64 REQUIRED.
   It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of
every building in the village to number it in the manner provided in this
article.
(1929 Code, § 198)
§ 30-65 BASE LINES DESIGNATED; STARTING NUMBERS; DIRECTIONS OF NUMERICAL
INCREASE.
   (a)   All lots or houses located on the north and south streets and on all
streets running in a northerly and southerly direction shall be numbered from a
line passing through the intersection of the south village boundary line and
the west line of Green Bay Road and at right angles to the right-of-way of the
Chicago and Northwestern Railway Company as a base line, beginning with No. l
at such base line and increasing toward the north.
   (b)   All lots or houses located on east or west streets or on streets
running in an easterly and westerly direction shall be numbered from a line
3,000 feet easterly from and parallel with the westerly line of the right-of-
way of the Chicago and Northwestern Railway Company, exclusive of station
grounds, as a base line, beginning with No. l at such base line and increasing
towards the west.
(1929 Code, § 199)
§ 30-66 ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS.
   (a)   There shall be assigned to each 1,000 feet of street frontage 100
building numbers. The even building numbers on the north and south streets or
streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be on the westerly
sides of such streets and the odd numbers on the opposite sides thereof. The
even building numbers on the east and west streets or streets running in a
westerly or easterly direction shall be on the south sides of such streets and
the odd numbers on the opposite sides thereof.
   (b)   The village clerk shall assign or caused to be assigned to each lot or
house its proper number and shall inform the owner, agent or person on
possession of such premises as to the number thereof at any time upon demand.
(1929 Code, § 200)
§ 30-67 SIZE, LEGIBILITY AND PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS.
   Each of the figures of every building number required by this article shall
be not less than three inches in height, being so marked as to be easily read.
Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place of the side of the house
nearest to the street.
(1929 Code, § 201)
ARTICLE VIII. SNOW REMOVAL
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 30-68 DEFINITION.
   The term SNOW REMOVAL as used in this article is hereby defined as and shall
be construed to mean plowing or removing ice or snow by the use of a snowplow
or other motorized equipment that in some way uses or affects the access points
to the streets, sidewalks or public parkways in the village.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 30-69 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of snow removal in the village
without having first obtained a license therefore. Applications for such
licenses, and the issuance thereof, shall comply with the provisions of
chapter 22 of this code.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 30-70 SAME - FEE.
   The license fee for engaging in the business of snow removal shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 2012-07-3308; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No.
2016-04-3394)
§ 30-71 SAME - BOND.
   Persons who are licensed to do business under the provisions of this article
shall file an annual bond in the sum of $10,000, with sureties to be approved
by the village manager, conditioned to indemnify and hold the village harmless
from any loss, damage, claim or liability arising out of or resulting from the
conduct or operation of such business or the doing or failure to do any act in
connection therewith.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
§ 30-71A PRIVATE ROADWAY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
   (a)   The village manager is hereby authorized to enter into agreements for
the provision of certain maintenance services upon private streets within the
village. No such agreement may be entered into unless:
      (1)   A petition is filed with the village manager by one or more owners
of record of at least a majority of the lots abutting or otherwise having legal
access rights on or upon a private street for which maintenance services are
requested; and
      (2)   The village manager determines after reviewing the petition that
the village is capable of providing the requested maintenance services without
adversely impacting the general health, safety and welfare of the village and
its residents. The village manager shall have discretion to determine the scope
of the maintenance services to be offered and the manner and terms under which
such maintenance services shall be provided.
   (b)   Upon the village manager determining that maintenance services can be
provided to a private roadway as set forth in subsection
30-71A(a) of this section, the village manager may enter into an agreement for
the provision of specific maintenance services for a private roadway, provided
that:
      (1)   The agreement has been executed by one or more owners of record of
at least a majority of the lots abutting or otherwise having legal access
rights on or upon the private street that is the subject of the agreement;
      (2)   The charge for the maintenance services shall reasonably reflect
the actual cost (including all overhead expenses) of providing the service as
determined by the village manager;
      (3)   The village shall be released from all claims of damage to person
or property resulting from the maintenance services;
      (4)   The owners requesting the maintenance services shall agree to
indemnify the village from any claims of liability arising from the maintenance
services; and
      (5)   Such other terms and conditions as determined by the village
manager.
   (c)   No agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall be for a
period in excess of 12 months.
(Ord. No. 2010-19-3277)
ARTICLE IX. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180, replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-72 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (b)   Intent. In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (c)   Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (d)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this article.
   (e)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (f)   Conflicts with other articles. This article supersedes all articles or
parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (g)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (h)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions
and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-73 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this article.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds and on
the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The village code of the Village of Glencoe.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The village's director of public works or his or
her designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this article, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The village engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this article. For
purposes of this article, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the center line of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. The entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
30-75 and
30-76 of this article.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
30-81.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES. As defined in §
30-92.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in
the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS
635/1 et seq. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a
single customer and/or a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel or a group of such channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall
not include value-added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase
of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through a
cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §
521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an
open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this article.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-74 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the director of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in §
30-79 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-75 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (a)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any village right-of-way
which:
         A.   Changes the location of the facility;
         B.   Adds a new facility;
         C.   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article); or
         D.   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the director of public works and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this article.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way. Small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the permit
requirements of §
30-92 of this article.
   (b)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
Small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the application requirements
of §
30-92 of this article.
   (c)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of the person or entity responsible for performing the proposed work;
the name, address and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of
the person or entity responsible for performing the restoration if different
from the person or entity responsible for the original work; and the names,
addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         A.   If requested, a written traffic-control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage
to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
         B.   If requested, an emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by
the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes
compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations. Such
drawings, plans and specifications shall include the following details, where
applicable, of the work to be performed: route location, method of
installation, all physical features and public utilities in the immediate area,
off-set distance from street edge, right-of-way lines and property lines;
      (7)   If the work is to be performed within an easement, the recording
document number assigned by the Cook County Recorder's office to the easement;
      (8)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
30-79 of this article;
      (9)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
30-81 of this article;
      (10)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
article (see §
30-93); and
      (11)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (d)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of subsection
30-75(c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following
items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the village
engineering standards, land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, have been satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
      (6)   In the case of small wireless facilities, applications shall
address all items required by §
30-92 of this article.
   (e)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application, including any
change in the actual locations of any facilities which deviates in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings or specification
submitted with the permit application, shall be submitted by the utility in
writing to the village within 30 days after the change necessitating the
amendment.
   (f)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall
be accompanied by a fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. Application
fees for small wireless facilities shall also be subject to the requirements of
§
30-92 of this article.
   (g)   Inspection fees. Any person obtaining a permit under this article for
which inspections are performed by or on behalf of the village shall reimburse
the village for the actual cost of such inspections. The village manager shall
from time to time determine the actual per hour costs of village employees for
purposes of calculating the costs of such inspections. No inspection fee is
required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord.
2018-12-3443)
§ 30-76 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (a)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of
public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the director of public works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of public works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the director of
public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the director of public works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
article.
   (b)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The director of public works shall specify the portion of
the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the director of public works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either:
         A.   Ten days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction; or
         B.   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this article.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
30-75 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection
30-76(a) of this section.
   (c)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances and
regulations.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-77 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion; provided, however,
that permits for small wireless facilities shall be subject to the duration
provided for SWF permits in §
30-92 of this article.
   (c)   Pre-construction meeting required. Unless waived in writing by the
director of public works, no construction shall begin pursuant to a permit
issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major
contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a
pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date,
time and place designated by the village with such village representatives in
attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (d)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-78 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
30-93 of this article. If the village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-79 INSURANCE.
   (a)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections
30-79(a)(1) and
30-79(a)(2) below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
"X," "C" and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         A.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         B.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         C.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for
each accident;
      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits;
      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident;
      (5)   Property insurance for its property replacement cost against all
risks; and
      (6)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (b)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (c)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (d)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the
village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the village manager of such intent to cancel or not
to renew."
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of the notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to the cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (e)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection
30-79(a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under subsection
30-79(a), or the requirements of subsections
30-79(b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure
shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required
under subsection
30-79(a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self
insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (f)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (g)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-80 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
article by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. A utility shall also waive any claims it my have against the
village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however
caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-81 SECURITY.
   (a)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this article;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
article; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this article or any other applicable law.
   (b)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (c)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the director of public works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of
public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection
30-81(c) for any single phase.
   (d)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that
the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (e)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection
30-81(c) of this section.
   (f)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for the withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection
30-81(c) of this section.
   (g)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of the revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of the costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (h)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-82 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (a)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this article;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (b)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this §
30-82.
   (c)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         A.   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         B.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         C.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to
the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this subsection.
   (d)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection
30-82(a) of this section.
   (e)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.
      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection
30-82(c) of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the
village:
         A.   Correct the deficiencies;
         B.   Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
         C.   After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village.
      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all
costs of removal.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-83 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (a)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (b)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-
of-way.
   (c)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-84 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (a)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (b)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the director of public works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-85 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (a)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (b)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (c)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
30-91 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   (e)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-86 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (a)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (b)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         A.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         B.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         C.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         D.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         E.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         A.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         B.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         C.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (c)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90-degree angle to the center line as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         A.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         B.   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         C.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         A.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         B.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (d)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (e)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (f)   Below ground installation. Below ground facilities may be installed
only if they are located a minimum of five feet, measured from outside edge to
outside edge, from any village-owned utility.
   (g)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (h)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         A.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         B.   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         C.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         D.   The proposed method of attachment;
         E.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         F.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         G.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         H.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (i)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   (j)   Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the additional
requirements of §
30-92 and the SWF Act.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201; Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-87 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (a)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         A.   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director
of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         B.   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         C.   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         D.   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger or
auger and following pipe method.
         E.   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         A.   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the director of public works.
         B.   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         C.   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         A.   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         B.   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of public works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection
30-87(a)(4) is permitted under §
30-92, the following requirements shall apply:
         A.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of public works.
         B.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         C.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         D.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         A.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         B.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         C.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         D.   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         E.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         F.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service   18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined
lines                                   by village)
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
 
   (b)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         A.   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         B.   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         C.   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers" or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         D.   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         A.   The use of "moles," "whip augers" or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         B.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         C.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         D.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. § 192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of
the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (c)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the director of public
works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (d)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in
chapter 9 of this code.
   (e)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-88 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (a)   Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit in accordance with the village tree preservation
ordinance, in addition to any other permit required under this article.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (b)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (c)   Chemical use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-89 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (a)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this article; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (c)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (d)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-90 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the director of public works for good cause shown.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-91 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (b)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available;
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately; and
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (c)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-92 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the
location, installation, and maintenance of small wireless facilities in
compliance with the Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and
village standards. Small wireless facilities shall be subject to the
requirements of this section, this article and federal law.
   (b)   Definitions. Words or phrases in this section that are not defined in
this subsection (b) or in §
30-92 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. The following words and phrases have the meanings
ascribed to them:
      ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
      COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace
wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility
pole.
      MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than
24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has
an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW. For the purposes of collocation of small wireless
facilities, the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use, and
does not include village-owned aerial lines.
      SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY or SWF. A wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, groundbased enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
      SWF ACT. The Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 ILCS
835/1 et seq.
      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
      WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated or wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic
cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial,
or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
      WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any entity authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
      WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.
      WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including
a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, using wireless facilities.
      WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. An entity that provides wireless services.
      WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower,
either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed
structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
   (c)   Permit required. No SWF may be installed within the village unless a
permit is first obtained in accordance with the provisions of this article;
provided, however, that micro wireless facilities may be subject to the limited
permitting requirements of §
30-92(q) of this article.
   (d)   Permit application. All applicants for a permit to install a SWF
within the village must submit a written permit application to the director of
public works by personal delivery, on a form provided by the village. The
permit application must include the following information and the information
required by §
30-92, as applicable:
      (1)   Contact information. The names and contact information of the
wireless services provider and the wireless infrastructure provider if any.
      (2)   Description. A description and depiction of the wireless services
provider’s existing SWFs located within the village.
      (3)   Location, photographs. The location where each proposed small
wireless facility or utility pole would be installed, including photographs of
the location and its surroundings, depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or the location
where a utility pole would be installed.
      (4)   Specifications, drawings. Specifications and drawings prepared by a
licensed professional structural engineer for each proposed SWF as it is
proposed to be installed, with a certification that each SWF complies with all
applicable size and location standards.
      (5)   Structural analysis. A site-specific structural analysis for each
location by a licensed professional structural engineer as well as any make-
ready analysis for a village utility pole that includes addressing the
acceptability of the site for factors such as pole loading from existing
utility equipment and conductors as well as the small wireless facility.
      (6)   Equipment, model numbers. The equipment type and model numbers for
the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with each proposed
SWF.
      (7)   Number. The total number of SWFs the wireless services provider
estimates it will seek within the village.
      (8)   Schedule. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion
of each proposed SWF, if approved.
      (9)   Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance coverage of the types and
amount set forth in §
30-92.
      (10)   Certification of SWF Act compliance. A certification that the
proposed SWF complies with subsection 15(d)(6) of the SWF Act and this article.
      (11)   Application fees. An application fee in the amount as established
in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
      (12)   Owner, co-owner certification. A certification from the owner or
co-owner of the utility pole or wireless support structure that the owner or
co-owner has approved installation of a SWF on the utility pole or wireless
support structure.
   (e)   Review of application. Applications will be reviewed in accordance
with the following process, except that the director of public works may alter
the review process for an application as appropriate based on the elements of
that application; provided, however, that the review process will be consistent
with the SWF Act:
      (1)   Determination of completeness. Within 30 days after an application
is filed, the director of public works will determine whether the application
is complete. The director of public works will notify the applicant of his or
her determination. If an application is not complete, then the director of
public works will identify the missing information.
      (2)   Processing time period. The director of public works will process a
complete application to collocate (i) a SWF on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure within 90 days, and (ii) a SWF on a new utility pole
within 120 days.
      (3)   Approvals; permits; duration. The director of public works will
approve an application and issue a permit if it meets all requirements of the
SWF Act and applicable village code requirements. All collocation under the
permit must be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
otherwise mutually agreed or for reasons authorized under the SWF Act. A permit
is valid for five years.
      (4)   Renewal. When the permit expires, the village will renew the permit
except if the village determines the SWF does not conform to any application
federal, state, or local code or regulation. The wireless provider must provide
all reports, plans, and other documents and data necessary for the village to
determine conformance of the SWF.
      (5)   Denial. The director of public works will deny an application if it
does not meet all requirements of the SWF Act and applicable requirements of
this code. The director of public works will notify the applicant of the denial
and the reason or reasons for the denial.
      (6)   Extensions of time. The time period for applications may be tolled
by express written agreement of the applicant and the village or a local,
state, or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the
delay.
   (f)   Guidance on SWF locations. Based on various factors including, among
others, public safety, existing utility poles and wireless facilities, and
potential adverse impacts, the applicant must consider collocation in these
locations, with the items listed from most preferable to least preferable:
      (1)   Public utilities’ poles. Utility poles owned or maintained by ComEd
or other public utilities.
      (2)   Village poles. Village-owned utility poles other than light poles
or standards (whether existing or to be installed) in the following order of
priority: (i) within an arterial street right-of-way, (ii) within a parking lot
or on other property related to a governmental or institutional use, and (iii)
within a collector street right-of-way.
      (3)   Privately-owned poles. Privately-owned utility poles, but only in
locations approved by the village.
      (4)   Village light poles. Village-owned light poles or standards
(whether existing or to be installed) in the following priority: (i) within an
arterial street right-of-way, (ii) within a parking lot or on other property
related to a governmental or institutional use, and (iii) within a collector
street right-of-way.
      (5)   Other poles. Utility poles, regardless of ownership, located in a
rear yard (or abutting easement) of any residential dwelling.
   (g)   Decorative utility poles, concealment of SWF. If the director of
public works determines that a SWF proposed by the applicant would have an
unduly adverse impact on the abutting area unless the SWF is collocated on a
decorative pole or is concealed, then the director of public works may require,
as a condition of approval of that SWF, a decorative utility pole or
concealment. The director of public works or a designee may meet with the
applicant to determine the plans for the SWF under that circumstance. If an
agreement on plans cannot be reached, then the director of public works may
deny the permit for that proposed SWF.
   (h)   Prohibited locations. SWFs are prohibited at the following locations
except as otherwise required by applicable law:
      (1)   Residential property. On any property classified in a residential
district under the village’s zoning code.
      (2)   Private property. On any privately-owned property except with the
approval of the village.
      (3)   Government property. On any property owned or controlled by a unit
of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, except with the
permission of the local government and approval of the village.
      (4)   Poles with equipment. On any utility pole that includes equipment
such as capacitor banks, transformers, cable terminals, cable rises, fuses, or
disconnects.
         A.   Size, height, and location of components.
            1.   Volume. No element of a SWF may exceed six cubic feet in
volume and all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the SWF is cumulatively not more than 25 cubic feet.
            2.   Height above pole. No element of a SWF may extend more than
ten feet above a utility pole or wireless support structure on which it is
collocated.
            3.   New utility pole, wireless support structure height. A new or
replacement utility pole or a new wireless support structure on which a SWF
will be collocated may not exceed the higher of (a) ten feet in height above
the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only
wireless facilities, that is in place as of the date the application is
submitted to the village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same
right-of-way within the village, or (b) 45 feet above ground level.
            4.   New utility pole location. No new utility pole may be
constructed for a SWF within 100 feet of an existing utility pole that the
applicant may use on reasonable terms and conditions and without undue
technical limits or undue additional costs.
   (j)   Color. Antennas and equipment cabinets must be in colors harmonious
with, and that blend with, the natural features, buildings and structures
surround such antenna and supporting structures, as well as the utility pole or
structure to which it is attached, as determined by the director of public
works. Any wiring or cables must be covered with an appropriate cover.
   (k)   Landscaping. The immediate area around any ground-mounted equipment or
cabinets must be landscaped in a manner that largely screens the equipment and
cabinets.
   (l)   Safety requirements.
      (1)   Mounting strength. The strength and sufficiency of the support
structure, and the mounting of the antenna and related equipment, must be
verified and stamped by a licensed structural engineer on the drawing required
under §
30-92(d).
      (2)   Guy wires prohibited. No guy wire or other support wires may be
used in connection with a SWF antenna or its related equipment except for
preexisting guy wires or other support wires on a preexisting wireless support
structure.
      (3)   Grounding. A SWF antenna and related structure must be bonded to a
ground rod.
      (4)   Emergency disconnection. A SWF antenna must have an emergency
disconnect.
      (5)   Lighting. No SWF may be lighted unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state agency with jurisdiction and
authority.
      (6)   Signs and advertising. Unless required by federal or state law, or
by a rule of a federal or state regulatory agency with jurisdiction and
authority, no markings, signs, or advertising of any kind may be placed on any
SWF component except unobtrusive identification or location markings.
      (7)   Building codes and safety standards. A SWF must meet or exceed (1)
all requirements of this Code, (2) all other applicable local and state
building codes and electrical codes, (3) and industry standards.
      (8)   Regulatory compliance. Each SWF and wireless facility must meet or
exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and any other federal or state
agency with jurisdiction and authority.
      (9)   Utility worker safety. Prior to the commencement of SWF
construction, the wireless provider must provide the village with any required
safety precautions for individuals working on or near the SWF. If refresher
training, personal protective equipment, or tools are required for safety
purposes related to a SWF collocated on a village-owned utility pole, then the
wireless services provider must reimburse the village for all of its actual
costs of those elements.
   (m)   IDOT, Cook County approvals. The applicant must provide proof of
concurrence of IDOT or Cook County for the use of village traffic signals
located on state or county roads.
   (n)   Abandonment. Any SWF that has been abandoned or is being used for a
purpose other than its original purpose must be removed at the owner’s expense.
ABANDONMENT includes, without limitation, any SWF that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months, or is otherwise out of operation or repair for
any reason, or used for a purpose other than its original purpose. Notice to
the owner of the facility must be given in compliance with the requirements of
the SWF Act, and the owner must remove the facility within 90 days of such
notice.
   (o)   Collocation on village utility poles.
      (1)   Rates and fees for use of village utility pole. The village will
set and charge nondiscriminatory rates and fees for collocation on village
utility poles. The village will keep a written schedule of rates and fees in
the office of the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Annual rate. Each wireless services provider must pay an annual fee
as established in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each SWF located
on a village utility pole in right-of-way or the actual, direct, and reasonable
costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village’s utility
pole and an annual fee as established in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule for each SWF on village property not located in right-of-way.
      (3)   Operating agreement. Prior to commencement of SWF construction on a
village-owned utility pole, the owner must develop an operating agreement
satisfactory to the director of public works. The agreement must include
protocols for emergency response and for maintenance of the utility pole and
include emergency contacts, a contact for public inquires, the utility billing
address, and the legal address of the wireless services provider.
   (p)   SWF equipment replacement. The wireless provider must notify the
village at least ten days prior to a planned equipment replacement and provide
the equipment specifications. The replacement equipment must be the same size
and/or smaller than the original installation.
   (q)   Right-of-way permit. The wireless provider must secure a permit for
any activities in the right-of-way that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
   (r)   General standards.
      (1)   No interference. Every wireless provider’s operation of a wireless
facility must not interfere with the frequencies used by any public safety
agency for public safety communications. The wireless provider must install
SWFs of the type and frequency that will not cause interference with any public
safety agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will be
determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or
any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
      (2)   Curing interference. If a SWF causes interference and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the village or
public safety agency, then the wireless provider, at its expense, must take all
reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference,
including, without limitation, powering down the SWF and later powering it up
for intermittent testing, if necessary. The village may terminate a permit for
a SWF based on interference if the wireless provider is not making a good faith
effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and
resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established
by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672
through 47 CFR 90.675.
      (3)   Compliance with contract terms. Every wireless provider must comply
with all requirements imposed by a contract between the village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and to groundmounted equipment located in right-of-way.
      (4)   Spacing. Every wireless provider must comply with spacing
requirements in this section or any other applicable village code or ordinance
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-
way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation of a spacing requirement.
      (5)   Undergrounding. Every wireless provider must comply with all
village codes and regulations regarding undergrounding of utilities and
facilities that prohibit installation of new, or modification of existing,
utility poles in a right-of-way. A wireless provider may apply for a variation
of an undergrounding requirement.
      (6)   General village standards. Every wireless provider must comply with
generally applicable village standards for construction and public safety in
the rights-of-way, including, without limitation, wiring and cabling
requirements, grounding requirements, utility pole extension requirements, and
sign restrictions. Every wireless provider must comply with all village
regulations applicable to the location, size, surface area and height of
wireless facilities and the abandonment and removal of SWFs.
      (7)   Poles for electricity distribution. No wireless services provider
may collocate a SWF on a village utility pole that is part of an electricity
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone
of the pole or the electric supply zone of the utility pole, except that the
antenna and support equipment of the SWF may be located in the communications
space on the village’s utility pole and on the top of the utility pole if no
other utility pole is available and the wireless provider complies with
applicable codes for work involving the top of the utility pole. The terms
COMMUNICATIONS SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY
ZONE shall have the meanings contained in the National Electric Safety Code.
      (8)   Public safety codes. Every wireless provider must comply with all
applicable state, county, and village codes, ordinances, and regulations that
concern public safety.
      (9)   Decorative, stealth, and concealment standards. Every wireless
provider must comply with the village’s generally applicable written standards
for decorative utility poles, and the Village’s generally applicable standards
regarding stealth, concealment, and aesthetics governing occupiers of the
right-of-way, including the Village’s design or concealment measures in an
historic district or regarding an historic landmark.
      (10)   Insurance. Every wireless provider must provide proof of insurance
as provided in §
30-79 of this article.
      (11)   Indemnification. Every wireless provider must indemnify the
village as provided in §
30-80 of this article.
   (s)   Installation and maintenance of wireless facilities. Each wireless
provider must construct, install, and maintain all wireless facilities in
accordance with the standards set forth in this article.
(Ord. 2018-12-3443)
§ 30-93 VARIANCES.
   (a)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of
public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (b)   Authority to grant variances. The director of public works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (c)   Conditions for granting of variance. The director of public works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (d)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the director of public works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the
purposes of this article.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-94 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination,
including denial of a variance, made by the director of public works under the
provisions of this article may seek a review of such order, requirement,
decision or determination by filing a request for review thereof with the
village manager, within 30 days after the notification of the order,
requirement, decision or determination. The request for review shall set forth
in detail the basis for the request. The village manager shall thereafter
consider the request for review, determine whether the order, requirement,
decision or determination should be affirmed, modified, modified with
conditions or reversed, and provide a written determination thereof. If such
utility seeks further review of the order, requirement, decision or
determination, such utility shall file a request to appeal the determination of
the village manager with the village clerk within 30 days after mailing of the
determination by the village manager; such appeal shall be considered by the
public works committee of the village board based on the relevant facts
available regarding the order, requirement, decision or determination in
question and the materials presented in connection with the request for appeal,
as well as materials presented in connection with the manager’s review provided
under this section. The determination of the public works committee shall be
final.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-95 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-96 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
§ 30-97 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. No. 2007-03-3180; Ord. No. 2007-24-3201)
ARTICLE X. COAL TAR SEALANT PROHIBITION
§ 30-98 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article, and the police of the Village, is to ban the
retail sale of coal tar sealant products and application and/or use of coal tar
sealant products in the Village.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
§ 36-99 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
article.
   COAL TAR. A viscous substance obtained by the destructive distillation of
coal and containing levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in excess of
10,000 milligrams per kilogram. COAL TAR includes, but is not limited to coal
tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar derivatives, coal tar pitch volatiles, coal tar
mixtures or any variation assigned to the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS)
numbers 65996- 93-2, 65996-89-6, or 8007-45-2.
   COAL TAR SEALANT PRODUCT. A surface applied sealant product that contains
coal tar or coal tar pitch volatiles, or a product labeled as such.
   COMMERCIAL ENTITY. A business, partnership, firm, trust, corporation, or
limited liability company.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
§ 30-100 SALE OF COAL TAR PRODUCTS PROHIBITED.
   No commercial entity may offer or sell at retail in the Village coal tar
sealant products for application and/or use on asphalt-paved surfaces.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
§ 30-101 USE OF COAL TAR PRODUCTS PROHIBITED.
   No coal tar sealant products of any kind may be applied, affixed to, or
otherwise used on the surface of any driveway, driveway approach, on or off-
street parking area, playground, sidewalk, bike trail, patio, sports facility,
loading area or facility, street, highway, roadway, or paved surface within the
Village, whether publicly or privately owned.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
§ 30-102 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine as provided in the Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Every
day that such violation is permitted to exist, or is maintained by the
commercial entity, shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
§ 30-103 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the prohibitions set forth in this article shall be
June 1, 2025.
(Ord. No. 2025-12-3616)
CHAPTER 31: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
Article I-A. General Provisions
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
   
31-1.1   Jurisdiction
   
31-1.2   Definitions
   
31-1.3   Word usage
   
31-1.4   Chapter deemed minimum requirements
Article I-B. Administration
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
   
31-1.5   Application and compliance required
   
31-1.6   Review of subdivisions
   
31-1.7   Modifications of certain application requirements by plat officer;
additional authority
   
31-1.8   Variations
   
31-1.9   Building permits and work authorizations
   
31-1.10   Interpretations
   
31-1.11   Appeals
   
31-1.12   Recording of approved plats
   
31-1.13   Penalties
Article I-C. Application Requirements
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
   
31-1.14   Pre-application review submittals
   
31-1.15   Preliminary plat applications
   
31-1.16   Form and contents of preliminary plat
   
31-1.17   Final plat applications
   
31-1.18   Form and contents of final plat
   
31-1.19   Plats of vacation applications; form and contents
Article I-D. Subdivision Review Process
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
   
31-1.20   Pre-application review
   
31-1.21   Preliminary plat review
   
31-1.22   Final plat review
   
31-1.23   Plat of vacation review
Article II. Village Plan
   
31-2.1   Adopted, made official
   
31-2.2   Official map adopted
   
31-2.3   Copies of official map and plan
   
31-2.4   Incorporated by reference; specific inclusions
   
31-2.5   Changes in plan
   
31-2.6   Enforcement
   
31-2.7   Invalidity of nonconforming maps, etc.
Article III. Plats
(Deleted by Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
Article III. Subdivision Design Standards
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
   
31-3.1   Consistency with zoning code and comprehensive plan; technical
standards
   
31-3.2   Lots
   
31-3.3   Tree preservation and protection
   
31-3.4   Landscaping
   
31-3.5   Natural resources and environment
   
31-3.6   Grading and storm water drainage
   
31-3.7   Utilities
   
31-3.8   Easements
   
31-3.9   Lot access and circulation
   
31-3.10   Survey monuments
   
31-3.11   Public land dedication or fees in-lieu
Article IV. Public Improvements
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
   
31-4.1   General requirements
   
31-4.2   Performance security for public improvements
   
31-4.3   Inspection of work
   
31-4.4   Dedication and acceptance of the improvements
   
31-4.5   Guaranty security
   
31-4.6   Development agreement
Cross-reference:
   As to plan commission generally, see §§
2-119 to
2-126
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to planning, zoning, etc., generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat.
1963, ch. 24, §§ 11-11-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I-A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.1 JURISDICTION.
   The Glencoe subdivision code shall apply to every subdivision either within
the corporate limits of the village or in unincorporated Cook County and within
one and one-half miles of the village's corporate limits. Valid, binding
boundary line agreements between the village and other municipalities may take
precedence in establishing the village's jurisdiction in unincorporated areas
within such one and one-half mile area.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.2 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions
herein ascribed to them.
   ABUT. To touch, to lie immediately next to, to share a common wall or lot
line or to be separated by only a street, alley or drainage course.
   APPLICANT. Any person undertaking the "subdivision" of land, as those terms
are defined in this chapter, including, without limitation, all record owners
and beneficial owners of the property that is the subject of the subdivision.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public lands, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shorelines, waterways
or boundary lines of the village.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The president and board of trustees of the Village of
Glencoe.
   EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a
specified purpose, of any designated area of his or her property. The term
EASEMENT also refers to such a designated area.
   ENGINEERING PLANS. Complete plans, specifications and analyses governing the
design and construction of all required public improvements, including, without
limitation, streets, sewer systems, water distribution and supply systems,
lighting systems and landscaping.
   ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATION MANUAL. The Village of Glencoe
Manual of Engineering Standards and Specifications for Public and Private
Improvements, current edition available in the office of the director of the
department of public works, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
   FLAG LOT. An irregularly shaped zoning lot consisting of two parts:
      (1)   The primary mass of the lot (the "flag" portion) that is set back
from the street access and is located behind one or more zoning lots; and
      (2)   A narrow access corridor (the "pole" portion) that extends for a
distance of at least 65 feet from the street line toward the flag portion of
the lot and at a width of less than 50 feet for the entire distance of the pole
portion.
(Ord. No. 2006-11-3153)
   IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any street, alley, public way, way for public service
facilities, storm and flood water run-off system, storm sewer, channel, basin,
sanitary sewer, septic system, water main, public grounds, planting strip,
landscaping, off-street parking area or any other facility necessary in the
determination of the village to provide a parcel with access to a public right-
of-way or with utility service of any kind or with water, sanitary sewage
treatment or disposal, storm water control or drainage or other necessary
public service.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
trust, trustee, estate, association or other similar legal entity, and any
agent thereof.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The Glencoe plan commission.
   PLAT. The schematic representation of land divided or to be divided or
consolidated or of rights-of-way to be established or vacated, prepared by a
registered surveyor or engineer, that delineates property lines and shows
monuments and other landmarks for the purpose of identifying property and
rights-of-way.
   PLAT OFFICER. The village manager or his or her duly authorized delegate or
delegates.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. See IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC.
   RECOMBINATION. The assemblage of real property comprising one or more
existing zoning lots (as defined in the zoning code) or parts thereof and the
subsequent subdivision of such assemblage of real property to yield more zoning
lots than had existed prior to such assemblage; provided, however, that all of
the real property so assembled was not in common ownership as of May 18, 2006.
(Ord. No. 06-20-3162)
   REQUIREMENTS OF LAW. All applicable federal, State of Illinois and village
laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations and
written administrative policies of the village.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICTS. Those districts contained in the Glencoe zoning code,
in force on the date of this ordinance, and all subsequent amendments.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street or related facilities, public path or trail, railroad, electric line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer, or communications
line or for other special uses.
   STREET. The portion of a public or private right-of-way having a weight-
bearing surface that affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard,
lane or throughway or however otherwise designated.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A vehicular way situated within an outlot or private
easement, not dedicated to or maintained by the village or any other government
agency.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A vehicular way located within a public right-of-way
dedicated to or maintained by the village or any other governmental agency.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the faces of parallel curbs or
outer parallel limits of the paved portion of a street.
   SUBDIVISION. Any division, rearrangement, consolidation, change or
resubdivision in the boundary or divisional lines of any parcel or parcels of
real estate, or the creation of separate legally defined parts of a parcel, or
the creation of, or change to, or rearrangement of the boundaries of, any
public street; provided, however, that the requirements of this chapter
applicable to subdivisions shall not apply to the sale or exchange of land
between owners of abutting parcels that do not result in a change in the number
of zoning lots nor cause either parcel to become non-conforming under village
ordinances, provided further that such sale or exchange is recorded with the
Cook County Recorder of Deeds and a copy of the recorded document is promptly
delivered to the plat officer.
   SUBJECT PROPERTY. The property that is proposed to be subdivided or
consolidated under this chapter of the village code.
   VACATION. The termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement,
right-of-way or public dedication of land.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Glencoe, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The village engineer of the Village of Glencoe or his or
her duly authorized delegate or delegates.
   VILLAGE MANAGER. The village manager of the Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.3 WORD USAGE.
   (a)   Tense. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.
   (b)   Shall. The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (c)   May. The word MAY is permissive.
   (d)   Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine gender and neuter.
   (e)   Meanings. Any term not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
given first in the Glencoe zoning code; then, if none, in any other applicable
village code or ordinance; and then, if none, in Webster's International
Dictionary of the English Language.
   (f)   Text controlling. In case of any difference in meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration or table, the
text shall control.
   (g)   Computation of time. The time within which any act required by this
chapter is to be performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Illinois General
Assembly, in which event it shall also be excluded.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.4 CHAPTER DEEMED MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions
shall in every instance be held to be the minimum reasonable requirements
adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare
of the people of the village.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
ARTICLE I-B. ADMINISTRATION
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.5 APPLICATION AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (a)   Subdivision. No subdivision shall be undertaken within the
jurisdiction defined in §
31-1.1 of this chapter except after approval of a completed application
pursuant to this chapter and then only in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. The village will withhold all permits and authorizations as well
as public improvements and services of whatsoever nature, including, but not
limited to, the maintenance of streets and the finishing of sewerage facilities
and water service, from all areas and parcels which have not been lawfully
subdivided and have not met the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (b)   Recording; improvements. No subdivision shall be filed for record, nor
any public improvement made related thereto, until after approval thereof
pursuant to this chapter.
   (c)   Conveyances. No lot, tract or parcel of land within any proposed
subdivision shall be conveyed until such subdivision has been approved and
recorded pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.6 REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS.
   (a)   No subdivision or plat of vacation shall be applied for except after a
pre-application review by the plat officer in accordance with the standards and
procedures set forth in §
31-1.20 of this chapter.
   (b)   All applications for approvals of plats of subdivision or plats of
vacation shall be reviewed by the plan commission and the board of trustees in
accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in §§
31-1.21,
1.22 and
1.23 of this chapter, and the following additional general standards.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151).
      (1)   The subdivision is consistent with the zoning code.
      (2)   The subdivision will not create a nonconforming building,
nonconforming use or nonconforming lot, nor will the subdivision create,
increase or extend any existing nonconformity.
      (3)   The subdivision will accommodate development on a lot that will
comply with required setbacks and will not result in the substantial loss of
existing trees or the significant alteration of the existing topography on the
lot.
      (4)   The subdivision will not substantially modify or threaten the
integrity of natural resources, including without limitation existing steep
slopes, floodplains, wetlands, mature trees or the use of public open spaces.
      (5)   The proposed development of the subdivision will not result in an
increase in the storm water release rate from the subdivision.
      (6)   The subdivision will be served by adequate sewer or water service,
electric service, natural gas and other public or private utilities available
within the village.
      (7)   The subdivision will dedicate easements or rights-of-way necessary
to provide for current and future extension of public utilities and services.
      (8)   The existing public street system, and any proposed extension of
that system, is sufficient to meet the projected traffic demand that will be
created by the subdivision.
      (9)   The design of the proposed street improvements meets minimum
village standards and does not exceed village standards in a manner that
threatens the health, safety or welfare, such as by inducing excessive speed of
travel or modifying traffic patterns in a manner inconsistent with street
design capabilities or by unnecessarily displacing pervious open spaces.
      (10)   The subdivision will extend, or does not inhibit the extension of,
the existing village street system and recognizes the interconnection of
adjacent neighborhoods.
      (11)   The subdivision will provide appropriate access and turning
movements for vehicles, and the proposed access is not so large so as to be
inconsistent with the character of the neighborhood surrounding the
subdivision.
      (12)   The development of the subdivision can be accomplished in a manner
that does not unduly disrupt or damage public services or facilities.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.7 MODIFICATIONS OF CERTAIN APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS BY PLAT OFFICER;
ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   (a)   The plat officer may modify or waive any requirement established in
article I-C of this chapter applicable to an application for a preliminary or
final plat of subdivision if the plat officer, in the exercise of his or her
reasonable discretion, determines that such waiver is appropriate in light of
all of the circumstances affecting the application, that compliance with the
requirement being waived is inappropriate, unnecessary or unduly burdensome,
and that such waiver will not have a detrimental impact on neighboring
properties and on the plan commission's ability to adequately review the
application for the subdivision nor will it be contrary to this chapter.
   (b)   The plat officer shall have administrative responsibility for
implementing the provisions of this chapter. To this end, the plat officer may
develop forms, practices and procedures consistent with the terms set forth in
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.8 VARIATIONS.
   Upon application to the plat officer, variations from the provisions of this
chapter may be authorized by the board of trustees in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (a)   Statement of justification. In applying for a variation from the
provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate in writing that
each of the following criteria is satisfied:
      (1)   The requested variation is in keeping with the overall purpose and
intent of this chapter;
      (2)   The grant of the requested variation will not impair the public
health, safety or general welfare and will not contravene the goals of the
comprehensive plan nor the intent of this chapter;
(Ord. No. 2006-11-3153)
      (3)   The grant of the variation will not adversely impact adjacent
properties; and
      (4)   The situation of the applicant is not of a general or recurring
nature for similarly situated properties within the village or within its
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Limitations on variations. No variation granted pursuant to this
section shall relieve an applicant from complying with every other requirement
of law. Nothing provided in this section shall be construed or applied as
authority of the board of trustees to vary any requirement of law other than
the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   Conditions may be imposed. In authorizing a variation, the board of
trustees may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other
features of the proposed subdivision or development as it may, in its sole and
absolute discretion, deem necessary in the public interest, and may require the
posting of a performance guarantee to insure compliance with the conditions
imposed.
   (d)   Procedure for review of variation requests. Applications for
variations of the provisions of this chapter shall be reviewed concurrently
with the related subdivision application, except as otherwise provided by the
board of trustees on a case-by-case basis. Every such application for
variation, however, shall be heard at a public meeting of the plan commission,
which shall formulate a recommendation regarding such application for variation
as part of its recommendation on the subdivision itself. Thereafter, the board
of trustees shall consider the variation at a public meeting, but only after
notice thereof given to the applicant in writing not less than five days nor
more than 30 days before such public meeting. An application for a variation
shall be deemed to be a waiver by the applicant of any prescribed time
limitations on the plan commission or board of trustees in their respective
reviews of the subdivision application affected by the variation request.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.9 BUILDING PERMITS AND WORK AUTHORIZATIONS.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise in writing by the board of
trustees in an approved development agreement, annexation agreement or other
agreement:
   (a)   General prohibition. No permit, authorization or approval shall be
issued for any work within any subdivision until after final engineering plans
for all required public improvements have been approved by the village as
provided in this chapter, appropriate security has been posted as provided in §
31-1.17(e) of this chapter, and a plat of the subdivision as recorded in the
office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds has been filed with the plat
officer; and
   (b)   Minimum required public improvements. No building permit for any
habitable structure on any lot or site within a subdivision shall be issued
until all required public improvements have been completed pursuant to the
final engineering plans. To the extent this requirement is modified by an
agreement duly approved by the board of trustees, and notwithstanding anything
contrary in such agreement if approved after the effective date of this
provision, no building permit for any habitable structure on any lot or site
within a subdivision shall be issued until after such site or lot is served by
public water and sewer and a street improved at least through binder course.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.10 INTERPRETATIONS.
   On application in writing on a form provided by the village, the plat
officer shall render formal written interpretations of the provisions of this
chapter. Applications for interpretations may be filed by any person having an
interest in the circumstances giving rise to the need for an interpretation;
provided, however, that interpretations shall not be given based solely on
hypothetical facts or when the interpretation would have no effect other than
as an advisory opinion. The plat officer shall render the requested
interpretation within 45 days after the receipt of a properly completed
application therefor. The failure of the plat officer to act within the time
period specified in this section, or such further time to which the applicant
may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision of the plat officer denying the
application. Appeals from interpretations rendered by the plat officer may be
taken as provided in §
31-1.11 of this chapter. Interpretations made by the plat officer are intended
to foster the consistent and effective implementation of this chapter and not
to delegate legislative authority to the plat officer.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.11 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision or interpretation of the plat officer
pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision or interpretation by filing
with the village clerk a notice of appeal within 30 days after such decision or
interpretation is made. The board of trustees shall cause notice to be given to
the person making the appeal (and, if different, to the applicant of the
subject property under such appeal) of a public meeting before the board of
trustees to review such appeal. Such public meeting shall be held not fewer
than five days nor more than 45 days after the appeal has been filed and notice
in accordance with the preceding sentence has been given. In making its
decision, the board of trustees shall give proper deference to the reasonable
decisions and interpretations of those charged with the administration of this
chapter. The board of trustees shall make a decision on the appeal within 60
days after the public meeting. The board of trustees may affirm, modify or
reverse, in whole or in part, the decision or interpretation appealed from and
may include such order or determination in its decision as the board of
trustees determines, in the exercise of its discretion, is appropriate and
proper under the circumstances. The decision of the board of trustees shall be
final. The failure of the board of trustees to act within the time periods
specified in this section, or within such further time or times to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision of the board of trustees
denying the appeal in its entirety.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.12 RECORDING OF APPROVED PLATS.
   After approval of a plat of consolidation, a final plat of subdivision or
resubdivision, or a plat of vacation by the plat officer or board of trustees,
the applicant shall file with the plat officer two original reproducible
versions of the approved plat bearing all appropriate signatures and in proper
form for recording by the plat officer with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds.
The applicant shall pay, at the time of filing of the reproducible version of
the plat, all costs and fees associated with the recording of the plat. After
receipt of such payment, the plat officer shall cause such plat to be recorded.
The recorded plat shall remain permanently on file with the village.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.13 PENALTIES.
   If a applicant violates any provision of this chapter, then the village
shall have, in addition to the remedies and penalties provided by any other
provisions in the Glencoe village code, the right, after five days' written
notice to the applicant stating the violation, to:
   (a)   Stop all work, or any portion of any work, being conducted on any
property subject to the requirements of this chapter;
   (b)   To revoke any permit or authorization issued by the village for
development on any such property;
   (c)   To discontinue processing and consideration of any pending application
for any such permit or authorization; and
   (d)   To refuse to accept for processing or consideration any future
application for any such permit or authorization.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
ARTICLE I-C. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.14 PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW SUBMITTALS.
   Prior to the processing of a preliminary plat of subdivision or a plat of
vacation, the applicant shall, in advance of a pre-application review, file
with the plat officer a letter requesting a pre-application review of a
proposed subdivision or plat of vacation, which letter shall be accompanied by
the following materials:
   (a)   A written description of the existing conditions and a description of
the plan for intended development of the requested subdivision, to be provided
to the plan commission and board of trustees as an aid in understanding the
applicant's intent to subdivide;
   (b)   A site plan for the subdivision or vacation plat of the subject
property, which plan shall be drawn to scale, and shall identify existing
property boundaries and existing features and uses on the subject property and
any abutting properties or properties within 500 feet in any direction of the
subject property;
   (c)   A narrative description of the proposed subdivision, including the
current zoning of the subject property and an explanation of any forms of
relief that might be required in furtherance of the proposed subdivision or
vacation plat;
   (d)   A description and location of the utility services available to serve
the proposed subdivision or vacation plat on the subject property, including a
summary of anticipated improvements that will be necessary in connection with
such proposed subdivision or vacation plat;
   (e)   A preliminary review of the grading, drainage, storm water management
and tree preservation issues arising from the proposed subdivision or vacation
plat of the subject property;
   (f)   Proof of the applicant's controlling interest in the subject property;
and
   (g)   Such other information relating to the proposed subdivision that the
plat officer may reasonably require to evaluate compliance of the proposed
subdivision or vacation plat with applicable standards, codes and regulations.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.15 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATIONS.
   An application for approval of a preliminary plat for any subdivision shall
be filed with the plat officer on a form provided by the village, and shall
include, without limitation, the following:
   (a)   Payment of escrow deposits required from time to time in any fee
ordinance of the village and the following fees:
      (1)   Any plat filed pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by an
initial application fee in an amount established by the village manager
pursuant to the provisions of subsection
31-1.15(a)(2) of this section;
      (2)   A.   The village manager is authorized to establish an initial
application fee in an amount reasonably calculated to reflect:
            1.   Any costs to the village of reviewing for approval or
disapproval and processing a preliminary or final subdivision plat or plat of
vacation pursuant to this chapter; and
            2.   Any cost to the village associated with the processing and
recording by the village clerk of any plat pursuant to this chapter.
         B.   The costs to the village described in subsection
31-1.15(a)(2) may include, but are not limited to, any cost to publish or mail
legal notices or to employ the services of planners, engineers, attorneys or
other persons not regularly on the village payroll for the purposes of
reviewing the plat in question, and may also include, but are not limited to,
the following items of direct and indirect expense: legal publication;
recording secretarial services; court reporter; document preparation and
review; professional and technical consultant service; legal review,
consultation and advice; copy reproduction; document recordation; staff review;
and inspection fees.
         C.   The filing fee for a supplemental plat application shall be its
cost to the village.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357)
      (3)   In addition to the initial application fee established pursuant to
subsection
31-1.15(a)(1) of this section, the village manager may impose a supplemental
application fee with respect to any plat filed pursuant to this chapter. The
supplemental application fee shall be imposed to reimburse the village fully
for its actual costs incurred in reviewing or processing any plat in addition
to the amount of the initial application fee. As a condition of imposing a
supplemental application fee, the village shall maintain an accurate record of
the actual costs (as described in subsection
31-1.15(a)(2) hereof) of processing and reviewing such application pursuant to
the provisions of this
chapter 31;
      (4)   The owner of the property which is the subject of any plat and, if
different, the developer, shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment
of all fees required to be paid pursuant to this section. By filing a plat
pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter 31, the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fees and to
consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to
insure collection of any such fees, plus the costs of collection, which have
not been paid within 30 days following the mailing of a written demand for such
payment to the owner or developer at the address shown on the application. Any
lien filed pursuant to this section may be foreclosed in the manner provided by
statute for mortgages or mechanics' liens;
      (5)   No plat shall be considered complete unless and until all fees
pursuant to this section have been paid. Every approval granted and every
permit issued pursuant to any provision of this
chapter 31 or any other provision of the Glencoe village code with respect to
the property which is the subject of the plat, whether or not expressly so
conditioned, shall be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of fees as required
by this section; and
      (6)   The failure to fully pay any fee pursuant to this section when due
shall be grounds for refusing to review or process a plat and for disapproving
any such plat or denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued
with respect to the property which is the subject of the plat.
   (b)   Names and addresses of all owners of record of the property, of all
beneficial owners of any land trust or other real parties in interest, of all
consultants who will be involved in the subdivision review process, and of the
applicant;
   (c)   Notices in the form approved by the plat officer as part of the pre-
application to all persons who were identified as part of the pre-application
review;
   (d)   The permanent real estate index numbers of the property to be
subdivided;
   (e)   Copies of all applications to other agencies having jurisdiction over
the subdivision; and
   (f)   Preliminary engineering plans for all required public improvements in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.16 FORM AND CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   Every preliminary plat of subdivision shall include or be accompanied by the
following information:
   (a)   One copy of the plat on Mylar and 26 paper prints, not exceeding 24
inches by 36 inches in size;
   (b)   A stated and graphically depicted scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet nor more than one inch equals 20 feet;
   (c)   Preliminary engineering plans;
   (d)   The location of existing streets, alleys and other public ways,
sewers, water mains, culverts, gas, electric, telephone facilities, and all
other existing human-made improvements within the tract indicating dimensions,
pipe sizes, grades, manholes and exact location;
   (e)   The location of existing wells, septic fields and similar facilities;
   (f)   The layout of proposed streets, street widths (in feet), street names,
crosswalks and easements;
   (g)   The location of all proposed utilities necessary to serve the proposed
subdivision and the layout of all easements to serve the utilities. Utility
easements shall be not less than 15 feet centered on side lot lines and 20 feet
centered on rear lot lines, and shall be dedicated across lots where required.
Such easements shall be platted to achieve continuity within the subdivision
and, where possible, with easements on property abutting the subdivision. All
wires, cables, pipes, conduit and similar improvements shall be shown as
installed underground. All service equipment and improvements shall be shown as
installed along rear lot lines to the fullest extent practicable;
   (h)   All information required by the village's storm water and grading
ordinances;
   (i)   A tree survey indicating the location, species and condition of all
trees with a caliper of six inches or larger when measured 54 inches above the
ground. The preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of article III of
chapter 34 of this code, the village's tree preservation regulations;
   (j)   A proposed name of the subdivision;
   (k)   The location of the subject property by township, section, town and
range, or by other legal description;
   (l)   The description and location of all existing survey monuments erected
in the subdivision;
   (m)   The boundary line of the proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy
line, and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby;
   (n)   Signature blocks for approval signatures in a form approved by the
plat officer;
   (o)   The existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and of abutting
tracts, in zoned areas;
   (p)   The identity of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of property owners in
the subdivision, including, but not limited to, school sites and parks,
recreational areas and public building sites;
   (q)   The layout, numbers, area (in square feet) and dimensions (in feet) of
lots;
   (r)   Minimum building setback lines, showing dimensions;
   (s)   The north point;
   (t)   The identification of all proposed uses of the property to be
subdivided;
   (u)   Indication of proposed phases or sections within the subdivision and
the order of site development;
   (v)   Existing topography on the property and within 50 feet of the proposed
subdivision, with minimum one-foot contour intervals;
   (w)   Minimum lot areas, widths and depths proposed for all lots and the
minimum standards required by the Glencoe zoning code or other applicable
zoning regulations;
   (x)   Such other information relating to the proposed subdivision as the
plat officer, the plan commission or the board of trustees may reasonably
require at any time as a result of special, unusual, unanticipated or
extraordinary conditions or circumstances relating to such subdivision in order
to promote the effective analysis or review of the proposed subdivision;
   (y)   The boundary lines of any village, township, park district, school
district, sanitary district and forest preserve district located within the
subdivision or outside of, but within 500 feet of, the boundaries thereof, and
shall list all municipal corporations having jurisdiction over the subdivision;
and
   (z)   For the subject property and properties within 500 feet in every
direction from the subject property, the following information: boundary lines;
existing streets or roads and the names thereof; widths of road pavements and
other dedications; existing easements and the nature thereof; section and half-
section lines; existing sewer and water facilities; existing permanent
buildings; and existing drainage structures and courses.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.17 FINAL PLAT APPLICATIONS.
   An application for approval of a final plat of subdivision shall be filed
with the plat officer on a form provided by the village, shall have the form
and content provided in §
31-1.18 of this chapter, and shall include, without limitation, the following:
   (a)   A copy of the approved preliminary plat;
   (b)   Payment of the fees and escrow deposits required from time to time in
any fee ordinance of the village;
   (c)   Copies of all applications to other agencies having jurisdiction over
the subdivision;
   (d)   Final engineering plans for all required public improvements, in
accordance with this chapter; and
   (e)   Submission of performance security to secure the satisfactory
completion of all public improvements in strict accordance with the
description, plans and specifications submitted by the developer and approved
by the village, which performance security shall be in an amount approved by
the village manager and in a form approved by the village attorney.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.18 FORM AND CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
   Every final plat of subdivision shall include or be accompanied by the
following information:
   (a)   One copy of the plat on Mylar and 26 paper prints, not exceeding 24
inches by 36 inches in size;
   (b)   A stated and graphically depicted scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet nor more than one inch equals 20 feet;
   (c)   The name of subdivision and the date of preparation of the final plat;
   (d)   The location of the subject property by township, section, town and
range or by other legal description;
   (e)   The north point;
   (f)   The boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with angular and
lineal dimensions;
   (g)   The exact locations, widths and names of all streets within and
adjacent to the subject property, and the exact location and widths of all
crosswalks. Street names shall have prior approval of the fire marshal and the
postmaster;
   (h)   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments (not fewer than three), all of which shall be accurately
located and described in the plat;
   (i)   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles;
   (j)   Radii, internal angles, points and curvature, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs;
   (k)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services or
utilities showing the written review of such company regarding the terms of
each such easement, and delineation of every overland drainage/paths with
appropriate reservation of areas to contain the same. All easements granted for
private use shall designate the beneficiaries of such use and the nature
thereof;
   (l)   Statements granting necessary easements to the village and to
appropriate utility companies for rights-of-way and for public service or
utilities, in forms specified by the village;
   (m)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths;
   (n)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of all areas to be dedicated
or reserved for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and of every
area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners.
When the tract or tracts dedicated or reserved for public use are not within
the corporate limits of the Village of Glencoe, the certificate of dedication
shall provide that the future official act of annexation of such tract or
tracts to the village shall constitute a transfer of title to the village for
such public use;
   (o)   Minimum building setback lines accurately shown with dimensions;
   (p)   Protective covenants, in a form acceptable to the plat officer, if
necessary;
   (q)   Certification by a registered surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him or her and that the monuments and markers shown
thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are
correct, in a form provided by the village;
   (r)   Notarized certification, by all property owners, and by any mortgage
holder on record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and
other public areas, in a form provided by the village;
   (s)   Signature blocks and certifications, in forms provided by the village,
for the following persons:
      (1)   Village president;
      (2)   Village treasurer;
      (3)   Village engineer;
      (4)   Plan commission chairperson;
      (5)   County clerk;
      (6)   County Highway Department, if necessary;
      (7)   Illinois Department of Transportation, if necessary; and
      (8)   Drainage design engineer, if necessary.
   (t)   Authorization from the surveyor who prepared the plat to have the plat
officer or the plat officer's designee record the plat; and
   (u)   Such other information relating to the proposed subdivision as the
plat officer, the plan commission or the board of trustees may reasonably
require at any time as a result of special, unusual, unanticipated or
extraordinary conditions or circumstances relating to such subdivision in order
to promote the effective analysis or review of the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.19 PLATS OF VACATION APPLICATIONS; FORM AND CONTENTS.
   An application for approval of a plat of vacation shall be filed with the
plat officer on a form provided by the village. The plat of vacation shall be
prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 6 of the Illinois Plat Act,
765 ILCS 205/6, and shall have the form and content provided in §
31-1.18 of this chapter for final plats of subdivision.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
ARTICLE I-D. SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.20 PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (a)   As a prerequisite to any preliminary plat application or application
for approval of a plat of vacation, and following receipt of the pre-
application review submittals in accordance with §
31-1.14, the plat officer and such other persons that the plat officer may
designate shall meet with the applicant to review the proposed plat, the
procedures for reviewing such plat and any issues that may relate to such plat,
including its conformity with the requirements of law. In addition, the plat
officer shall define with particularity for the applicant the form, scope and
content of the mailed and posted notices to be undertaken in connection with
the preliminary, final or vacation plat review for the subject property, as
well as the certifications relating to such notices.
   (b)   A applicant may propose during the pre-application review that the
proposed subdivision be considered for preliminary and final plat approval
concurrently. To the extent that the plat officer determines that the proposed
subdivision can be effectively and fully considered through a concurrent
review, a applicant may proceed in preparing application materials that satisfy
both the requirements for preliminary and final plat approval; provided,
however, that the plan commission will, in its sole discretion, have the
ultimate authority to determine whether such preliminary and final plats shall
be reviewed separately or concurrently, taking into account the public's
ability to participate effectively in the plat review process. In the event
that the plan commission accepts the concurrent presentation of preliminary and
final plats, the plan commission may recommend both the preliminary and final
plat, the preliminary plat only, or neither plat for approval to the board of
trustees. In addition, any required notices shall expressly state that both the
preliminary and final plats will be considered at the scheduled public meeting.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.21 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.
   (a)   Filing; deadline; plat officer general review.
      (1)   An application for approval of a preliminary plat of subdivision
shall be filed with the plat officer, in full compliance with §
31-1.15 and in proper form, at least 30 days before the meeting of the plan
commission at which it is to be considered.
      (2)   The plat officer shall review the application for approval of a
preliminary plat for general completeness; for compliance with requirements of
law, including, without limitation, the application requirements established in
article I-C of this chapter; and for technical accuracy. Within 15 days after
the date of filing of the application, the plat officer shall notify the
applicant either that the application has been accepted for processing, or that
the application may not be processed because of deficiencies or inaccuracies in
it. Every deficient or inaccurate application shall be returned to the
applicant. If the plat officer determines that the application for approval of
preliminary plat should be accepted for processing, then the plat officer shall
refer the application to all appropriate staff members and committees for
review.
   (b)   Notice of public meeting.
      (1)   After receipt of all required information, payment of all required
fees, and satisfactory general review pursuant to subsection
31-1.21(a) of this section, the plat officer shall notify the applicant of the
date that the application will be conditionally scheduled for review at a
public meeting of the plan commission. Such date shall be determined in light
of the plan commission's pending docket and the notification deadlines as set
forth in this subsection
31-1.21(b).
      (2)   Upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to review an
application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall deliver to the
plat officer for mailing notices to the occupants of all properties within 300
feet of the subject property, as determined during the pre-application review;
the plat officer shall review such notices for completeness and accuracy and,
if complete and accurate, promptly cause such notices to be mailed; provided
that such mailings are mailed not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the
scheduled public meeting date.
      (3)   In addition, upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to
review an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall
present to the plat officer the proposed signage, as determined during the pre-
application review, for posting on the subject property. The plat officer shall
review such signage for compliance and, if determined to be in compliance, the
plat officer shall direct the applicant where to post such signage on the
subject property; provided that such posting shall commence not more than 45
nor less than 30 days before the scheduled public meeting date. The village
shall also post, within the village hall, a notice of the availability to
review proposed application documents not less than 30 days before the
scheduled meeting date.
      (4)   If the notices required pursuant to this subsection cannot be
mailed and posted within the required time periods, then the public meeting
shall be re-scheduled to ensure that such notice periods can be satisfied.
   (c)   Determination of completeness of application. Provided that the plat
officer makes a general determination of completeness pursuant to subsection
31-1.21(a)(2) of this chapter, and provided the notices are timely given in
accordance with subsection
31-1.21(b) of this chapter, then the applicant shall deliver to the plat
officer a completed certificate of notice in the form determined during the
pre-application review on the date of the scheduled public meeting (and, if
delivered sooner, shall be deemed delivered on the date of the scheduled public
meeting). The delivery of such completed certificate of notice on the date of
the scheduled public meeting shall be the final element of the application for
preliminary plat approval and shall represent the completion of the applicant's
application for purposes of any statutory periods for undertaking and
completing the village's review of an application for preliminary plat
approval; provided, however, that any material change to such application after
the commencement of the public hearing shall be deemed the filing of a new item
in support of the application and shall restart any such statutory review
period.
   (d)   Action by the plan commission. The plan commission shall conduct a
public meeting to review the preliminary plat in accordance with the notices
mailed and posted published pursuant to subsection
31-1.21(b) of this section. Within 90 days after the completion of the
applicant's application for preliminary plat approval, the plan commission
shall recommend whether the preliminary plat should be approved, approved with
modifications or conditions or disapproved; and shall transmit such
recommendation to the board of trustees. The plan commission may recommend
approval of a plat subject to certain conditions or modifications as are deemed
necessary in the interests and needs of the community. The failure of the plan
commission to act within the time period specified in this subsection, or such
further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
recommendation of the plan commission to disapprove the preliminary plat.
   (e)   Action by board of trustees. The board of trustees, within 30 days
after its next regularly scheduled meeting following the transmission of a
recommendation by the plan commission on an application for preliminary plat
approval, shall disapprove the preliminary plat or shall approve it by
ordinance or resolution duly adopted. Any approval of a preliminary plat may be
subject to certain conditions or modifications as are deemed necessary in the
interests and needs of the community. If the board of trustees disapproves the
preliminary plat, then the plat officer shall notify the applicant in writing
of the reasons stated for such disapproval. The failure of the board of
trustees to act within the time period specified in this subsection, or such
further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision
of the board of trustees disapproving the preliminary plat.
   (f)   Effect of approval. The approval of a preliminary plat by the board of
trustees is strictly tentative in nature, involving merely the general
acceptability of the layout as submitted. Approval of the preliminary plat
shall be deemed solely as permission for the applicant to prepare a final plat
of subdivision, including detailed plans and specifications for the subdivision
and public improvements in accordance with the preliminary plat and within the
requirements of this chapter. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not entitle
the applicant to any other approval or issuance of any permit until after all
of the standards and procedures for such other approval or issuance of a permit
have been satisfied.
   (g)   Limitation on preliminary plat approval. Every approval by the board
of trustees of a preliminary plat of subdivision shall be effective for a
maximum period of 12 months after the date of approval unless, pursuant to a
written application therefor filed by the applicant before the expiration of
the preliminary plat approval, the board of trustees grants an extension of
that 12-month period. If, within the 12-month period, no extension of time has
been granted by the board of trustees and no application for approval of a
final plat of subdivision has been filed with the plat officer, then the
applicant must resubmit an application for approval of a preliminary plat for
full review of the plan commission and board of trustees.
   (h)   Statement of disapproval. If the plan commission or board of trustees
shall disapprove a preliminary plat pursuant to this section, then the plan
commission or board of trustees (as the case may be) shall deliver to the
applicant a statement of such disapproval. Such statement shall set forth with
particularity the grounds for disapproving the application for preliminary
plat. Such statement shall be furnished to the applicant within the time period
for plan commission or board of trustees action as set forth in subsections
31-1.21(d) and
31-1.21(e) of this section.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.22 FINAL PLAT REVIEW.
   (a)   Filing; deadline; plat officer general review.
      (1)   An application for approval of a final plat of subdivision shall be
filed with the plat officer, in full compliance with §
31-1.17, at least 30 days before the meeting of the plan commission at which it
is to be considered.
      (2)   The plat officer shall review the final plat for general
completeness, for compliance with requirements of law, including, without
limitation, the application requirements established in article III of this
chapter, for compliance with the approved preliminary plat and any
modifications and conditions imposed on the preliminary plat, and for technical
accuracy. Within 15 days after the date of filing of the application, the plat
officer shall notify the applicant either that the application has been
accepted for processing or that the application may not be processed because of
deficiencies or inaccuracies in it. Every deficient or inaccurate application
shall be returned to the applicant. If the plat officer determines that the
application should be accepted for processing, then the plat officer shall
refer the application to all appropriate staff members and committees for
review.
   (b)   Notice of public meeting.
      (1)   After receipt of all required information, payment of all required
fees, and satisfactory general review pursuant to subsection
31-1.22(a) of this section, the plat officer shall notify the applicant of the
date that the application will be conditionally scheduled for review at a
public meeting of the plan commission. Such date shall be determined in light
of the plan commission's pending docket and the notification deadlines as set
forth in this subsection
31-1.22(b).
      (2)   Upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to review an
application for final plat approval, the applicant shall deliver to the plat
officer for mailing notices to the occupants of all properties within 300 feet
of the subject property, as determined during the pre-application review; the
plat officer shall review such notices for completeness and accuracy and, if
complete and accurate, promptly cause such notices to be mailed; provided that
such mailings are mailed not more than 45 nor less than 30 days before the
scheduled public meeting date.
      (3)   In addition, upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to
review an application for final plat approval, the applicant shall present to
the plat officer the proposed signage, as determined during the pre-application
review, for posting on the subject property. The plat officer shall review such
signage for compliance and, if determined to be in compliance, the plat officer
shall direct the applicant where to post such signage on the subject property;
provided that such posting shall commence not more than 30 nor less than 15
days before the scheduled public meeting date.
      (4)   If the notices required pursuant to this subsection cannot be
mailed and posted within the required time periods, then the public meeting
shall be re-scheduled to ensure that such notice periods can be satisfied.
   (c)   Determination of completeness of application. Provided that the plat
officer makes a general determination of completeness pursuant to subsection
31-1.22(a)(2) of this chapter, and provided the notices are timely given in
accordance with subsection
31-1.22(b) of this chapter, then the applicant shall deliver a completed
certificate of notice in the form determined during the pre-application review
to the plat officer on the date of the scheduled public meeting (and, if
delivered sooner, shall be deemed delivered on the date of the scheduled public
meeting). The delivery of such completed certificate of notice on the date of
the scheduled public meeting shall be the final element of the application for
final plat approval and shall represent the completion of the applicant's
application for purposes of any statutory periods for undertaking and
completing the village's review of a application for final plat approval;
provided, however, that any material change to such application after the
commencement of the public hearing shall be deemed the filing of a new item in
support of the application and shall restart any such statutory review period.
   (d)   Action by the plan commission. The plan commission shall conduct a
public meeting to review the final plat in accordance with the notice published
pursuant to subsection
31-1.22(b) of this section. Within 15 days after the commencement of the public
meeting (or such longer period to which the applicant may agree), the plan
commission shall recommend whether the final plat should be approved, approved
with modifications or conditions, or disapproved; and shall transmit such
recommendation to the board of trustees. The plan commission may recommend
approval of a final plat subject to certain conditions or modifications as are
deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community. The failure of
the plan commission to act within the time period specified in this subsection,
or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
recommendation of the plan commission to disapprove the final plat.
   (e)   Action by board of trustees. The board of trustees, within 45 days
after receipt of the report of the plan commission, shall disapprove the final
plat or shall approve it by ordinance or resolution duly adopted. Any approval
of a final plat may be subject to certain conditions or modifications as are
deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community. If the board of
trustees disapproves the final plat, then the plat officer shall notify the
applicant in writing of the reasons stated for such disapproval. The failure of
the board of trustees to act within the time period specified in this
subsection, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision of the board of trustees disapproving the final plat.
Approval of a final plat shall not entitle the applicant to any other approval
or issuance of any permit until after all of the standards and procedures for
such other approval or issuance of a permit have been satisfied, and such
approval shall be subject in any event to the requirements of subsection
31-1.22(f) of this section.
   (f)   Final engineering plans and development agreement required.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided otherwise by the board of trustees,
no final plat of subdivision shall be approved by the board of trustees until
after the final engineering plans for the subdivision have been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Except as specifically provided otherwise by the board of trustees,
no final plat of subdivision for which public improvements are required shall
be deemed approved by the board of trustees for purposes of recording until
after the applicant has entered into a development agreement with the village
in form and substance acceptable to the village manager and village attorney
and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
§ 31-1.23 PLAT OF VACATION REVIEW.
   (a)   Filing; deadline; plat officer general review.
      (1)   An application for approval of a plat of vacation shall be filed
with the plat officer, in full compliance with §
31-1.19, at least 30 days before the meeting of the plan commission at which it
is to be considered.
      (2)   The plat officer shall review the application for approval of a
plat of vacation for general completeness; for compliance with requirements of
law, including, without limitation, the application requirements established in
article I-C of this chapter; and for technical accuracy. Within 15 days after
the date of filing of the application, the plat officer shall notify the
applicant either that the application has been accepted for processing, or that
the application may not be processed because of deficiencies or inaccuracies in
it. Every deficient or inaccurate application shall be returned to the
applicant. If the plat officer determines that the application for approval of
a plat of vacation should be accepted for processing, then the plat officer
shall refer the application to all appropriate staff members and committees for
review.
   (b)   Notice of public meeting.
      (1)   After receipt of all required information, payment of all required
fees, and satisfactory general review pursuant to subsection
31-1.23(a) of this section, the plat officer shall notify the applicant of the
date that the application will be conditionally scheduled for review at a
public meeting of the plan commission. Such date shall be determined in light
of the plan commission's pending docket and the notification deadlines as set
forth in this subsection
31-1.23(b).
      (2)   Upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to review an
application for approval of a plat of vacation, the applicant shall deliver to
the plat officer for mailing notices to the occupants of all properties within
300 feet of the subject property, as determined during the pre-application
review; the plat officer shall review such notices for completeness and
accuracy and, if complete and accurate, promptly cause such notices to be
mailed; provided that such mailings are mailed not more than 30 nor less than
15 days before the scheduled public meeting date.
      (3)   In addition, upon the conditional scheduling of a public meeting to
review an application for approval of a plat of vacation, the applicant shall
present to the plat officer the proposed signage, as determined during the pre-
application review, for posting on the subject property. The plat officer shall
review such signage for compliance and, if determined to be in compliance, the
plat officer shall direct the applicant where to post such signage on the
subject property; provided that such posting shall commence not more than 45
nor less than 30 days before the scheduled public meeting date.
      (4)   If the notices required pursuant to this subsection cannot be
mailed and posted within the required time periods, then the public meeting
shall be re-scheduled to ensure that such notice periods can be satisfied.
   (c)   Determination of completeness of application. Provided that the plat
officer makes a general determination of completeness pursuant to subsection
31-1.23(a)(2) of this chapter, and provided the notices are timely given in
accordance with subsection
31-1.23(b) of this chapter, then the applicant shall deliver a completed
certificate of notice in the form determined during the pre-application review
to the plat officer on the date of the scheduled public meeting (and, if
delivered sooner, shall be deemed delivered on the date of the scheduled public
meeting). The delivery of such completed certificate of notice on the date of
the scheduled public meeting shall be the final element of the application for
approval of a plat of vacation and shall represent the completion of the
applicant's application for purposes of any statutory periods for undertaking
and completing the village's review of a application for vacation plat review;
provided, however, that any material change to such application after the
commencement of the public hearing shall be deemed the filing of a new item in
support of the application and shall restart any such statutory review period.
   (d)   Action by the plan commission. The plan commission shall conduct a
public meeting to review the vacation plat in accordance with the notice
published pursuant to subsection
31-1.23(b) of this section. Within 15 days after the conclusion of the public
meeting, the plan commission shall recommend whether the plat of vacation
should be approved, approved with modifications or conditions, or disapproved;
and shall transmit such recommendation to the board of trustees. The plan
commission may recommend approval of a plat of vacation subject to certain
conditions or modifications as are deemed necessary in the interests and needs
of the community. The failure of the plan commission to act within the time
period specified in this subsection, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a recommendation of the plan
commission to disapprove the plat of vacation.
   (e)   Action by board of trustees. The board of trustees, within 45 days
after receipt of the report of the plan commission, shall disapprove the plat
of vacation or shall approve it by ordinance or resolution duly adopted. Any
approval of a vacation plat may be subject to certain conditions or
modifications as are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the
community. If the board of trustees disapproves the plat of vacation, then the
plat officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons stated for
such disapproval. The failure of the board of trustees to act within the time
period specified in this subsection, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision of the board of trustees
disapproving the vacation plat. Approval of a plat of vacation shall not
entitle the applicant to any other approval or issuance of any permit until
after all of the standards and procedures for such other approval or issuance
of a permit have been satisfied.
(Ord. No. 2005-08-3128)
ARTICLE II. VILLAGE PLAN
§ 31-2.1 ADOPTED, MADE OFFICIAL.
   The comprehensive plan of public improvements looking to the present and
future development of the village, which plan has been prepared and recommended
to the president and board of trustees by the plan commission is hereby adopted
and made the official plan of the village.
(Ord. No. 1292, art. 1, § 1)
Editor's note:
   The maps, charts, exhibits, etc., referred to in this section will be found
on file in the office of the director of public works.
§ 31-2.2 OFFICIAL MAP ADOPTED.
   An official map is hereby incorporated by reference and adopted as a part of
this chapter and shall be known as the official map.
(Ord. No. 74-8-1516, § 1; Ord. No. 78-6-1562)
§ 31-2.3 COPIES OF OFFICIAL MAP AND PLAN.
   The village clerk shall keep in his or her office for inspection by
interested persons at least three copies of the ordinance adopting an official
comprehensive plan, including such maps and other printed material which such
ordinance adopts by reference and any amendments thereof and of the official
map. The clerk shall make available copies of the ordinance adopting an
official comprehensive plan at a price of $5 each and shall make available
copies of the official map at cost upon order as required. The foregoing copies
of such ordinance and of the official map shall be in addition to the original
copies thereof which the statutes require the clerk to keep as part of the
official record of enacted ordinances.
(Ord. No. 74-8-1516, § 1)
§ 31-2.4 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE; SPECIFIC INCLUSIONS.
   (a)   The village plan adopted by this article, including the written
recommendations in reference to streets, public grounds and improvements of the
plan commission and each and every map, chart, drawing and exhibit which is
included in the recommendations of the plan commission, together with all
notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall be as much a part
of this article as if the same were fully described herein.
   (b)   Such inclusion shall extend to:
      (1)   Map No. 1, Title, Official Plan, Village of Glencoe, Cook County,
Illinois, showing a comprehensive plan for street improvements and development
which the village intends to put into execution as and when these improvements
and developments become advisable and feasible; and
      (2)   Subdivision regulations set forth in this chapter to regulate and
control the future physical development of the village.
(Ord. No. 1292, art. 1, § 1)
§ 31-2.5 CHANGES IN PLAN.
   The plan commission may from time to time prepare and recommend to the
president and board of trustees of the village such changes in the official
plan as may be deemed necessary by the president and board of trustees or by
the plan commission. Such changes shall become part of the official plan after
their approval by the plan commission and their adoption by the president and
board of trustees as amendments to this article.
(Ord. No. 1292, art. 1, § 3)
§ 31-2.6 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the director of public works of the village to
enforce the requirements of the village plan.
(Ord. No. 1292, art. 1, § 5)
§ 31-2.7 INVALIDITY OF NONCONFORMING MAPS, ETC.
   After the enactment of this chapter, no map or plat of any subdivision
presented for record, affecting land within the corporate limits of the village
or in contiguous territory within one and one-half miles from such limits and
not included in any city, village or incorporated town, shall be entitled to
record or shall be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon shall provide for
streets, public grounds and improvements in conformity with the requirements
applicable thereto in the village plan.
(Ord. No. 1292, art. 1, § 4)
ARTICLE III. PLATS
(Deleted by Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
ARTICLE III. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.1 CONSISTENCY WITH ZONING CODE AND COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; TECHNICAL
STANDARDS.
   (a)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to all applicable requirements
of the Glencoe zoning code and shall be consistent with the Village of Glencoe
comprehensive plan ordinance. The comprehensive plan ordinance goals include
maintaining the existing environmental assets of the village, preserving and
protecting mature trees and existing landscaping, and guiding, controlling and
encouraging development that is consistent with the village's character.
   (b)   For purposes of implementing this
chapter 31 and other provisions of the village code, the director of public
works is hereby authorized and directed to prepare, maintain and update the
Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.2 LOTS.
   (a)   General. All lots shall be designed and subdivided in conformance with
the zoning code, including without limitation compliance with the lot area
requirements of the zoning code. Outside the corporate limits, the minimum area
of each proposed lot shall be not less than the minimum lot area required by
the zoning regulations of the county for the district in which the proposed lot
is located. Lots shall be generally geometrically shaped and not irregular or
of a shape that substantially deviates from the consistent pattern established
on the block on which the lot is located. No subdivision shall create a through
lot or a flag lot. The minimum depth of any proposed lot shall be 125 feet.
   (b)   Consolidations.
(Ord. No. 06-11-3153)
      (1)   Two lots. For the consolidation of two lots into one lot, the total
side yard setbacks for the new lot shall comply with the setbacks required by
the zoning code for the district in which the lot is located, and the
individual side yard setbacks shall be subject to the review and approval of
the plan commission.
      (2)   More than two lots. No consolidation of more than two lots shall be
permitted unless a variation is granted pursuant to §
31-1.8 of this code. In granting any such variation, the board of trustees may
impose certain conditions, including without limitation any one or more of the
following conditions, which are in addition to those authorized by §
31-1.8(c) of this code: the installation of additional landscaping on the lot;
an increase in the width of any required yard or yards on such lot beyond what
is required by the zoning code; a restriction on the gross floor area for the
lot that is less than what is permitted by the zoning code; and a restriction
on the maximum impervious surface on the lot.
   (c)   Recombinations. No recombination shall be permitted, unless authorized
by variation. In considering a request for variation to allow a recombination,
the plan commission and village board shall consider, in addition to the
standards set forth in §
31-1.8, whether the lot area and dimensions of the proposed zoning lots
resulting from such recombination are consistent with other zoning lots located
adjacent to or in the same block (or such portion thereof as affected by the
recombination) as the proposed zoning lots.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151; Ord. No. 06-11-3153; Ord. No. 06-20-3162)
§ 31-3.3 TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION.
   (a)   The comprehensive plan ordinance recognizes that trees and mature
landscaping, as well as the ecology of the community, are important
characteristics of the village and should be preserved and protected. In
furtherance thereof, the village enacted tree preservation regulations in
article III of
chapter 34 of the Glencoe village code. All subdivisions shall comply with the
village's tree preservation regulations in article III of
chapter 34.
   (b)   In additional to complying with article III of
chapter 34 of the Glencoe village code, an applicant shall preserve and protect
trees and other vegetation during construction activity on the subject
property, in accordance with an approved tree preservation plan and the
following standards:
      (1)   Applicant shall provide protective fencing around trees in order to
shield the root systems from vehicle compaction, excavation and stockpiling of
construction materials;
      (2)   Applicant shall auger or route sewer, water, electric, gas and
other utilities so as to maintain a minimum distance of 15 feet from the trunk
of mature trees and five feet from the trunk of small trees;
      (3)   Applicant shall regularly water and fertilize trees during
construction;
      (4)   Applicant shall limit paving activities, including sidewalks and
driveways, to no closer than 15 feet from the trunk of mature trees and five
feet from the trunk of small trees; and
      (5)   Applicant shall monitor the site to ensure that trees are protected
throughout the construction process.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.4 LANDSCAPING.
   Street trees shall be installed along all parkways in the subdivision, in
accordance with §
31-4.1. In addition, when the village determines that additional landscaping is
desirable or necessary to mitigate the impact of any new buildings or
structures on any lot to be created within a subdivision, the subdivision
approval may be conditioned upon the installation of additional landscaping on
such lot to screen any new buildings or structures on that lot from an adjacent
lot or from the street, or both, in accordance with the landscaping guidelines
set forth in the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual. If such
additional landscaping is required, the applicant shall submit, for the review
and approval of the village, a detailed landscaping plan depicting the
additional landscaping. In addition, the village may require the applicant to
provide performance security and guaranty security for the landscaping, which
security shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of article IV of
this chapter.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.5 NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT.
   The topography of the proposed subdivision shall be preserved wherever
possible in its natural state by minimizing grade changes on the property. No
grade change shall be permitted that would require the installation of a
retaining wall or other engineered device within any required yard to protect
or support the subject property or any adjacent lot. Areas on a lot designated
for development shall be designed so as to preserve the natural features of the
lot, avoid disturbance of areas of environmental sensitivity, including
wetlands, floodplains, slopes in excess of 15%, ravines and habitat of
endangered wildlife, and minimize negative impacts to or alteration of natural
features. The existing landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by
minimizing the removal or destruction of existing trees and other natural
features on the property, so that the resulting development shall be in keeping
with the general appearance of the surrounding area and will not adversely
affect the ecology of the area.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.6 GRADING AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (a)   The subdivision shall be developed in strict accordance with all
applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations related to grading
and storm water retention, detention and drainage, including without limitation
§§
9-82 and
9-83 of the village code, as well as in strict accordance with the grading
plans and profiles approved as part of the approved engineering plans.
   (b)   No grade change shall be permitted that would:
      (1)   Modify storm water drainage on the subject property or an adjacent
lot;
      (2)   Adversely impact the capacity or operation of the village's storm
water system; or
      (3)   Affect the structural stability of an adjacent lot, unless the
village engineer, in his or her sole determination, approves in writing an
alternative means that will adequately provide for the collection and diversion
of storm water.
   (c)   No grading plan shall be approved that, in the village engineer's
determination, poses potential adverse impacts to the environment including,
without limitation, significant change to the rate of storm water run-off, rate
or volume of sedimentation, or location of discharge. In addition, no grading
plan shall be approved that, in the village engineer's determination, fails to
provide adequate setback from any ravine or bluff.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.7 UTILITIES.
   All utilities necessary for the subdivision shall be constructed in
accordance with article IV of this
chapter 31, and shall be installed underground, unless expressly approved by
the village engineer upon payment of a fee to the village in an amount equal to
the costs of burying the utilities underground, as determined by the village
engineer. When the village engineer determines that a storm sewer, sanitary
sewer or water supply system should be designed and constructed larger than is
immediately required to serve the subdivision, the applicant may be reimbursed
for the additional costs of such over-sizing, as determined by the village
engineer, pursuant to a recapture agreement in accordance with state statute.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.8 EASEMENTS.
   Easements shall be provided where necessary for the provision of sanitary
sewer, water, storm drainage, gas lines, electric lines, telephone, cable
television, streets, pathways, sidewalks and other necessary public or private
purposes in order to adequately serve the proposed subdivision. The easements
shall be depicted on the preliminary and final plats of subdivision in
accordance with §§
31-1.16 and
31-1.18. The size and location of all such easements shall be subject to the
approval of the village engineer, and the terms of all such easements shall be
subject to the approval of the village engineer and village attorney.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.9 LOT ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
   All subdivisions shall be designed to provide appropriate public street
access to all lots in the subdivision, which access shall be designated on the
preliminary and final plats of subdivision.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.10 SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   Permanent survey monuments constructed of iron pipe not less than one inch
in diameter and 30 inches long, or as other wise approved by the village
engineer, shall be installed at all street corners, at all points where street
lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision, and at
angle points and points of curve in each street.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-3.11 PUBLIC LAND DEDICATION OR FEES IN-LIEU.
   (a)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   It is declared to be the policy of the village that the provision
of various public facilities required to serve new residential development is
subject to the control of the village in accordance with the comprehensive plan
of the village for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development
of the village.
      (2)   New residential developments cause and impose increased and
excessive demands upon public facilities and services that are specifically and
uniquely attributable to those new residential developments. Affected
facilities and services include public schools and parks.
      (3)   Planning projections indicate that new residential development
shall continue and shall place ever-increasing demands on the school districts,
park district, the village and other governmental bodies to provide necessary
public facilities.
      (4)   Development potential and property values are influenced and
affected by village policy as expressed in the comprehensive plan and as
implemented by the village zoning code and other village regulations.
      (5)   To the extent that new residential developments place demands upon
public facilities that are specifically and uniquely attributable to such
developments, those demands should be satisfied by requiring that the new
residential developments creating the demands pay the cost of meeting the
demands.
      (6)   The amount of the development impact fees to be required of new
residential developments shall reflect the proportionate share of the cost of
the additional public facilities needed to support such residential
developments and shall be calculated to ensure that new residential
developments pay only that portion of the costs of acquiring needed lands and,
to the extent permitted by law, the needed facilities specifically and uniquely
attributable to the new residential developments.
      (7)   The village board, after careful consideration, hereby finds and
declares that imposition of development impact fees upon new residential
developments to finance the acquisition of certain land and, to the extent
permitted by law, other specified public facilities, the demand for which is
created by such residential developments within the village, is in the best
interests of the general welfare of the village and its residents, is
equitable, and does not impose an unfair burden on such developments.
Therefore, the village board deems it necessary and desirable to adopt this
section as herein set forth.
   (b)   Applicability. This section requires payment of development impact
fees, payable no later than the time of issuance of a building permit, in an
amount equal to the proportionate share of the cost of the various public
facilities required to serve residential developments. The fees for school and
park site developments shall be uniformly applicable to all "residential
development," as defined herein.
   (c)   Definitions.
      (1)   The language in the text of this section shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
         A.   The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural
the singular;
         B.   The word SHALL is mandatory; the word MAY is permissive; and
         C.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
      (2)   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this
section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection,
except when the context otherwise indicates.
         BEDROOM. Any room in a dwelling unit that is designed and intended for
sleeping purposes. In the absence of other means of determining the status of a
room in a dwelling unit, a BEDROOM is a room that:
            1.   Is suitable for sleeping purposes;
            2.   Is greater than 100 square feet in floor area; and
            3.   Is not a living room, dining room, kitchen or bathroom.
         BUILDING PERMIT. The permit issued by the village for the construction
of a new dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the village, or such
similar permit issued by the county for a development in an unincorporated
area.
         BUILDING SITE. An area of land designed, intended or used as a
location for a structure.
         CODE. The Glencoe village code.
         COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The official plan for the development of the
village adopted by the village board.
         DEVELOPER. The person undertaking a residential development, which
may, for purposes of this section, include, without limitation, the owner as
well as the subdivider of the land on which the development is to take place.
         DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A special and additional fee imposed pursuant
to the provisions of this section.
         DWELLING UNIT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the zoning
code.
         GROSS ACREAGE. The entire area of a parcel of real property or a
building site expressed in acres or portions thereof.
         INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT. An agreement to be entered into between
the village and each public body, individually, that affirms each public body's
acknowledgment that this section shall control the collection and distribution
of development impact fees, or land in lieu of development impact fees relating
to residential developments, and that creates the responsibility for each
public body to fully indemnify the village in connection with its
administration of this section.
         LOT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the zoning code.
         MAI. The professional designation MEMBER, APPRAISAL INSTITUTE as
conferred by the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers.
         PARK DISTRICT. The Glencoe park district.
         PARK SITE. Land used for active and passive recreation, including,
without limitation: parks; playgrounds; recreation centers, systems and
facilities; pleasure driveways; scenic ways; pathways; conservancy areas; open
space or land; and natural areas.
         PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
organization or business or charitable trust.
         PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The cost of a public facility specifically and
uniquely attributable to a residential development, after consideration of the
generation of additional demand from the residential development, and any
appropriate credits for contribution of money, dedication of land or taxes
dedicated for such residential developments.
         PUBLIC BODY. Collectively, the school districts and park districts
having territory that is coextensive, in whole or in part, with the village.
         PUBLIC FACILITY. School sites and park sites, and any other use
permitted by law, that may be financed in whole or in part by the requirement
of, or funds generated from, a development impact fee.
         RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any subdivision for which application is made
and final approval is received on or after May 18, 2006, and that is:
            1.   Used, or is designed or intended to be used, entirely or in
part, for residential purposes other than for a multiple-family dwelling that
either:
               a.   Is "affordable housing," as defined in the Glencoe
affordable housing plan and the Illinois Affordable Housing and Appeals Act,
and subject to a recorded restrictive covenant approved by and acceptable to
the village board; or
               b.   Is "housing for senior citizens and handicapped persons,"
as defined in the Glencoe zoning code, and subject to a recorded restrictive
covenant approved by and acceptable to the village board.
            2.   Contemplates, or results in, a net increase in the number of
lots or dwelling units over that which previously existed on the property on
which the residential development is, or is to be, located.
         SCHOOL DISTRICT. Glencoe school district 35.
         SCHOOL SITE. Land used for school purposes.
         SERVICE AREA. Any classification, whether geographic, functional, or
otherwise, described in a public body's needs assessment that is used to
quantify and identify public facilities required by such public body to meet an
existing or projected service standard.
         SERVICE STANDARD. The existing level of service delivery associated
with a public facility for which a development impact fee shall be required.
         SITES. Lands that are:
            1.   Leased or owned, or to be leased or owned, by a public body;
and
            2.   Used, to be used, or capable of being used for any purposes of
the public body.
         SUBDIVISION. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the subdivision
regulations.
         SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT. An agreement, entered into between a developer
and the village, approving and governing the subdivision of land pursuant to
these subdivision regulations.
         SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.  
Chapter 31 of this code, regulating the processes and design standards
applicable to the division of land within the village, as the same has been,
and may from time to time hereafter be, amended.
         TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT. The table
included as Appendix A, subsection
31-3.11(u).
         ZONING CODE. The Glencoe zoning code, regulating the use of land
within the village, as the same has been, and may from time to time hereafter
be, amended.
   (d)   General procedures for development impact fees.
      (1)   Calculation of development impact fees. The village manager shall
calculate development impact fees due from any particular residential
development pursuant to and in accordance with this section, and the village
manager shall present such calculations in writing to the developer and to each
public body eligible to receive development impact fees due from any particular
residential development. Development impact fees due from any particular
residential development shall be collected no later than before the issuance of
any building permit for any particular residential development. A developer may
challenge the calculation or imposition of development impact fees by filing a
written objection with the village clerk within ten days after receipt of the
calculation from the village manager. Such objection shall set forth with
particularity the basis for challenging the calculation and shall be
accompanied by any evidence supporting such objection. In addition, if
requested by the village manager, the developer shall obtain or provide such
other information as may be reasonably requested for purposes of evaluating the
developer's objection. The final determination of calculation or applicability
of development impact fees shall be made by the village board, in its sole
discretion, based upon such information submitted by the developer and from
other sources available to the village board or that may be submitted to the
village board by a public body.
      (2)   Collection of development impact fees.
         A.   Public bodies with intergovernmental agreements. Any development
impact fees due to a public body pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement and
the provisions of this article shall be collected by such public body, and the
developer shall be required to deliver to the village clerk a receipt from each
affected public body evidencing delivery of such development impact fees.
Unless expressly provided otherwise in a development agreement approved by the
village, the developer shall not be entitled to any further permits, approvals
or authorizations relating to the residential development until the developer
delivers such receipt of payments to the village.
         B.   Public bodies without intergovernmental agreements. Any
development impact fees relating to public facilities for public bodies that
have not entered into intergovernmental agreements with the village pursuant to
this section shall be paid to the village and collected by the village manager,
who shall hold such development impact fees in trust for the affected public
body or bodies. Unless expressly provided otherwise in a development agreement
approved by the village, the developer shall not be entitled to any further
permits, approvals or authorizations relating to the residential development
until the developer delivers such payments to the village.
      (3)   Transfer of funds to accounts.
         A.   Upon receipt of development impact fees, the village manager
shall forward such fees to the director of finance. In addition:
            1.   The director of finance shall establish an account in a bank
authorized to receive deposits of village funds;
            2.   The development impact fees deposited in the account shall be
used solely for the purposes of and in accordance with this section; and
            3.   The director of finance shall maintain and keep adequate
financial records for the account, which shall show the source and disbursement
of all revenues, and which shall account for all money received. Such records
shall account for money received as being funds allocable to the particular
public body to which the funds are allocable under this section.
         B.   Whenever the village manager receives development impact fees in
trust pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(d)(2)B., the director of finance shall separately account for such fees
held in trust.
      (4)   Disbursement of funds.
         A.   In order to ensure that each distribution of development impact
fees from the account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of
projects consistent with the applicable needs assessment on file with the
village, prior to the village board authorizing disbursement of any such funds
in accord with this section, the village clerk shall be in receipt of each of
the following:
            1.   A fully executed intergovernmental agreement between the
village and the public body receiving such funds governing certain aspects of
the implementation of this section by the village and the public body; and
            2.   A fully executed subdivision agreement. The amount of
development impact fees due for the pro rata share of the costs of public
facilities servicing the residential development shall be incorporated into the
subdivision agreement.
         B.   No final plat of subdivision shall be approved and recorded for
any residential development until the village clerk has received the fully
executed subdivision agreement required pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(d)(4)A.2. No impact fees shall be disbursed until the village clerk has
received the fully executed intergovernmental agreement required pursuant to
subsection
31-3.11(d)(4)A.1. of this section.
   (e)   Use of development impact fees. Development impact fees paid pursuant
to this section shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for paying
the cost of public facilities, whether payment is made directly therefor, or as
a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations of
indebtedness.
   (f)   Effect of development impact fees on zoning and subdivision
regulations. This section shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use
of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements; or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
applicable regulations of the village, which shall be operative and remain in
full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
   (g)   Development impact fees as additional and supplemental requirement.
Development impact fees are additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the village on the
development or subdivision of land or the issuance of building permits. In no
event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for public facilities in an
amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this section; but a
property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to village ordinances,
regulations or policies, for other public facilities in addition to the
development impact fees for public facilities as specified herein.
   (h)   Land in lieu of development impact fees.
      (1)   Prior to any preliminary plat approval (or such later time as the
village board may, in its discretion, allow), a public body may make a request
in writing to the village board to allow for a donation of land in lieu of
development impact fees related to any development. Such a request shall
specifically itemize the public body's reasons for requesting land in lieu of
development impact fees.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request from a public body for land in lieu of
development impact fees, the village board shall consider and perform an
analysis of such request, and make a determination thereon by resolution duly
adopted. The resolution shall be based upon a review of the needs assessment on
file with the village clerk for the public body making the request, as well as
the following factors:
         A.   Other developments occurring in the prior year within the
surrounding area of the residential development;
         B.   Public facilities actually constructed and servicing the
surrounding area of the residential development;
         C.   Changing public facility needs and capacity at existing public
facilities servicing the surrounding area of the residential development; and
         D.   Such other factors as the village board may deem to be relevant.
      (3)   Requests of land in lieu of development impact fees shall be made
specifically for public facilities or expansion of public facilities on
adjacent parcels.
   (i)   Preparation of needs assessments.
      (1)   Each public body shall periodically prepare a study to assess the
need for additional public facilities.
      (2)   The study may consist of a detailed examination or analysis of
existing public facilities, service standards and/or research regarding sites.
      (3)   Such study should also reflect:
         A.   Development occurring in the prior years;
         B.   Public facilities actually constructed;
         C.   Changing public facility needs;
         D.   Inflation;
         E.   Revised cost estimates for public facilities;
         F.   Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable
to public facility projects; and
         G.   Such other factors as may be relevant.
      (4)   Each public body shall maintain on file with the village clerk its
most recent needs assessment study.
      (5)   In addition, the village may request, as a condition of calculating
or disbursing any development impact fees from any particular residential
development, that the public body certify that the needs assessment study on
file with the village clerk reasonably reflects such public body's need for
public facilities.
      (6)   Two or more public bodies may join together in the preparation of a
needs assessment provided the assessment ultimately contains the information
required under this section for each service area served by each such public
body.
   (j)   Use and content of needs assessment.
      (1)   A needs assessment shall contain the following information for each
service area described in the assessment:
         A.   An inventory of existing lands and buildings utilized by the
public body to provide services within the service area;
         B.   An identification of the area of each building within a service
area and, in the case of schools, the number of students then enrolled in each
school building;
         C.   A projection of the character of residential development that is
expected to occur during the succeeding ten-year period that will be affecting
any service area;
         D.   An identification of the amount of lands that will be necessary
for each service area in order to accommodate the demands of the projected
residential development; and
         E.   A general description of the total building area and, in the case
of schools, temporary classrooms, if any, that will be necessary for each
service area in order to provide capacity for the projected residential
development.
      (2)   Public bodies that complete needs assessments for the acquisition
of lands shall periodically update those needs assessments and shall amend
their adopted lands acquisition plan based on those updated needs assessments.
   (k)   Source information for population estimate variable in impact fee
formulas.
      (1)   Calculation of required development impact fees or land dedication,
as set forth in this section, shall be made in accordance with the population
density projections contained in the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit, as defined in this section.
      (2)   In the event a developer files a written objection, within ten days
after receiving notice of the development impact fee calculation pursuant to
subsection
31-3.11(d)(1), to the use of the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit, the developer shall obtain and submit, at his or her own cost, a
demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated from the
residential development; and in that event, final determination of the density
formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the village board, in
its sole discretion, based upon such demographic information submitted by the
developer and from other sources available to the village board or that may be
submitted to the village board by a public body.
   (l)   Determination of land value and distribution of development impact
fees.
      (1)   Determination of land value. The development impact fees for public
facilities shall be based on the fair market value of an acre of land for such
facilities. For purposes of this section, the FAIR MARKET VALUE of an acre of
land in and surrounding the village shall be no less than $1,000,000 which
amount may be adjusted from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the
village board. Such land value shall be used in making any calculations
required in this section unless the developer files a written objection within
ten days after receiving notice of the development impact fee calculation
pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(d)(1). In the event of any such objection, the developer, at his or her
own cost, shall obtain and submit an independent appraisal from an MAI
designated appraiser indicating the fair market value of such improved land in
the area of the proposed development. Final determination of the fair market
value per acre of such land shall be made by the village board in its sole
discretion based on such information submitted by the developer and from other
sources which may be submitted to the village board by the public bodies or
others.
      (2)   Distribution of development impact fees. The development impact fee
for public facilities shall be collected in accordance with subsection
31-3.11(d)(2) and shall be used solely for public facilities of the public
bodies for which such development impact fees are designated. Provided the
village clerk has in his or her possession the respective agreements and
indemnities of the public bodies as required by this section, any development
impact fees so collected and held by the village shall be forwarded from time
to time to the respective public body to be used in the funding of building
sites and public facilities and for other purposes as permitted by law in
accordance with the applicable intergovernmental agreement.
   (m)   Criteria for determining school site development impact fee. The
following criteria shall govern the calculation of the school site development
impact fee.
      (1)   Service area requirement and population ratio. The school
development impact fee shall be calculated based on the amount of land that
would be required for a school site in light of the ultimate number of students
to be generated by the residential development.
         A.   The school site development impact fee requirement shall be
determined by obtaining the product of the following:
            1.   Estimated number of students to be generated by the
residential development within each school classification, as derived from the
most current version of the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling
unit; over
            2.   The maximum recommended number of students to be served in
each such school classification as established in this section; times
            3.   The recommended number of acres for a school site of each
school classification as established in this section.
         B.   The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to
have sufficient school site land to serve the estimated increased number of
students in each such school classification. The school site development impact
fee shall be the cash amount, rounded upward to the nearest $5 increment, equal
to the product of the number of acres required for school sites times 82.90% of
the fair market value of land per acre established in this section.
      (2)   School classification and size of school site. School
classifications and the size of school building sites within the village shall
be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
 
School Classification by Grade Capacity Acres
Elementary or grade K-5        600      11
Junior high or grades 6-8      900      29
 
      (3)   School site development impact fee as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
Description
Single-family 2-bedroom detached
Single-family 3-bedroom detached
Single-family 4-bedroom detached
Single-family 5-bedroom or more detached
Single-family 2-bedroom attached
Single-family 3-bedroom attached
Single-family 4-bedroom or more attached
Multi-family 1-bedroom
Multi-family 2-bedroom
Multi-family 3-bedroom or more
 
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
      (4)   Location. Where land in lieu of development impact fees is
requested, or required pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(h), the comprehensive plan and the standards adopted by the affected
school district shall be used as guidelines in locating sites.
   (n)   Criteria for determining park site development impact fee. The
following criteria shall govern the calculation of the park development impact
fee.
      (1)   Service area requirement and population ratio.
         A.   The park development impact fee shall be calculated based on the
amount of land that would be required for park purposes in light of the
ultimate number of individuals to be generated by the residential development.
         B.   The public facilities that would be required for park purposes
shall be directly related to the ultimate population to be generated by the
residential development.
         C.   The park development impact fee requirement shall be determined
by obtaining the product of the following:
            1.   Estimated population to be served by the park system, as
derived from the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit; over
            2.   One thousand; times
            3.   The sum of the recommended number of acres of park site for
each park classification as established in this section.
         D.   The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to
have sufficient park site land to serve the estimated increased population.
         E.   The park development impact fee shall be the cash amount, rounded
upward to the nearest $5 increment, equal to the product of the number of acres
required for park site times 20.25% of the fair market value of land per acre
established in this section.
      (2)   Park site classification and acreage per population. Park site
classifications and the minimum acres of park site per 1,000 population shall
be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
 
Type of Park      Size Range in Acres Minimum Acres per 1,000 Population
Mini park         1 - 3               0.5
Neighborhood park 3 - 20              2.0
Community park    50 - 100            8.0
Total                                 10.5
 
      (3)   Park site development impact fee as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
Description
Description
Single-family 2-bedroom detached
Single-family 3-bedroom detached
Single-family 4-bedroom detached
Single-family 5-bedroom or more detached
Single-family 1-bedroom attached
Single-family 2-bedroom attached
Single-family 3-bedroom attached
Single-family 4-bedroom or more attached
Multi-family efficiency
Multi-family 1-bedroom
Multi-family 2-bedroom
Multi-family 3-bedroom or more
 
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
      (4)   Location. Where land in lieu of development impact fees is
requested, or required pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(h), the comprehensive plan shall be used as a guideline in locating
sites. Factors affecting the location of required park site dedication shall
include, but not be limited to:
         A.   Accessibility to population served;
         B.   Existence of mature vegetation;
         C.   Proximity to permanent and seasonal waterways;
         D.   Existence of or proximity to unique topographical features; and
         E.   The value of the site as an extension of existing elements of the
park system.
   (o)   Size and type of development.
      (1)   General rule. For purposes of implementing subsections
31-3.11(m) and (n) of this section, each dwelling unit within a residential
development shall be deemed a "4 BR SF detached" for purposes of applying the
table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit.
      (2)   Procedures for modifying general rule to a particular development.
         A.   In the event that a developer objects to the classification of
certain dwelling units as being "4 BR SF detached," the developer may file a
formal objection with the village clerk.
         B.   Such objection shall be filed by the earliest of either:
            1.   The time of filing a building permit application for an
individual dwelling unit for which a development impact fee had not previously
been paid;
            2.   Within 30 days after a new residential development receives
final zoning and subdivision approval, where and as applicable, but prior to
the presentation of any final plat or development agreement for execution by
the village or any of its officials; or
            3.   Within ten days after receiving notice of the development
impact fee calculation pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(d)(1).
         C.   In the event of an objection, the developer shall deliver to the
village clerk:
            1.   Such information and data as the developer believes will
support its objection, as well as:
            2.   Such information as the village manager may request relating
to either the particular dwelling unit for which a building permit is sought or
to all dwelling units to be constructed within a new residential development.
         D.   Final determination of the classification of any dwelling unit
shall be made by the village board based on the information provided by the
developer, other relevant and available information and the terms of this
section.
      (3)   Corrective adjustment of development impact fee. In the event that
the village board has modified the general rule in subsection
31-3.11(o)(1) at the request of a developer pursuant to subsection
31-3.11(o)(2) for a particular dwelling unit or units, and a subsequent
building permit application is presented for any such dwelling unit that would
have required a larger development impact fee but for the adjustment approved
pursuant to the developer's request under this subsection, no building permit
shall be issued for such dwelling unit unless the developer of that dwelling
unit pays a corrective development impact fee. The corrective development
impact fee shall be equal to 115% of the applicable development impact fee for
such dwelling unit as calculated at the time of the building permit application
less the development impact fee initially paid in connection with such dwelling
unit.
   (p)   Credit for net reduction of any or all lots, dwelling units or
bedrooms.
      (1)   Where a new residential development involves a net reduction in the
number of any or all of the lots, dwelling units or bedrooms on the property on
which the development is, or is to be, located, and development impact fees had
previously been paid in connection with an earlier development of such
property, the developer may request a credit for a net reduction, calculated on
a "per unit of public body" basis. Such request shall be filed within 30 days
after a new residential development receives final zoning and subdivision
approval, where and as applicable, but prior to the presentation of any final
plat or development agreement for execution by the village or any of its
officials. The credit due the developer shall be the proportion of such net
reduction to the number of lots, dwelling units or bedrooms for which
development impact fees were previously paid in connection with the development
of the property, but in no event shall such credit reduce the amount of
development impact fees due in connection with the new residential development
to less than zero, nor shall any credit against the development impact fee due
to one public body be used to offset development impact fees due other public
bodies calculated by reason of the new residential development.
      (2)   In the event a developer is entitled to a credit for the net
reduction of the number of any or all of the lots, dwelling units or bedrooms
on the property on which the development is, or is to be, located, and more
than one lot is created from the property on which such unit or units were
located, the credit shall be equally divided among all such newly created lots.
The amount of such credit due per lot shall be determined prior to recording a
new plat of subdivision, and the amount of the credit for each such lot shall
be set forth in the subdivision agreement, or applicable agreement, prior to
recordation.
   (q)   Reservation of additional land. Pursuant to this
chapter 31, the village has made provision for school sites, park sites and
public land. In addition, the village has in its comprehensive plan designated
land that may be appropriate for development as school sites, park sites or
public land. As a result of such provisions and designations:
      (1)   Where land is requested in lieu of a development impact fee or in
lieu of more than 50% of a development impact fee; and
      (2)   The comprehensive plan, or the standards of the village, or the
needs assessment of a public body call for a larger park site or school site in
a particular residential development than the developer is required to
dedicate, then any land within the development so designated in the village's
comprehensive plan will be reserved in accordance with § 11-12-8 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 for subsequent purchase by the
village or other public body designated by the village. Such reservation will
terminate within one year from the date of approval of the final plat unless a
negotiated purchase is made or eminent domain proceedings are commenced within
such one-year period, or an agreement between the developer and the village is
recorded outlining specific conditions for the conveyance of such property.
(Ord. No. 08-17-3228)
   (r)   Combining with adjoining development. Where land is requested in lieu
of a development impact fee and the residential development is less than 40
acres, where practical, a park site or school site should be combined with
dedications from adjoining residential developments in order to produce a
usable park site or school site without undue hardship on a particular
developer.
   (s)   General site standards. The slope, topography and geology of any
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purpose. Wetlands, storm water detention areas and retention areas shall not be
accepted for village ownership and maintenance, nor shall such lands be
credited against development impact fees if accepted by a park district for
ownership and maintenance. A park site shall be not less than one acre in area.
Wetlands, detention areas, retention areas and areas of steep slope shall not
be accepted as school sites.
   (t)   School site standards.
      (1)   A school site shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full
infrastructure improvements as required by this code, including, but not
limited to, electrical service, water service, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and
street improvements.
      (2)   Depending upon projected timing for the construction of school
facilities, a cash contribution may be required in lieu of the sidewalk and
street tree improvements.
      (3)   The cash contribution shall be equal to the cost of such
improvements consistent with approved engineering plans and estimates of cost.
   (u)   Appendix A: Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit.
Appendix A: Table of Estimated Ultimate School Population per Dwelling Unit
                  Elementary Junior    Total     High
Type of Preschool Grades K-  High      Grades K- School    Adults 18- Total per
Unit    0-4 Years 5 5-10     Grades 6- 8 5-13    Grades 9- up         Unit
                  Years      8 11-13   Years     12 14-17
                             Years               Years
Appendix A: Table of Estimated Ultimate School Population per Dwelling Unit
                     Elementary Junior    Total     High
Type of    Preschool Grades K-  High      Grades K- School    Adults Total per
Unit       0-4 Years 5 5-10     Grades 6- 8 5-13    Grades 9- 18-up  Unit
                     Years      8 11-13   Years     12 14-17
                                Years               Years
Single-family detached
2 bedroom  0.133     0.136      0.048     0.184     0.020     1.700  2.017
3 bedroom  0.292     0.369      0.173     0.542     0.184     1.881  2.899
4 bedroom  0.418     0.530      0.298     0.828     0.360     2.158  3.764
5 bedroom  0.283     0.345      0.248     0.593     0.300     2.594  3.770
Single-family attached
1 bedroom  0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     1.193  1.193
2 bedroom  0.064     0.088      0.048     0.136     0.038     1.752  1.990
3 bedroom  0.212     0.234      0.058     0.292     0.059     1.829  2.392
4 bedroom  0.323     0.322      0.154     0.476     0.173     2.173  3.145
or more
Multiple-family dwelling and community residence
Efficiency 0.000     0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     1.294  1.294
1 bedroom  0.000     0.002      0.001     0.003     0.001     1.754  1.758
2 bedroom  0.047     0.086      0.042     0.128     0.046     1.693  1.914
3 bedroom  0.052     0.234      0.123     0.357     0.118     2.526  3.053
or more
 
(Ord. No. 06-24-3166; Ord. No. 08-17-3228)
ARTICLE IV. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The applicant shall provide, at his or her sole expense, the public
improvements described in this section.
   (a)   Streets and rights-of-way.
      (1)   General. All streets shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the requirements of the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual
and shall be designed to allow the safe passage of moving traffic. A
subdivision shall be designed so as to accommodate the extension of existing
and planned streets in the village and shall recognize the connectivity of any
neighborhood surrounding the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Rights-of-way widths.
         A.   Regional and community arterial streets, as defined in the
Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual, and any street designated by
the state as a state highway, shall be not less than 80 feet in width.
         B.   Collector and local streets, as defined in the Engineering
Standards and Specifications Manual, shall be not less than 66 feet in width.
         C.   Cul-de-sac streets, as defined in the Engineering Standards and
Specifications Manual and having a length greater than 300 feet, shall be not
less than 50 feet in width. Cul-de-sac streets having a length less than 300
feet shall be not less than 40 feet in width.
         D.   Alleys shall be not less than 20 feet in width.
      (3)   Cul-de-sac streets. All cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular
right-of-way with a minimum pavement diameter of 70 feet.
      (4)   Curbs and gutters. All streets shall be designed and constructed
with a curb and gutter system in accordance with the Engineering Standards and
Specifications Manual.
      (5)   Intersection design and improvement. Intersections shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Engineering
Standards and Specifications Manual.
      (6)   Street name signs. Street name signs approved by the village
manager shall be installed at all street intersections.
      (7)   Street lights. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with
the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
      (8)   Traffic study. The village may require the submission of a traffic
study by a qualified traffic engineer addressing the design and installation of
adequate and safe capacity and adequate traffic control devices on the streets
adjacent to and within the proposed subdivision.
   (b)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets throughout a
subdivision; provided, however, that an exception may be permitted, in the
village's sole discretion, to allow the installation of a sidewalk on only one
side of a cul-de-sac street.
   (c)   Water systems. The water system of the village shall be extended to
serve all lots within a subdivision in accordance with the Engineering
Standards and Specifications Manual, as well as to accommodate extension to or
connection with current or future water facilities on adjoining properties.
   (d)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire
subdivision at a distance not more than 400 feet from one another, in
accordance with the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
   (e)   Sanitary sewer systems. Sanitary sewer systems shall be installed to
serve all lots within a subdivision in accordance with the Engineering
Standards and Specifications Manual.
   (f)   Storm water systems. Storm water systems, including, without
limitation, storm sewers and storm water detention facilities, shall be
installed to serve all lots within a subdivision in accordance with the
Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
   (g)   Parkway trees. Street trees shall be planted throughout the
subdivision. The location, spacing and species of such trees shall be as set
forth in the Engineering Standards and Specifications Manual.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.2 PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   General requirement. The applicant shall submit to the village
security for the public and other improvements required for the new subdivision
in accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (b)   Amount of performance security.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit or commencement of any
construction on the subject property, the applicant shall deliver to the
village performance security, in a form approved by the village attorney and
issued by a financial institution acceptable to the village manager, in the
amount of 110% of:
         A.   The village engineer's estimate of the costs for constructing and
installing all of the public and other required improvements; or
         B.   The actual cost as shown by all contracts for construction and
installation of all of the public and other required improvements, whichever is
greater.
      (2)   The performance security shall be for the purpose of insuring the
construction of all of the public and other required improvements in accordance
with the final engineering plans and all applicable requirements of law.
   (c)   Terms of performance security. The performance security shall remain
in effect at all times until all of the public and other required improvements
have been approved by the village engineer and the public improvements have
been accepted by the village pursuant to §
31-4.4. If the public and other required improvements have not been completed
and accepted or approved by the village 30 days prior to the date on which the
security by its terms is to expire, then the applicant shall deliver on or
before such date replacement security which by its terms shall extend through
the date the public and other required improvements are accepted or approved by
the village. If the applicant fails to so deliver such security, then the
village shall have the right at such time, without prior notice to applicant,
to draw down the full amount of the existing security.
   (d)   Draw on performance security. If the applicant fails or refuses to
complete the construction of any of the public or other required improvements
covered by the performance security, or fails to correct any defect or
deficiency in such improvements upon request by the village, or in any other
manner fails or refuses to meet fully the obligations under the performance
security, or the applicable development agreement, then the village may, in its
sole and absolute discretion, draw on or retain all or any part of the
performance security.
   (e)   Partial reduction of performance security.
      (1)   The applicant may make a written request to the village engineer to
partially reduce the amount of the approved performance security. The village
engineer shall be authorized, in his or her sole discretion, to approve a
partial reduction in the amount of the performance security, provided that the
public and other required improvements for which the reduction is sought have
been completed, inspected and approved by the village engineer.
      (2)   In no event shall the amount of the performance security be reduced
to a level that:
         A.   Would not allow the village to complete the installation of the
public and other improvements required for the subdivision, in the sole and
absolute opinion of the village engineer and village manager; or
         B.   Is less than the guaranty security required by §
31-4.5.
   (f)   Release of performance security. Following the village engineer's
certification that all public and other required improvements included in the
security have been completed to the satisfaction of the village engineer, and
the village's acceptance of all public improvements in accordance with all
requirements of §
31-4.4, including without limitation the delivery of satisfactory guaranty
security or all public improvements, the village manager shall release the
security.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.3 INSPECTION OF WORK.
   The public and other required improvements shall not be deemed completed
until the village engineer, or the village's appointed inspector, has inspected
the public and other required improvements, determined that the approved
engineering plans have been satisfactorily implemented, and has issued a
written declaration of completion to the applicant. Upon written request from
the applicant, and promptly thereafter, at a time mutually agreeable to
applicant and the village engineer or its appointed inspector, the village
engineer or its appointed inspector shall inspect the public and other required
improvements and report its findings as to acceptability and completeness to
applicant. The village engineer shall prepare a punch list of items, if any, to
be performed or corrected and shall fix a time within which applicant shall
perform or correct the items listed thereon. Following applicant's performance
or correction of the items, the village engineer or its appointed inspector
shall make another review of the public and other required improvements, and
either issue a written declaration declaring the public and other required
improvements to be complete or present another punch list to the applicant.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.4 DEDICATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   The acceptance of the public improvements shall be made only by the
adoption of a resolution by the board of trustees of the village after there
has been filed with the village manager a certification by the village engineer
stating that:
      (1)   The public and other required improvements have been completed and
the public improvements are in all respects in satisfactory condition for
acceptance;
      (2)   Two sets of "as-built" plans of the public improvements constructed
have been received;
      (3)   Satisfactory guaranty security for the public improvements has been
delivered to the village in accordance with §
31-4.5 of this agreement; and
      (4)   All surveying monuments have been placed in accordance with §
31-3.10, and after the applicant has paid to the village all monies due and
owing by the applicant to the village.
   (b)   Further, the village shall have no obligation to accept the public
improvements if the applicant has failed in any respect to comply strictly with
this
chapter 31.
   (c)   Prior to acceptance of the public improvements, the applicant shall,
at applicant's own cost and expense, remove, discharge or otherwise dispose of
any and all liens and other encumbrances on the public improvements.
   (d)   The applicant shall convey and transfer title to the public
improvements by bill of sale to the village.
   (e)   The applicant shall deliver such documents to the village, together
with any other documents deemed necessary by the village or the village
attorney, including, without limitation, non-exclusive easements on, over and
across the subject property to enable the village to access the public
improvements.
   (f)   All such documents shall be acceptable to the village attorney in form
and substance.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.5 GUARANTY SECURITY.
   The applicant shall provide to the village guaranty security, in an amount
equal to 10% of the actual cost of construction of all the public improvements,
the form and substance of which shall be acceptable to the village attorney.
The guarantee security shall insure the village against any defects in the work
performed and materials used in the construction of the public improvements for
two years after the village's acceptance of the public improvements. Such
security, as approved by the village attorney, shall be delivered to the
village prior to acceptance of the public improvements.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
§ 31-4.6 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   The development agreement required by subsection
31-1.22(f)(2) of this code shall, without limitation, include or reference the
following minimum information:
   (a)   Proposed schedule for installation of required public improvements and
referencing the final plat of subdivision, final engineering plans;
   (b)   Description and estimated cost of the public improvements, in a form
and amount approved by the village engineer;
   (c)   Type and summary of the terms of the performance security for the
construction of the public improvements;
   (d)   Reserved;
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
   (e)   A summary of the covenants, restrictions and easements necessary for
the subdivision, if required;
   (f)   Agreement to pay for the public improvements and any other applicable
costs, payments, permit fees, inspection fees or other fees attributable to the
subdivision;
   (g)   Special provisions acknowledging, accepting and ensuring compliance
with any conditions of approval of the subdivision; and
   (h)   All other provisions deemed necessary by the village manager in order
to fulfill the purpose and intent of this code.
(Ord. No. 06-09-3151)
CHAPTER 32: TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Article I. Taxicabs
   
32-1   Taxicab license generally - required
   
32-2   Same - application; investigation of applicant
   
32-3   Same - persons to whom taxicab licenses may not be issued
   
32-4   Same - fee
   
32-5   Reserved
   
32-6   Insurance and bonds
   
32-7   Duty of holders of taxicab licenses to offer service; holder of taxicab
license to provide office and telephone
   
32-8   Transfer of taxicab licenses prohibited
   
32-9   Revocation of taxicab license upon suspension of service
   
32-10   Requirements for holder of taxicab license wishing to operate
additional taxicabs
   
32-11   Taxicab driver's license - required
   
32-12   Same - qualifications of applicants
   
32-13   Same - applicants to file statement as to name, residence, previous
employment, etc.
   
32-14   Same - fingerprinting and photographing of applicant; record of chief
of police as to taxicab drivers
   
32-15   Same - display of taxicab driver's license upon demand; when taxicab
driver to have taxicab driver's license upon person
   
32-16   Employment of unlicensed person as taxicab driver; permitting
unlicensed person to operate taxicab
   
32-17   Procedure when taxicab driver is guilty of drunk driving, reckless
driving, etc.
   
32-18   Duty of holder of taxicab license to keep register and records
concerning drivers
   
32-19   Reserved
   
32-20   Designation of public taxicab stands; parking on streets; solicitation
of business generally
   
32-21   Reserved
   
32-22   Meters required
   
32-23   Rates of fare and reporting requirements
   
32-23.1   Reserved
   
32-24   Rules and regulations to be posted in taxicabs
   
32-25   Conduct of taxicab drivers generally
   
32-26   Carrying additional passengers
   
32-27   Refusal to carry passengers
   
32-28   Vehicles to be kept in good mechanical condition, sanitary, etc.;
inspection of vehicles; revocation of license of unsafe, unsanitary, etc.,
taxicab
   
32-29   Certain information to be displayed on taxicabs; design and color
scheme
   
32-30   Tests and inspections of taxicabs generally
Article II. Bus Lines
   
32-31   Definitions
   
32-32   Licensed bus lines
   
32-33   Same - application
   
32-34   License fee; penalties
   
32-35   Vehicles to be clean, sanitary and safe
   
32-36   Obedience to traffic rules and regulations, etc.
   
32-37   Drivers to be careful and competent, etc.
Article III. Draymen, Carters and Expressmen
   
32-38   License - required
   
32-39   Same - application
   
32-40   Same - fee
   
32-41   Receiving, etc., stolen goods
   
32-42   Information to be displayed upon vehicles
Article IV. Chauffeurs
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
   
32-43   License - required
   
32-44   Same - application
   
32-45   Same - fee
Cross-reference:
   As to motor vehicles and traffic generally, see
ch. 23
   As to parking of taxicabs, etc., see §
23-92
   As to use of bus stops and taxicab stands by vehicles other than busses and
taxicabs, see §
23-93
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to license, regulate, etc.,
draymen, carters, expressmen, etc., see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-42-6
   For state law as to local transportation systems generally, see Ill. Rev.
Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 23-116
ARTICLE I. TAXICABS
§ 32-1 TAXICAB LICENSE GENERALLY - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or a public
passenger vehicle for hire which is not used as a part of and in connection
with the operation of a public utility without first obtaining a license
therefor as provided in this article.
(1929 Code, § 489) (Ord. No. 1270)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 32-2 SAME - APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   An application for taxicab license shall be made in writing to the village
manager, and shall comply with the provisions of
chapter 22. Each application shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the number of taxicabs to be operated, the estimated number of drivers to be
employed, and such other information as may be required by the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 490) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 2001-12-3029)
§ 32-3 SAME - PERSONS TO WHOM TAXICAB LICENSES MAY NOT BE ISSUED.
   No taxicab license shall be issued under the provisions of this article to
any person who is not a person of good character or to any person who has been
convicted of a felony.
(1929 Code, § 490) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-4 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for each taxicab driver operating in the village
shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(1929 Code, § 491) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2001-12-3029;
Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 32-5 RESERVED.
§ 32-6 INSURANCE AND BONDS.
   Each application for taxicab license or for the renewal of a taxicab license
under the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by:
   (a)   A certificate from the Secretary of State showing compliance by the
licensee, for each taxicab, with the provisions of the statutes of the state
now or hereafter in force, relating to the bonding or insuring or motor
vehicles used for the carriage of passengers for hire;
   (b)   A duplicate policy or certificate of insurance for each taxicab,
issued by a solvent and responsible insurance company, to be approved by the
village manager, conditioned that the licensee or the driver of such taxicab
will pay all final judgments recovered against such licensee or such driver for
any injury to or death of any person resulting from the negligence of such
licensee or his or her agents, or of such driver, in the operation of such
taxicabs, in the sum of $50,000 for death or injury to one person and $100,000
for injury to or death or more than one person caused by a single accident; and
   (c)   (1)   A duplicate policy or certificate of insurance, for each
taxicab, issued by a solvent and responsible insurance company, to be approved
by the village manager, conditioned that the licensee or such driver will pay
all final judgments recovered against such licensee or such driver for any
property damage resulting from the negligence of such licensee or his or her
agents, or of such driver, in the operation of such taxicabs, in the sum of
$100,000 for each accident.
      (2)   Each such duplicate policy or certificate of insurance required by
this section shall provide for payment and satisfaction of any final judgment
rendered as aforesaid and shall provide that suit may be brought in any court
of competent jurisdiction upon such insurance policy by the owner of any owner
of any such judgment, shall contain a description of each motor vehicle, giving
the manufacturer's name and number and state license number, and shall also
provide that such insurance policy cannot be cancelled by the company issuing
the same without giving ten days' notice in writing of such cancellation to the
village manager, either personally or by registered mail.
      (3)   In lieu of the duplicate policies or certificates of insurance
provided for by this section, licensee may furnish bonds with solvent and
responsible surety companies authorized to do business under the laws of this
state as sureties thereon, or individual bonds with one or more personal
sureties owning real estate in the state of the value in the aggregate of
$200,000, if offered in lieu of the personal injury and death insurance
hereinabove provided for, or of $100,000 if offered in lieu of the property
damage insurance hereinabove provided for, over and above all encumbrances, to
be approved by the village manager, which bonds with personal sureties shall be
accompanied by affidavits by each of such sureties to be attached to such
bonds, stating the location, legal description, market value, nature, the
amount of encumbrances, if any, and the value above all encumbrances of real
estate scheduled to qualify on such bonds. The amount of such bonds shall be
the same as the amounts of the insurance policies or certificates hereinbefore
set forth. The conditions for payment of such bonds shall be the same as those
contained in the insurance policies or certificates hereinbefore set forth.
Such bonds shall contain all of the other provisions and conditions
hereinbefore set forth and required in the aforesaid insurance policies and
certificates, and such bonds, for the full amount thereof shall, by their
terms, be a lien so scheduled, and shall be recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in each county in which such real estate is located.
      (4)   The licensee shall at all times maintain the full insurance or bond
coverage hereinabove provided.
      (5)   The village president is hereby directed and empowered to revoke
any taxicab license issued with respect to any taxicab not complying with the
provisions of this section; and if, at any time, in the judgment of the village
manager, such policies or certificates of insurance or such bonds are not
sufficient for any good cause, he or she may require replacement thereof with
other good and sufficient policies or certificates of insurance or bonds in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(1929 Code, § 492) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-7 DUTY OF HOLDERS OF TAXICAB LICENSES TO OFFER SERVICE; HOLDER OF TAXICAB
LICENSE TO PROVIDE OFFICE AND TELEPHONE.
   Each holder of a taxicab license shall furnish both day and night service
and maintain an office or place of business in the village equipped with a
telephone and operator to receive calls at any time during the period of 6:00
a.m. to 2:00 a.m. daily; provided, however, that these provisions as to the
office or place of business and telephone or operator shall be deemed complied
with, if such holder of such taxicab license, or groups of such holders shall
furnish written evidence of a mutual agreement whereby there shall be in
continuous operation upon the streets of the village such number of taxicabs as
shall be deemed satisfactory by the village manager and that there shall be
such telephone facilities for receiving calls between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 2:00 a.m. daily, as shall be deemed satisfactory by the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 489) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 2001-12-3029)
§ 32-8 TRANSFER OF TAXICAB LICENSES PROHIBITED.
   Taxicab licenses granted under the terms of this article shall not be
transferable.
(1929 Code, § 489) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-9 REVOCATION OF TAXICAB LICENSE UPON SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   If at any time during the term of a taxicab license granted under the
provisions of this article, service shall be suspended for a term of 14 days by
the holder of the taxicab license, the village president may thereupon revoke
the taxicab license involved.
(1929 Code, § 489) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-10 REQUIREMENTS FOR HOLDER OF TAXICAB LICENSE WISHING TO OPERATE
ADDITIONAL TAXICABS.
   Whenever the holder of a taxicab license wishes to add to the number of
taxicabs which he or she operates in the village, he or she shall make
application to the village manager for each additional taxicab in the manner
provided in §
32-2 and shall comply with all the provisions of this article with respect to
each taxicab.
(1929 Code, § 491) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-11 TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab on the public streets
or ways of the village without having obtained a taxicab driver's license as
provided in this article.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-12 SAME - QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall:
   (a)   Be of the age of 18 years or older;
   (b)   Be physically sound and have good sight and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble or other infirmity of body or mind which might render
him or her unfit for the safe operation of the taxicab; and
   (c)   Be able to read and write the English language.
§ 32-13 SAME - APPLICANTS TO FILE STATEMENT AS TO NAME, RESIDENCE, PREVIOUS
EMPLOYMENT, ETC.
   Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall fill out, upon a form
provided by the village manager, a statement giving his or her full name,
residence, place of residence for the last five years previous to his or her
present address, name and length of service with his or her present employer,
driving record, and whether he or she has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor or whether he or she has been previously licensed as a driver or
chauffeur, and if so, when and where.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 2001-12-3029)
§ 32-14 SAME - FINGERPRINTING AND PHOTOGRAPHING OF APPLICANT; RECORD OF CHIEF
OF POLICE AS TO TAXICAB DRIVERS.
   (a)   Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be fingerprinted
and photographed by the chief of police of the village. Every applicant for a
taxicab driver's license shall present himself or herself to the chief of
police of the village to be fingerprinted and photographed.
   (b)   A record shall be kept by the chief of police in his or her office
containing every taxicab driver's fingerprint, photograph, his or her name and
address and the application filled out by the applicant.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-15 SAME - DISPLAY OF TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE UPON DEMAND; WHEN TAXICAB
DRIVER TO HAVE TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE UPON PERSON.
   Every taxicab driver shall, upon demand by any authorized police officer or
official of the village, exhibit his or her taxicab driver's license for
inspection. Every taxicab driver shall keep his or her taxicab driver's license
upon his or her person at all times while in charge of a taxicab.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-16 EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED PERSON AS TAXICAB DRIVER; PERMITTING
UNLICENSED PERSON TO OPERATE TAXICAB.
   No person owning, controlling or operating any taxicab shall employ any
person as a driver of taxicabs who is not licensed as a taxicab driver under
the provisions of this article, or permit any person other than a licensed
taxicab driver to operate any such vehicle on the public streets and ways of
the village.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-17 PROCEDURE WHEN TAXICAB DRIVER IS GUILTY OF DRUNK DRIVING, RECKLESS
DRIVING, ETC.
   The village manager is hereby empowered to request the holder of any taxicab
license to discharge any taxicab driver in his or her employment who has been
found guilty of operating his or her taxicab while under the influence of
liquor or speeding or reckless driving. The holder of a taxicab license shall
promptly comply with all such requests of the village manager and, in the event
of his or her failure or refusal to do so, or in the event the guilty driver is
the holder of the taxicab license, his or her taxicab license shall be revoked
by the village president.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
Cross-reference:
   As to driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs,
see §
23-73
   As to reckless driving generally, see §
23-75
§ 32-18 DUTY OF HOLDER OF TAXICAB LICENSE TO KEEP REGISTER AND RECORDS
CONCERNING DRIVERS.
   Each holder of a taxicab license issued under the provisions of this article
shall maintain a register showing the names and addresses of every driver in
his or her employ and a daily record indicating the name of each driver and the
number of the taxicab operated by him or her each day. This record shall be
subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police.
(1929 Code, § 494) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-19 RESERVED.
§ 32-20 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC TAXICAB STANDS; PARKING ON STREETS; SOLICITATION
OF BUSINESS GENERALLY.
   (a)   The village manager shall designate portions of streets or other areas
in the village, which shall be considered as public taxicab stands and suitable
markers shall be installed to so indicate public taxicab stands.
   (b)   No taxicab driver shall park the taxicab that he or she is driving
upon the streets or solicit business from any point or location other than at a
location designated by the village manager as a public taxicab stand.
   (c)   No taxicab driver shall actively solicit, by word, gesture or
otherwise, the patronage of any person upon any public cab stand or on any
street in the village.
(1929 Code, §§ 498, 499, 500) (Ord. No. 1270)
Cross-reference:
   As to use of taxicab stands by vehicles other than taxicabs, etc., see §
23-93
§ 32-21 RESERVED.
§ 32-22 METERS REQUIRED.
   Each taxicab licensed and operated under the provisions of this article
shall be equipped with a meter which will visibly register, mechanically, the
distance traveled by such vehicle, the time such vehicle is in waiting, and the
total fare to be charged in dollars and cents.
(1929 Code, § 493) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-23 RATES OF FARE AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   There shall be no established rates of taxicab fare; provided, however, that
each licensed owner or operator shall advise the director of public safety in
writing of his or her proposed rates at least 30 days in advance of the
effective date of the new rates. Such rates shall be posted as provided in this
§
32-23 and a duplicate of the printed rates that appear on the inside of the cab
shall appear on the window of the rear door of both sides of each cab showing
the rate schedule.
(Ord. No. 2000-19-30010; Ord. No. 2001-12-3029)
§ 32-23.1 RESERVED.
(Ord. No. 88-4-1771)
§ 32-24 RULES AND REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED IN TAXICABS.
   There shall be posted in each taxicab licensed and operated under the
provisions of this article in a conspicuous place designated by the village
manager such rules and regulations regarding the operation of taxicabs,
operation of meters, rates of fare and such other information as promulgated,
and in the form furnished by the village.
(1929 Code, § 495) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-25 CONDUCT OF TAXICAB DRIVERS GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to conduct himself or herself in
other than a gentlemanly manner at all times while in charge of a taxicab, or
to smoke while passengers are in his or her taxicab, or to shout or call to
operators of other taxicabs, or to use profane or boisterous language.
(1929 Code, § 501) (Ord. No. 1270)
§ 32-26 CARRYING ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS.
   When more than one passenger is waiting for a taxicab at the Park Avenue
Railroad Station platforms, the taxicab driver shall be permitted to convey not
more than that number of persons for which the taxicab has seating
accommodations; provided, that this does not delay the departure of the first
passenger who engaged the cab. From any other departure point, the first
passenger who engaged the cab shall not be required to share his or her ride
with other passengers.
(1929 Code, § 496) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-27 REFUSAL TO CARRY PASSENGERS.
   No driver of any licensed taxicab operated under the provisions of this
article shall refuse to convey with the village limits, any person, with or
without baggage, when applied to for that purpose, or, having undertaken to
convey such person, shall omit or neglect to do so.
(Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-28 VEHICLES TO BE KEPT IN GOOD MECHANICAL CONDITION, SANITARY, ETC.;
INSPECTION OF VEHICLES; REVOCATION OF LICENSE OF UNSAFE, UNSANITARY, ETC.,
TAXICAB.
   All taxicabs licensed under the provisions of this article shall be kept in
good mechanical operating condition and in a clean and sanitary condition. The
chief of police, and the village manager, shall be and are hereby empowered to
inspect such taxicabs at any time. The village president shall and is hereby
empowered to revoke the license with respect to any taxicab that is not kept in
a safe, clean and sanitary condition.
(1929 Code, § 493) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-29 CERTAIN INFORMATION TO BE DISPLAYED ON TAXICABS; DESIGN AND COLOR
SCHEME.
   (a)   The business or firm name of the holder of the taxicab license, and
the name of such licensee, shall be painted, in letters at least three inches
in height, on both sides and on the rear of each taxicab licensed and operated
under the provisions of this article. Each taxicab shall be numbered on both
sides and on the rear with numerals not less than two inches in height. No two
taxicabs operated by the same licensee shall have the same number.
   (b)   Each licensee shall have his or her taxicabs painted and lettered in
such design and color scheme as shall be approved by the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 493) (Ord. No. 1270; Ord. No. 1420, § 1)
§ 32-30 TESTS AND INSPECTIONS OF TAXICABS GENERALLY.
   (a)   The director of public safety is hereby directed and empowered at any
time to require the owners and operators of all licensed taxicabs operated
under the provisions of this article to submit such vehicles to "safety lane"
tests, or other tests as may be directed by the village manager, for the
purpose of determining that they are in a safe condition for the carriage of
passengers.
   (b)   Before obtaining a license to operate within the village, and once
every 12 months thereafter, each taxicab licensed and operated under the
provisions of this article shall be submitted to the director of public safety
for similar inspection and test, or the taxicab shall be submitted for such
inspection and test by a garage or testing agency as may be designated by the
village manager, and a written report shall be submitted to the director of
public safety indicating that each licensed taxicab has successfully passed
these periodic inspections and tests.
(Ord. No. 2001-12-3029)
ARTICLE II. BUS LINES
§ 32-31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Article II of
Chapter 32, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section, except when the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning. All words or phrases not defined in
this Section have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois Vehicle Code,
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   BUS LINE. Any motor vehicles used to carry passengers along or fixed route
for hire. Bus lines do not include bus services conducted by public agencies
within the state of Illinois.
   INTERCITY BUS. Any bus used for the one-way transportation of ten or more
passengers originating from a location outside of the village that is not a
regularly scheduled service.
   REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE. Bus service involving passengers disembarking
in the village on a predictable and recurring basis, following a schedule that
is published at least five days in advance and available to the general public
in the village, and provides service in exchange for paying a fare.
   UNSCHEDULED STOP. The stopping or standing of an intercity bus within the
village for the purpose of unloading or the disembarking of passengers without
prior approval of the village as required by this Article II of
Chapter 32.
(1929 Code, § 451) (Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
§ 32-32 LICENSED BUS LINES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bus line or intercity
bus, picking up or discharging passengers within the village, without having
first secured a license therefor; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to bus lines operating under a special franchise from the village.
   (b)   Unscheduled stops prohibited. Unscheduled stops by intercity busses
are declared to be a public nuisance and are prohibited in the village.
   (c)   Intercity buses only may stop to allow passengers to disembark in the
village if they comply with all of the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   Permitted hours.
         A.   Intercity buses may only stop or stand to allow passengers to
disembark within the village between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, or such other time as may be approved by the village
manager in its sole discretion, but not on any federal, state, or village
holidays, unless approved by the village manager in its sole discretion;
         B.   No intercity bus may allow passengers to disembark except within
30 minutes before or after the time designated in an application that has been
approved pursuant to § 32-33 of this Code.
      (2)   Permitted location. Intercity buses may only stop or stand to allow
passengers to disembark within the Glencoe Metra Station located at 724 Old
Green Bay Road, Glencoe, Illinois, or such other location as may be approved by
the village manager in its sole discretion.
      (3)   Coordination of disembarking passengers. The owner, operator, or
driver of an intercity bus must make sure that the intercity bus is met by
individuals responsible for coordinating the transportation of the passengers
from the stop location in the village to their final destination(s).
      (4)   Advance approval. The owner, operator, or driver of an intercity
bus must obtain advance written approval of the village prior to making a stop
and allowing passengers to disembark within the village. In order to obtain
advanced approval of a stop, the owner, operator, or driver of the intercity
bus must submit an application to the village manager, pursuant to §
32-33 of this Code at least five business days before the date of the proposed
stop.
(1929 Code, § 449) (Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 32-33 SAME - APPLICATION.
   (a)   Application for the license required by §
32-32 shall be made in writing to the village manager for each intercity bus
drop-off, and shall state the name and address of the owner or applicant, and
the names and addresses of the person to operate each vehicle used, and the
number of vehicles to be used. Applications for intercity buses must include
the information listed in subsection (b).
   (b)   Applications for intercity busses must include the following
information:
      (1)   The full name, full address, and telephone numbers, including
mobile telephone numbers of the owner, operator, and driver of the intercity
bus;
      (2)   The full name, full address, and telephone numbers, including
mobile telephone numbers of any entity or individuals that have either
directed, paid for, or financed the transport of persons who will disembark in
the village;
      (3)   The make, model, state registration/plate number, fleet number, and
vehicle identification number (VIN) of the vehicle that will be providing the
service;
      (4)   The number of people who are proposed to disembark in the village;
      (5)   The name, address, or location in the village where the applicant
proposes to allow passengers to disembark;
      (6)   The full names, addresses, telephone numbers, including mobile
telephone numbers, and electronic mail addresses of all entities or individuals
who will be present to meet and receive the passengers disembarking in the
village;
      (7)   A detailed, written plan identifying how the disembarking
passengers will be cared for, housed, and fed upon disembarking in the village;
      (8)   Any additional information that the village manager may reasonably
require; and
      (9)   An affirmation by the applicant that the information provided in
the application is true and correct. Such affirmation must be attested to by a
person authorized to administer paths or witness affirmations within the state
or territory where the application is sworn to or affirmed.
   (c)   Review of applications for intercity buses. Upon receipt of the
application for an intercity bus license submitted pursuant to this section,
the village manager will undertake a review of the information contained in the
application to verify its truth and authenticity. If the application is
incomplete, the village manager will, in writing, advise the applicant of the
additional items needed to complete the application. No later than three
business days after receiving a completed application, the village manager will
inform the applicant, in writing, that the application is approved or denied
for the proposed location of disembarkation in the village.
   (d)   Intercity bus driver obligations. The driver of an intercity bus
granted a license pursuant to §
32-33 to stop in the village must ensure passengers remain on the bus until the
designated village employee is on-site at the designated location for
disembarkation to assist in making sure passengers will be transported to their
final destination and cared for upon disembarking in the village.
   (e)   Proof of application and approval. The driver of an intercity bus
granted a license pursuant to §
32-33 to stop in the village must have in its possession a physical or
electronic copy of an approved application and present it for inspection at the
place of disembarkation, upon request by any employee or designee of the
village.
   (f)   Compliance with approved application. No person may permit the
disembarkation of passengers from an intercity bus except in compliance with
the application approved pursuant to §
32-33 of this Code.
   (g)   Revocation. The approval of an application pursuant to §
32-33 may be revoked by the village manager upon the manager's determination
that the application contains any false or misleading information.
(1929 Code, § 450) (Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
§ 32-34 LICENSE FEE; PENALTIES.
   (a)   The annual license fee for a license as required by §
32-32 shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule for each vehicle operated.
   (b)   Any person, firm, or corporation that operates a bus line or intercity
bus in violation of any provision of this §
32-32, or in violation of an application approved pursuant to this §
32-33, will be fined for each offense in the amount set forth in the village's
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (c)   Village public safety officers are hereby authorized to seize and
impound any intercity bus that is used in the commission or furtherance of a
violation of §
32-32 or §
32-33. Seizures and impoundments under §
32-32 are subject to the applicable provisions of §§
23-110 et al. of this Code.
(1929 Code, § 449) (Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2024-03-3580)
§ 32-35 VEHICLES TO BE CLEAN, SANITARY AND SAFE.
   All vehicles used in the operation of bus lines licensed under this article
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be safe for the
transportation of passengers.
(1929 Code, § 452)
§ 32-36 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS, ETC.
   The drivers of all vehicles used in the operation of bus lines licensed
under this article shall obey all traffic rules and regulations of the village
and all orders and directions of traffic officers and all traffic signals.
(1929 Code, § 452)
§ 32-37 DRIVERS TO BE CAREFUL AND COMPETENT, ETC.
   Drivers employed to operate vehicles used in the operation of bus lines
licensed under this article shall be careful and competent drivers and shall
conduct themselves in an orderly manner.
(1929 Code, § 452)
ARTICLE III. DRAYMEN, CARTERS AND EXPRESSMEN
§ 32-38 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of drayman,
carter or expressman in the village without having obtained a license therefor.
(1929 Code, § 461)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits generally, see
ch. 22
§ 32-39 SAME - APPLICATION.
   An application for a license as required in §
32-38 shall be made to the village manager and shall designate thereon the name
of the applicant, the location of his or her business and the number of
vehicles intended to be used by him or her.
(1929 Code, § 462)
§ 32-40 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for a license as required in §
32-38 shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule, but any licensee maintaining or using more than one vehicle for
business shall pay an amount as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee
and Fine Schedule for each additional vehicle.
(1929 Code, § 462) (Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-
3394)
§ 32-41 RECEIVING, ETC., STOLEN GOODS.
   It shall be unlawful for any drayman, expressman or carter to receive, move
or conceal any goods or articles which he or she knows, or has reason to
suspect, to be stolen.
(1929 Code, § 463)
§ 32-42 INFORMATION TO BE DISPLAYED UPON VEHICLES.
   Every vehicle used in business by any drayman, expressman or carter shall
have printed thereon, in a place easily visible from the side of the vehicle,
the name and address of the owner thereof in letters legible to one of normal
eyesight at a distance of 25 feet.
(1929 Code, § 463)
ARTICLE IV. CHAUFFEURS
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 32-43 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be a chauffeur in the village without
having obtained a license therefor.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 32-44 SAME - APPLICATION.
   An application for a license as required by §
32-43 shall be made in writing to the village manager, and shall comply with
the provisions of
chapter 22.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812)
§ 32-45 SAME - FEE.
   The annual license fee for a license as required by §
32-43 shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 90-3-1812; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
CHAPTER 33: TOBACCO DEALERS
Section
   
33-1   License - required; application; qualification of applicant
   
33-2   Same - fee
   
33-3   Sanitation of premises
   
33-4   Violations and penalties
Cross-reference:
   As to sale of cigarettes, etc., to minors under 18 years of age, see §
24-8
§ 33-1 LICENSE - REQUIRED; APPLICATION; QUALIFICATION OF APPLICANT.
   No person shall engage in the sale at retail of cigars or tobacco in any
form, including cigarettes, without obtaining a license as provided in this
chapter. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the village
manager; and he or she shall cause an investigation to be made of the character
of the applicant. No such license shall be issued to any person who is not of
good character. For the purpose of this section, SALE AT RETAIL shall include
sales by means of vending machines and a separate license shall be required for
each vending machine dispensing tobacco in any form.
(Ord. No. 80-2l-1621)
§ 33-2 SAME - FEE.
   The annual fee for a tobacco and cigar dealer’s license shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule; and the daily fee
shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 80-10-1610; Ord. No. 92-2-1868; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 33-3 SANITATION OF PREMISES.
   Premises and buildings used for the sale of cigars and tobacco in any form
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The chief of police or the
health officer shall inspect such premises frequently enough to ensure
compliance with this section.
(1929 Code, § 446)
Cross-reference:
   As to health and sanitation generally, see
ch. 21
§ 33-4 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in §
16-1.
   (b)   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked for a violation
of any provision of this chapter, or of any ordinance relating to cigar or
tobacco dealers or their licenses or premises used.
(1929 Code, § 448)
CHAPTER 34: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
Article I. In General
   
34-1   Nuisance trees, shrubs, and weeds - duty of owners and occupants
   
34-2   Same - notice to owners and occupants; failure to obey notice
   
34-3   Same - trimming by village
   
34-4   Planting in public places - permit required; approval of location
   
34-5   Same - certain trees prohibited
   
34-6   Height of parkway shrubs
   
34-7   Enforcement of article
Article II. Nuisance Trees
   
34-8   Nuisance trees - generally
   
34-9   Trees suitable for beetle breeding places declared nuisancesReserved
   
34-10   Keeping infected, etc., trees prohibited
   
34-11   Notices to remove, etc., nuisances - by whom given; form and substance
   
34-12   Same - manner of service
   
34-13   Duty to remove, etc., nuisance after notice - generally
   
34-14   Reserved
   
34-15   Costs of removal, etc., of nuisance by village
   
34-16   Nuisances on village-owned property
   
34-17   Enforcement of article - generally
   
34-18   Same - right of entry, etc.
   
34-19   Same - hindering enforcement officers
   
34-20   Dutch Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer
Article III. Tree Preservation
Division 1. General
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092)
   
34-21   Purpose and policy
   
34-22   Definitions
Division 2. Tree Permit Procedures
   
34-23   Tree permit required
   
34-24   Tree permit application
   
34-25   Review of tree permit applications; issuance of tree permits
   
34-26   Tree replacement standards
Division 3. Administration and Enforcement
   
34-27   Application forms, fees and incidental rules; appeals
   
34-28   Plan enforcement
   
34-29   Penalty
Article IV. Parkway Tree Management
   
34-30   Purpose
   
34-31   Definitions
   
34-32   Parkway tree authority
   
34-33   Parkway tree maintenance and management
   
34-34   Prohibited parkway trees
Article V. Tree Commission
   
34-35   Commission created
   
34-36   Commission membership
   
34-37   Terms of office
   
34-38   Removal and vacancy
   
34-39   Secretary
   
34-40   Meetings
   
34-41   Authority and duties
   
34-42   Depository
Charter reference:
   For charter provision as to power of village in connection with planting,
etc., trees along streets, etc., see char.,
art. IV, § 8
Cross-reference:
   As to powers and duties of director of public works in connection with trees
located in public streets, etc., see §
2-76
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 34-1 NUISANCE TREES, SHRUBS, AND WEEDS - DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (a)   All weeds; any tree or shrub overhanging any public sidewalk, street,
avenue, alley or any other public property so as to interfere with pedestrian
or vehicular traffic thereon or maintenance thereof: or any tree or shrub with
any dead branches, boughs or limbs located in such a position that the
branches, boughs or limbs could fall or be blown onto any adjacent public or
private property; which are found growing on any lot, block, tract or parcel of
land situated along any street or avenue in the village, or in any space
between the curb line and the sidewalk line of any such lot, block, tract or
parcel of land in the village, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (b)   Every owner or occupant of any house, building, lot or premises in the
village shall keep the shade, ornamental and other trees and shrubs situated on
his or her property and in parkways abutting his or her property, trimmed so
that trees and shrubs do not become weeds and nuisances as defined by this §
34-1 of the Glencoe village code.
(Ord. No. 79-25-1600; Ord. No. 2017-15-3423)
§ 34-2 SAME - NOTICE TO OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS; FAILURE TO OBEY NOTICE.
   Whenever any person whose duty it is to keep any tree trimmed or cut as
provided in the preceding section shall fail to do so, the village shall serve
notice or cause to be served upon such person notice requiring the same to be
done forthwith, and if such person shall fail to cause such trees to be trimmed
within ten days after the service of such notice, he or she shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such notice may be served by delivering
the same, or a copy thereof, to such owner or occupant, or by leaving the same
at his or her usual place of business or abode, and in case such owner is a
non-resident of the city, by posting such a notice in a conspicuous place upon
the lot on or in front of which such trees may be located.
§ 34-3 SAME - TRIMMING BY VILLAGE.
   In the event of the failure of an owner or occupant to trim or cause trees
and shrubs to be trimmed, as provided in §
34-1, within the time provided by the notice set out in the preceding section,
such trees may be trimmed by the village and the owner or occupant shall be
charged with all costs and expenses which may be incurred by the village in
trimming trees and shrubs, which costs and expenses shall be a lien on the real
property, if privately owned, on which the trees or shrubs which were trimmed
are located and shall be collected by the village by suit or otherwise in
addition to any fine or penalty imposed.
(Ord. No. 79-25-1600)
§ 34-4 PLANTING IN PUBLIC PLACES - PERMIT REQUIRED; APPROVAL OF LOCATION.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public place without
having secured a permit therefor from the village manager. The location of any
such tree or shrub shall be subject to the approval of the village manager.
(1929 Code, § 22a)
§ 34-5 SAME - CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any willow, poplar, aspen, cottonwood or other
species of tree listed on the not approved list in Appendix A of the Urban
Forestry Management Plan, as defined in § 34-31 of this chapter, in any public
place within the village.
(1929 Code, § 226a) (Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-6 HEIGHT OF PARKWAY SHRUBS.
   No shrub on a parkway shall be permitted to grow or remain at a greater
height than two and one-half feet from the ground; except, that shrubs planted
or maintained to screen a public parking lot from the street pavement may be
permitted to grow or remain at a height prescribed by the village manager, but
not greater than six feet from the ground.
(1929 Code, § 226a) (Ord. No. 67-1-1442, § 1)
§ 34-7 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.
   The board of trustees or the president of the village may appoint any
officer or other person to carry out the intent or purpose of this article, who
shall act under their specific direction or as he or she may be instructed
thereto by the village manager, and the village manager is hereby empowered to
carry out and execute the terms of this article and to aid him or her in
fulfilling the same he or she may require members of the police force or fire
department to assist him or her.
(1929 Code, § 229)
ARTICLE II. NUISANCE TREES
§ 34-8 NUISANCE TREES - GENERALLY.
   A tree which is determined by the village arborist, as defined in § 34-22 of
this chapter, to be a nuisance tree is one which is dead or declining and has
the potential to damage other trees, people, or structures. These trees may be
located on public or private property.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter declining means a tree that may provide
potential impacts to other trees, people or structures. This would include, but
not be limited to, diseased, infested or structurally unsound trees.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the property owner on any parcel to promptly
remove any trees which pose a risk.
   (c)   Infected, infested trees due to a pest or pathogen are defined as a
nuisance.
      (1)   Any tree which is in a state of irreparable or untreatable decline
due to heavy infestation or disease is included in the definition of a
nuisance. Infested or infected trees, which are identified by Federal or state
departments of agriculture to be in quarantine or can potentially infect or
infest other trees are defined as a nuisance. This would include but not be
limited to Ash (Fraxinus) trees infested with emerald ash borer which are not
being treated or whose treatment is ineffectual, or Elm trees (Ulmus) infected
with Dutch elm disease. Trees infected with Dutch elm disease or Emerald Ash
Borer shall be subject to the additional regulations set forth in § 34-9 of
this Code.
         A.   The village shall enforce state and federal regulations governing
quarantine zone boundaries, and regulated articles.
         B.   For the purposes of this section, "regulated articles" are hereby
defined as any insects at any living state of development, any materials such
as wood products including, but not limited to chips, limbs, lumber, firewood
or any other product or means of conveyance which may be determined by federal
or state departments of agriculture to pose a risk of spread of any infestation
or infection.
         C.   It shall be illegal to move out of established quarantine zone(s)
regulated articles unless those articles have met all requirements of the
local, federal and state regulatory agencies.
         D.   It shall be illegal for any person or entity to transfer from a
quarantine zone into a non-quarantine zone any regulated articles.
         E.   Any person or entity found to be in violation of any local, state
or federal regulations related to tree infestations or infections shall be
prosecuted to the full extent of the law.
         F.   All contractors working within and near any quarantine zone(s)
are required to comply with the quarantine regulations and supply records that
may be required for inspection to the village, county, state or federal
agencies upon request.
      (2)   Trees in decline or dead are defined as a nuisance:
         A.   Any tree or part of a tree which is dead which could potentially
fall on a person or structure is defined as a nuisance.
         B.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the
village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any tree which is dead,
or declining to the state where it may create a potential risk for structures
or people. It shall be the duty of any such owner to promptly cause the removal
of any such tree.
   (d)   Removal of public nuisances. Unless the owner initiates and maintains
a treatment program overseen by a licensed arborist and approved by the village
arborist, the village manager or his/her designee, shall give to the owner of
the real estate where the public nuisances described in this section are found
a written notice of the existence of such nuisance and requiring the removal of
the same within 30 days following such notice, such removal to be done under
the direction and supervision of the village manager or his/her designee. The
notice shall also notify the owner of the real estate that, unless such
nuisance is removed in compliance with the terms thereof within such 30-day
period, the village will proceed with the removal of such nuisance, and assess
the cost thereof against the owner.
   (e)   Duty of owner to remove diseased or dead tree or breeding place. Upon
receipt of notice, it shall become the duty of the owner of the real estate to
cause such tree or breeding place to be removed under the supervision of the
village manager, or his/her designated representative. In lieu thereof, the
person charged with such removal may request in writing that the same be done
by the village manager, or his/her designated representative. If the village
shall remove any tree or breeding place, all costs incurred in connection
therewith shall be assessed against and paid by such owner.
   (f)   Enforcement. The village manager or his/her designee, is charged with
the enforcement of this section. When the village manager is unable to effect
voluntary entry onto private real estate for the purpose of inspecting the
trees thereon, the village manager shall seek the necessary authorization to
make or cause entry to be made onto the real estate.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the general provisions of §§ 34-8 through 34-19, Dutch
Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer nuisance trees are subject to the additional
requirements set forth in § 34-20.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-9 RESERVED.
§ 34-10 KEEPING INFECTED, ETC., TREES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning property whereon any tree such as
is mentioned in the two preceding sections is situated to possess or keep the
same.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 2)
§ 34-11 NOTICES TO REMOVE, ETC., NUISANCES - BY WHOM GIVEN; FORM AND SUBSTANCE.
   The village manager or his or her representative shall give to the owner of
property, where a public nuisance described in §§ § 34-8, 34-9 or 34-10 is
found notice of the existence of such nuisance, requiring the removal of the
same within 30 days following such notice. Such notice shall also notify the
owner that unless such nuisance is removed in compliance with the terms thereof
within such 30-day period, the village will proceed with the removal of such
nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such property owner. Notice shall
include a copy of this article and the applicable provision of the Illinois
Municipal Code and shall identify the property by common description and the
tree or trees affected.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 4; Ord. No. 77-11-1553, § 1; Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-12 SAME - MANNER OF SERVICE.
   Notice referred to in §
34-11 shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on
the property upon which the tree or trees affected is or are located, and a
copy of the notice shall be mailed to the occupant of such property.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 5; Ord. No. 75-5-1526; 77-11-1553; § 1)
§ 34-13 DUTY TO REMOVE, ETC., NUISANCE AFTER NOTICE - GENERALLY.
   Upon service of notice pursuant to the preceding section being completed, it
shall become the duty of the person to serve, within 30 days from such service,
to cause such tree or breeding place to be removed.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 6; Ord. No. 77-11-1553, § 1)
§ 34-14 RESERVED.
§ 34-15 COSTS OF REMOVAL, ETC., OF NUISANCE BY VILLAGE.
   If the village shall remove any tree or breeding place pursuant to this
article, all expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be assessed
against the property owner from whose property the same was removed.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 6; Ord. No. 77-11-1553, § 1)
§ 34-16 NUISANCES ON VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY.
   Trees on village-owned property constituting nuisances under this article
shall be removed at the expense of the village.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 7)
Cross-reference:
   As to nuisances generally, see §§
24-38,
24-39
§ 34-17 ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE - GENERALLY.
   The village manager shall enforce this article.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 3)
§ 34-18 SAME - RIGHT OF ENTRY, ETC.
   In the enforcement of this article, the village manager may enter upon
private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees
thereon, and may remove such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis
to determine whether or not the same are infected. When the village manager is
unable to effect voluntary entry onto private real estate for the purpose of
inspecting the trees thereon, the village manager shall seek the necessary
authorization to make or cause entry to be made onto the real estate.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 3; Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-19 SAME - HINDERING ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the village manager or his or
her representative from entering on private property for purposes of carrying
out his or her duties under this article, or to interfere with the village
manager or his or her representative in the lawful performance of his or her
duties under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1344, § 3)
§ 34-20 DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND EMERALD ASH BORER.
   (a)   Incorporation of certain provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code.
For purposes of implementing and enforcing the applicable provisions of the
Illinois municipal code, as amended, that relate to property maintenance,
removal of nuisances and filing and enforcing liens for associated removal
costs, the village incorporates by reference the following provisions and all
updates and amendments: division 2 (ordinances) of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 et seq.), including, but not limited to, §§ 11-20-7, 11-20-11,
11-20-12, 11-20-15 and 11-20-15.1. Any conflict between this code and the
incorporated provisions of the Illinois municipal code, as amended, shall be
resolved by following the state law provisions.
   (b)   Nuisance. All species and varieties of elm trees (Ulmus and Zelkova)
infected with Dutch elm disease (the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi), as
determined, when an owner is directed by the village arborist to do so, by
laboratory analysis or another method of analysis approved by the village
arborist and paid for by the owner, are declared to be a public nuisance, and
shall be removed within 30 days following notification of the discovery of such
infection. The results of the analysis shall be given to the village arborist
within seven days of the owner's receipt of the results. All other similarly
infected trees are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed within
30 days following notification of the discovery of such infection, unless the
tree is placed in or is being actively treated under a nationally recognized
treatment program overseen by a licensed arborist hired by the owner and
approved by the village arborist. It shall be unlawful for the owner of real
estate where such a tree is situated to possess or keep such a tree, after the
expiration of 30 days following notification issued by the village of the
discovery of said infection, unless the owner initiates and maintains a
treatment program overseen by a licensed arborist and approved by the village
arborist. See 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(c) for definition of "treatment".
   (c)   Elm Bark Beetle breeding places. Trees or parts thereof of Ulmus (elm)
or Zelkova in a dead or dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for
the European elm bark beetle, Scolytus multistriatus, are declared to be a
public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of real estate where
the tree is situated to possess or keep the same.
   (d)   Emerald Ash Borer. Trees of all species and varieties of ash trees
(Fraxinus) infected with the emerald ash borer beetle (Agrilus planipennis
Fairmaire) that are dead or have lost at least 50% of their crown, as
determined by the village arborist, shall be declared to be a public nuisance
and shall be removed within 30 days following notification of the discovery of
such infection. All other similarly infected trees are declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be removed within 30 days following notification of the
discovery of such infection, unless the tree is placed in or is being actively
treated under a nationally recognized treatment program overseen by a licensed
arborist hired by the owner and approved by the village arborist. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of real estate where such a tree is situated to possess
or keep such a tree after the expiration of 30 days following notification of
the discovery of said infection by the village, unless the owner initiates and
maintains a treatment program overseen by a licensed arborist and approved by
the village arborist. See 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(c) for the definition of
"treatment".
   (e)   Enforcement and removal. The provisions of §§
34-8 through
34-19 apply to the enforcement and removal of trees under this section.
   (f)   Lien. Notice of the lien claim for removal activities performed to
abate the nuisances under this section shall be mailed by the village manager,
or his/her designated representatives, to the owner and occupant of the real
estate whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days after it has
been rendered. The failure of the village manager, or his/her designated
representatives, to record such lien claim or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills for removal activities as provided herein.
This lien upon the real estate is superior to all other liens and encumbrances,
except tax liens and as otherwise provided by state law; provided that notice
has been given as herein described, and further provided that within one year
after such removal costs are incurred the village, or person performing the
service by authority of the village, in his/her or its own name, files notice
of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County. The notice shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, including the identification of the real
estate by common description; 2) a description of the removal activities; 3)
the amount of money representing the removal costs; 4) the date or dates when
such removal costs were incurred by the village; and 5) a statement that the
lien has been filed pursuant to applicable provisions of this code and the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, 11-20-8(d), 11-20-12(d), 11-20-13(e), 11-20-
15, 11-20-15.1 or 11-31-1.01, as applicable.
   (g)   Service of notice. Prior to filing the lien, the following notice
shall be personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person whom
was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the real estate for the last
preceding year. The notice shall be delivered or sent after the removal
activities have been performed. The notice shall: 1) state the substance of 65
ILCS 5/11-20-12 and 5/11-20-15 and the substance of any ordinance implementing
those laws; 2) identify the real estate at issue by common description; and 3)
describe the removal activities. See 65 ILCS 11-20-7 and 11-20-15.
   (h)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the removal costs, the lien filing
fees and the release filing fees by the owner of or persons interested in such
real estate, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by
the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may
be filed of record as in the case of filing the notice of lien. See 65 ILCS 5/
11-20-15(h) or 11-20-15.1(e).
   (i)   Trees partly on private real estate and partly on public real estate.
Dutch elm diseased trees and Emerald Ash borer infested trees, the trunks of
which, in the opinion of the village manager, or his/her designated
representative, are partly on village owned real estate and partly on privately
owned real estate, shall be removed by the village. The cost of such tree
removal shall be shared equally by the village and the owner of record of the
privately owned real estate. In the event that the owner of the privately owned
real estate, upon notice from the village, fails to pay one-half of said cost
within 30 days, then the village shall pay the entire cost of the tree removal
and shall have the right to collect from the owner one-half of the cost by lien
or suit for judgment. The cost shall be a lien upon the real estate, provided
that notice is given to the owner prior to 30 days before the tree removal and
a notice of lien is recorded in the recorder's office within 60 days after the
removal costs are incurred, as provided by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12. For purposes of
this section, the village property line shall be deemed to be 33 feet from the
centerline of each street, except in those instances where a street may be more
than 66 fet in width, in which case the village engineer, or his/her designated
representative, shall determine the location of the property line. In the sole
discretion of the village manager, or his/her designated representative, the
village may agree to place the tree in a nationally recognized treatment
program overseen by a licensed arborist hired by the owner and approved by the
village arborist. The village and the private owner shall share equally the
costs of such treatment program.
   (j)   Village to remove its own trees. Unless the tree is placed in or is
being actively treated under a nationally recognized treatment program overseen
by the village arborist, infected trees on village owned real estate and on
public streets and highways within the corporate limits shall be removed at the
expense of the village.
   (k)   Abandoned residential property; removal; lien. For nuisance trees
removed from properties qualifying as abandoned under § 11-20-15.1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1), the village may impose liens in
accordance with the processes set forth in § 5/11-20-12(d) and 11-20-15.1 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d); 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1), as
amended.
   (l)   Foreclosure of lien. Liens imposed pursuant to this section may be
foreclosed on in accordance with the processes set forth in § 11-20-15.1(d) of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1(d)), as amended.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
ARTICLE III. TREE PRESERVATION
Division 1. General
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092)
§ 34-21 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and enhance the forested
character and natural resources of the village. The village finds that the
presence of trees in the village improves air quality, conserves energy,
provides wildlife habitat, reduces soil erosion, enhances storm water detention
and drainage and preserves and enhances property values in the village and its
environs. The policy of the village is to balance the private property rights
of landowners with the public health, safety and welfare that is promoted by
the existence and maintenance of trees in the village.
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092)
§ 34-22 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   When used in this article, the following terms shall have the
following definitions.
      APPLICANT. The owner or representative of an owner of a lot, parcel or
tract on which a tree impact activity is sought.
      CALIPER. The diameter of a tree when measured at six inches above grade.
      CUTTING. The felling or removal of a tree, or any other procedure that is
likely to cause the death of, or material damage or substantial injury to, a
tree. CUTTING does not include normal pruning or trimming of trees.
      DESTROY or DESTRUCTION. The actual physical removal, or the effective
removal, of a tree through damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect
action resulting in or likely to result in the death of a tree.
      DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of a tree when measured at
54 inches above grade.
      DRIP LINE. An artificial line along the ground that conforms to the
perimeter of the crown of a tree and projects vertically to the ground.
      HERITAGE TREE. Any tree of the American elm, American linden, black
walnut, buckeye, catalpa, gingko, hackberry, hickory, ironwood, maple (except
Norway maple or silver maple), oak, osage orange, sycamore or white pine
varieties.
(Ord. No. 2009-11-3244)
      PRIORITY TREE.
         A.   Any tree qualifying in any of the following categories, which
categories are ranked in order of priority.
            1.   PRIORITY I TREE. Any tree located on any village-owned
property, including without limitation parkway and other right-of-way areas.
            2.   PRIORITY II TREE. Any tree on a lot located within a front or
corner side yard of such lot and having a DBH of eight inches or more.
(Ord. No. 2005-11-3131)
            3.   PRIORITY III TREE. Any tree on a lot located outside of the
front or corner side yard of such lot and having a DBH of eight inches or more.
(Ord. No. 2005-11-3131)
         B.   Any tree qualifying for more than one category of priority trees
shall be included in the higher priority category for purposes of this article.
      REMOVABLE TREE. Any priority tree of the box elder, buckthorn,
cottonwood, poplar or willow varieties, as well as any dead, diseased or
hazardous trees (as determined by the village arborist).
      REPLACEMENT TREE. A tree installed pursuant to a tree permit to replace a
priority tree that an applicant has been authorized to cut or destroy.
      TOPPING. The act of removing or shearing off the top of a tree.
      TREE IMPACT ACTIVITY. Any activity that will or is likely to involve or
result in:
         A.   The subdivision of any lot, parcel or tract of land in the
village;
         B.   Any work on a lot for which a building permit is required (unless
such building permit is limited exclusively to interior work on existing
building space); or
         C.   The cutting or destruction of a priority tree or taking actions
that will likely result in the cutting or destruction of a priority tree.
      VILLAGE ARBORIST. An employee or consultant of the village designated by
the director of public works who is trained or skilled in the diagnosis of the
condition of shade trees, ornamental trees and/or shrubs and their treatment.
There may at any time be more than one village arborist.
   (b)   Any term used in this article that is not defined in this section, but
that is defined in the Glencoe zoning code, shall have the meaning ascribed to
it by the zoning code.
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092; Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
Division 2. Tree Permit Procedures
§ 34-23 TREE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person that proposes to undertake any tree impact activity shall be
required to obtain a tree permit from the village arborist prior to the
approval or commencement of any tree impact activity. A tree permit is not
required for pruning, trimming or other similar tree maintenance activities.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-24 TREE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (a)   Any applicant for a tree permit shall submit an application on a form
prescribed by the village arborist as well as a plan (the "priority tree plan")
that:
      (1)   Identifies all priority trees on the lot, parcel or tract,
including their location, size (in DBH), species and condition;
      (2)   Indicates the nature and extent of the tree impact activity that is
proposed to occur within or likely to interfere with the drip line of any
priority tree; and
      (3)   Sets forth in detail the measures to be undertaken to protect any
priority tree (but not any removable trees) on the lot, parcel or tract.
   (b)   The village arborist may allow the priority tree plan to be combined
with any other material that may be required in connection with the activity
giving rise to the tree permit requirement. In addition, the village arborist
may require an applicant to submit such supplemental information that may
reasonably be necessary to conduct a complete review of the application
pursuant to this article.
§ 34-25 REVIEW OF TREE PERMIT APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE OF TREE PERMITS.
   (a)   The village arborist shall review each priority tree plan to
determine:
      (1)   Whether such plan will likely result in the cutting or destruction
of any priority tree;
      (2)   Whether such plan minimizes the destruction to or cutting of
priority trees; and
      (3)   Whether such plan provides adequate protection of each priority
tree.
   (b)   If the village arborist determines that a priority tree plan will
neither destroy nor cut any priority tree and will provide adequate protection
of all priority trees, then the arborist shall issue a tree permit, and the
applicant shall be entitled to proceed with the tree impact activity, subject
to satisfaction of any other permitting or other requirements of law relating
to such activity.
   (c)   If the village arborist determines that a priority tree plan will
likely result in the cutting or destruction of any priority tree, the arborist
shall first consult with the applicant to modify the tree impact activity or to
take other or additional action to avoid or minimize such cutting or
destruction. If such consultation results in modifications or additional
actions that avoid or minimize the cutting or destruction of priority trees,
the village arborist shall issue a tree permit, and the applicant shall be
entitled to proceed with the tree impact activity, subject to satisfaction of
any other permitting or other requirements of law relating to such activity.
   (d)   If the village arborist determines that a priority tree plan will
likely result in the cutting or destruction of any priority tree, and the
arborist's consultation with the applicant does not result in modifications or
additional actions that avoid or minimize the cutting or destruction of
priority trees, then:
      (1)   Priority I trees. For each priority I tree, the village arborist
shall determine whether the cutting or destruction of the priority I tree can
be avoided by a reasonable modification to the tree impact activity. If so, the
village arborist shall issue the tree permit subject to such modifications. If
the village arborist determines that no such modification will avoid the
cutting or destruction of the priority I tree, and that absent such cutting or
destruction of a priority I tree the applicant cannot make reasonable use of
the applicant's lot, parcel or tract, then the applicant shall receive a tree
permit subject to satisfying the tree replacement condition prescribed in the
tree permit;
      (2)   Priority II trees. No priority II tree shall be cut or destroyed
unless the applicant demonstrates that such cutting or destruction is necessary
to accomplish the tree impact activity (other than the cutting or destruction
of a priority tree), and no reasonable alternatives exist to effect the tree
impact activity without such cutting or destruction. Upon demonstrating the
necessity of such cutting or destruction, the applicant shall receive a tree
permit, subject to satisfying the tree replacement condition prescribed in the
tree permit; and
      (3)   Priority III trees. If the cutting or destruction of a priority III
tree is desired, the applicant shall receive a tree permit, subject to
satisfying the tree replacement condition prescribed in the tree permit.
   (e)   When issuing a tree permit, the village arborist may establish such
conditions as may be necessary or appropriate to achieve the purposes of this
article, including without limitation the installation of fencing to protect
the drip line of any priority tree. Any applicant receiving a tree permit shall
be required to comply strictly with the terms and conditions of such tree
permit, including the priority tree plan, at the applicant's sole cost and
expense.
   (f)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, to the
extent a tree permit is sought for a removable tree, the village arborist shall
issue the tree permit without any tree replacement obligation.
   (g)   Topping prohibited. It is recognized that topping immediately injures
the tree, exposes a tree to decay, and permits invasion from insects and
disease. In addition, the loss of foliage starves the tree, weakening the
roots, and reducing the tree's structural strength.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-26 TREE REPLACEMENT STANDARDS.
   (a)   Whenever a tree permit is subject to a tree replacement obligation due
to the cutting or destruction of a priority tree, the village arborist shall
determine what the tree replacement obligation shall be, which obligation shall
be based on the type of priority tree affected and subject to the following
terms.
      (1)   Priority I trees.
         A.   If the affected priority I tree has a DBH of four and one-half
inches or less, the village arborist may require the applicant to relocate such
tree elsewhere on the parkway serving applicant's lot, parcel or tract.
         B.   If the affected priority I tree has a DBH in excess of four and
one-half inches or the village arborist determines that relocation is not
desirable or feasible, the village arborist may require the applicant to pay a
tree replacement fee to the village for the installation of a replacement tree
on any parkway or right-of-way in the village. The village manager shall
establish a reasonable tree replacement fee on an annual basis, based on the
village's cost per inch of a tree with a DBH of three inches. The required tree
replacement fee shall then be calculated by multiplying the DBH inches of the
priority tree that is removed times the tree replacement fee established by the
village manager, except that the tree replacement fee is doubled if the removed
priority tree is a heritage tree that has a DBH of eight inches or more.
(Ord. No. 2005-11-3131; Ord. No. 2009-11-3244)
      (2)   Priority II and III trees.
         A.   The village arborist may require the applicant to install a
replacement tree(s) at a specific location on the applicant's lot, parcel or
tract; provided, however, that no replacement tree(s) shall be installed within
25 feet of any existing tree.
         B.   If the applicant's lot, parcel or tract does not have a suitable
location to install a replacement tree(s), the village arborist may require the
applicant to pay a tree replacement fee to the village for installation upon
the parkway within the same or adjacent block as the applicant's lot, parcel or
tract. The village manager shall establish a reasonable tree replacement fee on
an annual basis, based on the village's cost per inch of a tree with a DBH of
three inches. The required tree replacement fee shall then be calculated by
multiplying the DBH inches of the priority tree that is removed times the tree
replacement fee established by the village manager, except that the tree
replacement fee is doubled if the removed priority tree is a heritage tree that
has a DBH of eight inches or more.
(Ord. No.2005-11-3131; Ord. No. 2009-11-3244)
      (3)   Waiver. If the village arborist determines that:
         A.   There is no suitable location for installing a replacement tree
(s) on the applicant's lot, parcel or tract; and
         B.   The removal of the priority tree will enhance the conditions for
other trees on such lot, parcel or tract, the village arborist may waive the
requirement to provide for a replacement tree(s).
   (b)   Whenever the village arborist requires an applicant to install a
replacement tree on the applicant's lot, parcel or tract as a condition of a
tree permit, such replacement tree shall have a caliper of no less than three
inches. The village arborist may prescribe the species of replacement tree,
provided that such species is one of the species authorized for installation
pursuant to the village's parkway tree program. In addition, an applicant shall
be required to replace any replacement tree that does not survive the second
anniversary of its installation. If a heritage tree is removed and replaced
with a heritage tree(s), the replacement tree(s) must measure one caliper inch
for each DBH inch of the removed heritage tree. If a heritage tree is removed
and replaced with a tree(s) that is not a heritage tree(s), the replacement
tree must measure two caliper inches for each DBH inch of the removed heritage
tree.
(Ord. No. 2000-10-2092; Ord. No. 2009-11-3244)
Division 3. Administration and Enforcement
§ 34-27 APPLICATION FORMS, FEES AND INCIDENTAL RULES; APPEALS.
   (a)   The village manager is hereby authorized to establish any incidental
rules or regulations that may be necessary to implement the provisions of this
article, including the preparation of application, permit or other forms. There
shall be no fee charged in connection with the issuance of or application for a
tree permit.
   (b)   In the event that an applicant objects to a determination of the
village arborist in connection with a tree permit or tree permit application
under this article, an applicant may appeal such determination of the village
arborist by filing a written appeal with the village manager within ten days
after the arborist's determination. The appeal shall set forth with
particularity the aspect or aspects of the arborist's determination from which
the appeal is sought and the basis on which the applicant believes the
arborist's determination was inconsistent with the standards of this article.
The village manager shall, after reviewing such written appeal and making such
investigations as the manager deems necessary or appropriate, render a written
decision on the appeal, which decision shall either affirm, reverse or modify
the determination of the village arborist. The decision of the village manager
shall be final.
§ 34-28 PLAN ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   The village shall have the authority to stop any tree impact activity
unless a tree permit has been issued therefor. Also, any tree impact activity
that is not undertaken in strict conformity with the terms and conditions of a
tree permit shall be subject to a stop work order until full compliance with
such plan has been achieved, in addition to other penalties authorized in this
article.
   (b)   (1)   Upon determination by the village manager that a tree impact
activity has been undertaken in a manner inconsistent with the terms of a tree
permit or a priority tree plan, the village manager may require that a security
deposit be filed with the village to secure the costs of removal and
replacement of any priority tree that is or becomes damaged or fails to
survive.
      (2)   The amount of the security deposit shall be determined by
calculating:
         A.   The value of the priority tree, based on the tree replacement fee
formula set forth in §
34-26 of this code; and
         B.   The cost of removing the dead or damaged priority tree from the
lot.
      (3)   The security deposit shall be in a form acceptable to the village
manager, and shall be valid for a period of two years from the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
      (4)   The village manager may draw from the security deposit where the
village manager has determined that a priority tree has been damaged or failed
to survive as a result of the tree impact activity.
      (5)   The security deposit may be used for the costs of removing the
damaged or dead priority tree and replacing the priority tree.
(Ord. No. 2005-11-3131)
§ 34-29 PENALTY.
   (a)   (1)   The cutting, topping or destruction of any priority tree without
a tree permit shall:
         A.   Result in a fine as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee
and Fine Schedule for each priority tree cut, topped or destroyed; and
         B.   Require immediate compliance with this article, including without
limitation application for and issuance of a tree permit pursuant to §§
34-23 through
34-25 of this code and installation of replacement trees or payment of the tree
replacement fee pursuant to §
34-26 of this code.
      (2)   The cutting, topping or destruction of each priority tree shall be
a separate violation, and each day that such violation continues and compliance
with this article has not been met shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 2005-11-3131; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
   (b)   Any other violation of this article shall result in a fine as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule for each offense.
Each day that a condition continues in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (c)   In the event that any person undertakes any cutting or destruction of
a priority tree without a permit due to emergency circumstances, the village
arborist shall have the authority to waive any penalty or to issue a tree
permit after the fact of such cutting or destruction.
ARTICLE IV. PARKWAY TREE MANAGEMENT
§ 34-30 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to define the scope of protection,
preservation, management, removals, care and pruning, selection, and planting
requirements of parkway trees in the Village of Glencoe. It is recognized that
parkway trees are integral to the urban forest canopy and an important asset to
the village. Parkway trees are a vital and valuable part of the village's
infrastructure.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-31 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
definitions.
   PARKWAY TREE. Any tree that is located on the public right-of-way, typically
between the edge of curb/pavement and the private property line.
   URBAN FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN. A plan that was completed in 2022 that
describes best practices for managing trees in the village, as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-32 PARKWAY TREE AUTHORITY.
   The Village of Glencoe, through its public works department, shall have sole
authority to manage, maintain, remove, and plant all parkway trees.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-33 PARKWAY TREE MAINTENANCE AND MANAGEMENT.
   The Urban Forestry Management Plan is hereby adopted by reference for the
purpose of guiding the village's planting, care, pruning, and general
management of parkway trees.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-34 PROHIBITED PARKWAY TREES.
   Trees listed on the not approved list in Appendix A of the Urban Forestry
Management Plan shall not be used as parkway trees.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
ARTICLE V. TREE COMMISSION
§ 34-35 COMMISSION CREATED.
   There is hereby created the tree commission of the Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-36 COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.
   The commission shall consist of three members, one of whom is a village
trustee, who must be residents of the village appointed by the village
president and approved by the board of trustees. The president shall appoint
one commissioner as chairperson and a second commissioner as vice chairperson.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-37 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office for commissioners shall be five years. Initially, the
chairperson shall be appointed for a term of five years, the vice chairperson
shall be appointed for a term of four years, and the remaining commissioner
shall be appointed for an initial term of three years, respectively; thereafter
such commissioners or their successors shall be appointed for a term of five
years as herein provided for the appointment and approval of such
commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-38 REMOVAL AND VACANCY.
   The board of trustees shall have the power to remove any commissioner for
cause. Vacancies in the commission shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the manner herein provided for the appointment and approval
of a commissioner.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-39 SECRETARY.
   The village manager shall designate a staff secretary of the commission, who
shall attend all meetings and perform all administrative and recordkeeping
duties of the commission.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-40 MEETINGS.
   (a)   Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established
by resolution of the commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at
any time upon the call of the chairperson. There shall be a minimum of two
meetings per year.
   (b)   A quorum shall consist of two commissioners. A concurring vote of a
majority of those members present and constituting a quorum is necessary to
render a decision on any matter upon which the commission is authorized to act.
   (c)   The chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the commission. In
the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume the duties
and responsibilities of the chair.
   (d)   All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings
Act of the State of Illinois.
   (e)   No member of the commission shall vote on any matter involving any
property in which such commissioner has a legal or beneficial ownership
interest or any other matter where such commissioner's interest would violate
any provision of the Glencoe Village Code, the Illinois Municipal Code or any
other law.
   (f)   The commission may adopt its own rules of procedures. In the absence
of such rules, the commission shall conduct its business, as nearly as
practicable, in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
   (g)   The commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-41 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   Subject to the laws of the State of Illinois, the Glencoe Village Code and
any other ordinances and resolutions of the village, the commission shall have
and may exercise the authority and duties herein described:
   (a)   To provide guidance on the preservation, care, management and
protection of trees within the village in accordance with the urban forestry
management plan, regional and local best management practices.
   (b)   To prepare and recommend to the village board from time-to-time
recommendations for specific improvements of the preservation, care, management
and protection of trees within the village.
   (c)   To recommend rules and regulations to the village board for budget,
plans, projects and schedules regarding the preservation, care, management and
protection of trees within the village.
   (d)   To review the village urban forest management plan and provide
recommendations for improvements to the village board.
   (e)   To work collaboratively with village staff to support the village
ordinances and urban forest management plan.
   (f)   Manage and administer all plans, programs, projects and tasks
delegated to it by the village board as authorized and directed by the village
board.
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
§ 34-42 DEPOSITORY.
   The office of the village clerk shall be the depository for all
applications, maps, reports, records of proceedings, decisions and other
materials created by and in conjunction with the commission. These tree
preservation materials shall be made available to the public."
(Ord. No. 2022-12-3532, § 2)
CHAPTER 34A: UNCOLLECTED DEBTS GENERALLY
Section
Article I. In General
   
34A-1   Purpose
   
34A-2   Applicability
   
34A-3   Cumulative remedy; no waiver
Article II. Enforcement Procedures
   
34A-4   First notice; late payment penalty
   
34A-5   Reserved
   
34A-6   Final notice
   
34A-7   Review procedure
   
34A-8   Termination of service; revocation of permits, etc.
   
34A-9   Imposition of liens
   
34A-10   Foreclosure of liens
   
34A-11   Use of collection services
   
34A-12   Other remedies
   
34A-13   Deposit in funds
Article III. Separability; Effective Date
   
34A-14   Separability
   
34A-15   Effective date
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 34A-1 PURPOSE.
   It is intended that this chapter establish standardized and uniform
collection enforcement procedures for all monies due to the village.
(Ord. No. 79-12-1587)
§ 34A-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter establishes standardized collection enforcement procedures for
monies due to the village under any provisions of the village code or any
provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
(Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 34A-3 CUMULATIVE REMEDY; NO WAIVER.
   (a)   The enforcement procedures set forth in this chapter shall be
cumulative with, and alternative to, any applicable procedures provided in any
administrative regulations or provisions of the village, any other provision of
this code, or any state statute. To the extent that procedures and remedies
provided in this chapter and in any administrative regulations or provisions of
the village, other provisions of the code and state statutes are not
inconsistent, they may be enforced simultaneously.
   (b)   Where procedures established in this chapter are inconsistent with
procedures established by any administrative regulations or provisions of the
village, other provisions of this code or state statutes, the village may,
except where limited by law, elect which procedure it will employ, based solely
on a criterion of selecting the most efficient and effective procedure,
considering the facts and circumstances involved in each particular case.
   (c)   The failure of the village to follow the procedures in any section of
this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of its rights to proceed under
administrative regulations and provisions of the village, other provisions of
this chapter, this code or applicable state statutes.
ARTICLE II. ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
§ 34A-4 FIRST NOTICE; LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
   (a)   If, at the end of 30 days after any monies, as provided in §
34A-2, due to the village have not been received, the village clerk or the
clerk's designee shall serve a "first notice" upon the person owing the money,
by first class mail. Service is effective on the date the first notice was
mailed. The notice shall advise the person that it is the "first notice"
pursuant to
chapter 34A of the Glencoe village code, and it shall include a copy of the
unpaid bill(s) revised to include a 10% late payment penalty. The notice shall
also advise the person of administrative procedures for contesting the bill,
including procedures for requesting an informal hearing.
   (b)   This requirement for a first notice shall be deemed satisfied with
respect to water and rubbish bills by service of a "reminder notice" pursuant
to the administrative regulations of the Glencoe department of public works.
§ 34A-5 RESERVED.
§ 34A-6 FINAL NOTICE.
   (a)   In the event any monies owing to the village are not paid within 30
days following service of the first notice pursuant to this section, the
village clerk or the clerk’s designee shall serve a “final notice” by first
class mail.
   (b)   Service shall be effective on the date the final notice was mailed.
   (c)   The notice shall advise the person that it is the “final notice” under
chapter 34A of the Glencoe village code, shall describe the amount due and for
what it is owed.
   (d)   The notice shall advise the person that, if the bill remains unpaid,
then:
      (1)   Service may be terminated;
      (2)   A lien may be imposed upon the property to which the service was
provided;
      (3)   The amount owed may be submitted to a collection agency; and
      (4)   The date after which such termination, lien filing or collection
agency referral may occur.
   (e)   The final notice also shall advise the person of administrative
procedures available for contesting the bill, including a description of the
review procedure included in §
34A-7 of this chapter.
   (f)   The costs of serving such notice and all subsequent costs of
collection (including, without limitation, reasonable attorney’s fees) shall be
deemed to be, and shall be treated as, an additional fee due and owing the
village for the goods, service, permit or license which gave rise to the
initial debt.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253; Ord. No. 10-13-3271; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 34A-7 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   At any time after receiving a first notice pursuant to §
34A-4, the person affected may question the bill and request that the bill be
reviewed. A request for review under this section shall be filed in writing
with the village clerk no later than 15 days after a final notice as provided
in §
34A-6. Following receipt of a request, the village clerk or the clerk's
designee shall refer the person to the appropriate village employee with
authority to resolve the dispute. After receiving a review request, the
appropriate village employee shall invite the person affected to submit
documentation supporting any claim that the original bill was not correct.
Whoever shall conduct the review shall be called the "review officer," and
shall conduct the review in a disinterested and unbiased manner. The review
process is designed to obtain all information and evidence relevant to the
billing and money owed, and the dispute concerning it. After review is
completed, the review officer shall make written findings of fact and a written
determination, and shall send a copy of the decision to the person liable for
the bill or money via personal service or United States mail. In the case of a
landlord, such decision shall also be sent via personal service or United
States mail to all of the landlord's tenants residing on the property which may
be affected by a termination of services as a result of the decision pursuant
to §
34A-7.
(Ord. No. 10-11-3271; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 34A-8 TERMINATION OF SERVICE; REVOCATION OF PERMITS, ETC.
   (a)   If, at the end of 15 days after a final notice was served pursuant to
§
34A-6, no review has been requested and the monies which were the subject of
the final notice have not been paid in full, the appropriate village authority
shall terminate or revoke, or initiate any other applicable provisions or
procedures appropriate for terminating or revoking, any village service,
license or permit for which the monies are owing without further notice.
   (b)   If:
      (1)   A review has been requested pursuant to §
34A-7;
      (2)   A decision has been rendered by the review officer finding any
monies to be owing to the village; and
      (3)   The monies have not been paid in full within seven days following
mailing of the review officer's decision, then the appropriate village
authority shall terminate or revoke, or initiate any other applicable
provisions or procedures appropriate for terminating or revoking, any village
service, license or permit, for which the monies are owing without further
notice.
§ 34A-9 IMPOSITION OF LIENS.
   (a)   If, at the end of 30 days after a final notice is served pursuant to §
34A-6, no hearing has been requested and any monies that were the subject of
the final notice have not been paid in full, the village manager may file, with
the Recorder of Deeds of the county, a statement of lien claim, wherever
authorized by statute. The statement of lien claim shall contain the legal
description of the subject premises, the amount and due date of the unpaid bill
or fee, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as
for any charges incurred for the same village service provided subsequent to
the period covered by the bill or fee and for costs of collection, in
accordance with §
34A-6.
   (b)   Where a review pursuant to §
34A-7 results in a finding that the person owes any monies to the village and
such monies have not been paid in full within 21 days after the decision
rendered pursuant to §
34A-7 has been send as required, the village manager may file a statement of
lien claim as described above.
   (c)   Notice of the lien shall be mailed to the party owing the monies to
the village under this section. If the party owing the monies due to the
village under this section is not the owner of the premises, and the village
manager has notice of the fact, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his or her address be known to the village manager, or to the
address where the last tax bill for the property was sent if the address is not
known. The manager shall also mail a notice to any other person as may be
required by statute.
   (d)   Any failure of the village manager in recording such lien claim or in
sending such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall
not affect the right to foreclose for lien as provided in the following
section, or the right of the village to pursue any other rights or remedies it
may have available to it.
§ 34A-10 FORECLOSURE OF LIENS.
   If, at the end of 30 days after a notice of lien is mailed pursuant to §
34A-9, any monies which were the subject of the lien have not been received,
the village attorney shall, upon direction of the village manager, institute
proceedings in the name of the village to foreclose any lien claims filed by
the village pursuant to §
34A-9. Such proceedings shall be in accordance with any specifically applicable
state statutes or, if none exist, in accordance with the procedures generally
applicable to the foreclosure of statutory liens. The proceeds of the sale
shall be applied to pay the bills, charges, fees or other debt which gave rise
to the lien, after deducting costs, as in the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens.
§ 34A-11 USE OF COLLECTION SERVICES.
   In addition or as an alternative to imposition of lien, as provided for in §
34A-9, the village clerk or the clerk’s designee may use a professional
collection service or a collection service operated by a federal, state, or
local government or agency, including without limitation the Illinois State
Comptroller's Local Debt Recovery Program, to collect any unpaid debt included
in the village code.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253; Ord. No. 2016-12-3402)
§ 34A-12 OTHER REMEDIES.
   The board of trustees may, in addition to the remedies hereinabove provided,
direct the village manager and village attorney to take any and all additional
actions which may be available to enforce payment of monies due the village.
§ 34A-13 DEPOSIT IN FUNDS.
   Monies recovered shall be placed in the appropriate special fund, if any.
Otherwise, such monies shall be deposited in the general fund.
ARTICLE III. SEPARABILITY; EFFECTIVE DATE
§ 34A-14 SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
§ 34A-15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be effective as to monies which become due to be paid to
the village since January 1, 2009. Individuals with monies already 30 days past
due upon the passage and due publication of this ordinance will receive a
duplicate copy of the initial invoice with an additional 30 days to pay prior
to any penalty being applied or enforcement procedures being performed.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
CHAPTER 35: UNDERTAKERS
Section
   
35-1   License - required
   
35-2   Same - application; qualifications of applicant
   
35-3   Same - issuance; revocation
   
35-4   Same - fee
   
35-5   Same - surrender
   
35-6   Requirement for establishments
Statutory reference:
   As to funeral directors and embalmers generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat., ch.
111 ½, § 73.1 et seq.
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate undertaking
establishments, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-22-1
§ 35-1 LICENSE - REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an undertaker, or to prepare a
dead body for burial or cremation, or to manager a funeral or to conduct,
manage or be in charge of an undertaking room, store or place or in any way
advertise or hold himself or herself out to the public as an undertaker or
funeral director by card, sign, solicitation or otherwise, without first
obtaining a license as an undertaker or funeral director, as provided by this
chapter. No person other than a licensed undertaker shall be permitted to
manager or control any undertaking room, store, place or establishment, or to
prepare bodies for burial or cremation, or to manager or conduct funerals in
the capacity of an undertaker.
(Ord. No. 1156)
Cross-reference:
   As to licenses and permits, see
ch. 22
§ 35-2 SAME - APPLICATION; QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   (a)   Any person desiring a license to act as an undertaker or funeral
director, or to prepare dead bodies for burial or cremation, or to manage
funerals or to be in charge of an undertaking room or advertise or hold himself
or herself out to the public as an undertaker, or to solicit business as an
undertaker, shall make application in writing therefor to the village manager,
setting forth therein the name and residence of such applicant, that the
applicant is a licensed embalmer, and giving the number of such applicant's
state embalmer's card and the location of the room, store or place where such
applicant intends to carry on or conduct the business of undertaking.
   (b)   Every such applicant shall also furnish to the village manager
evidence that he or she has knowledge of and is familiar with the laws and
ordinances of the village and the rules and regulations of the department of
health governing and concerning the removal, preparation and burial or
cremation of the dead, and that such applicant has a practical knowledge of
approved and sanitary methods of caring for dead bodies and preparing the same
for burial or cremation, including the embalming and disinfection of dead
bodies and preparing the same for burial or cremation, including the embalming
and disinfection of dead bodies. Such applicant is a resident of the village or
maintains an undertaking establishment in the village, that he or she is of
good moral character and a fit person to be licensed as an undertaker, and no
license shall be issued unless the foregoing requirements have been complied
with.
(Ord. No. 1156)
   (c)   Every such applicant shall also furnish to the village manager
evidence that he or she has knowledge of and is familiar with the laws and
ordinances of the village and the rules and regulations of the department of
health governing and concerning the removal, preparation and burial or
cremation of the dead, and that such applicant has a practical knowledge of
approved and sanitary methods of caring for dead bodies and preparing the same
for burial or cremation, including the embalming and disinfection of dead
bodies. Such applicant is a resident of the village or maintains an undertaking
establishment in the village, that he or she is of good moral character and a
fit person to be licensed as an undertaker, and no license shall be issued
unless the foregoing requirements have been complied with.
(Ord. No. 1156)
§ 35-3 SAME - ISSUANCE; REVOCATION.
   If an applicant referred to in the preceding section possesses the requisite
qualifications and is a fit person to be entrusted with an undertaker's
license, the village manager shall, upon the payment by such applicant of the
license fee fixed by §
35-4, issue, or cause to be issued, to such applicant a license, attested by
the village clerk, authorizing such applicant to carry on, conduct or engage in
the business of undertaking, or to prepare dead bodies for burial or cremation,
and to conduct and manage funerals, at and from the store, room or place
designated in the application, for and during the period of such license
provided, that such license may at any time after the issuance thereof be
revoked by the village manager, in addition to any other penalty imposed by
this chapter, for any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or of
any rule or regulation of the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 1156)
§ 35-4 SAME - FEE.
   The license provided for in this chapter to be paid by the applicant
therefor shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
(Ord. No. 1156; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 35-5 SAME - SURRENDER.
   If at any time before the expiration of any license or certificate issued
under this chapter, such license or certificate shall be revoked, the licensee
shall forthwith surrender and deliver to the village manager, or his or her
duly authorized representative, the license so revoked. If any person licensed
hereunder shall neglect, fail or refuse to surrender and deliver such license
or certificate as herein provided, the village manager shall have power, and it
shall be his or her duty to seize and destroy such revoked license or
certificate.
(Ord. No. 1156)
§ 35-6 REQUIREMENT FOR ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No person shall be licensed to carry on a business of undertaking in any
establishment, store or place, unless such establishment, store or place shall
be provided with a compartment or room completely shut off or capable of being
completely shut off from the other parts of such establishment, store or place.
Such compartment or room shall have free outside ventilation and light, and its
floor shall be constructed of or covered with a nonabsorbent material and shall
be connected with a sewer by an approved sanitary drain.
(Ord. No. 1156)
CHAPTER 35A: TAXATION
Section
Article I. Taxation
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
   
35A-1   Definitions
   
35A-2   Imposed; amount
   
35A-3   Exemptions
   
35A-4   Tax to be in addition to amount for use of streets, etc.
   
35A-5   With respect to the taxes imposed pursuant to §
35A-2(a) of this article, returns to be filed; payment of tax
   
35A-5A   Collection of electricity tax; returns to be filed; books and records
   
35A-6   Payments in error
   
35A-7   Penalty
Article II. Telecommunications Tax
   
35A-8   Definitions
   
35A-9   Imposed; amount
   
35A-10   Exemptions
   
35A-11   Retailer responsibility; collection
   
35A-12   Returns to be filed; payment of tax
   
35A-13   Tax liability
   
35A-14   Payments in error
   
35A-15   Penalty
Article III. Enhanced 9-1-1 Surcharge
(Ord. No. 93-21-1926)
   
35A-16   Definitions
   
35A-17   Imposed; amount
   
35A-18 - 35A-25   Reserved for future use
Article IV. Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
   
35A-26   Definitions
   
35A-27   Registration of telecommunications providers required
   
35A-28   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
   
35A-29   Collection, enforcement and administration of telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fees
   
35A-30   Compliance with other laws
   
35A-31   Existing franchises and licenses
   
35A-32   Penalties
   
35A-33   Enforcement
   
35A-34   Severability
   
35A-35   Conflict
Article V. Taxpayers' Rights
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
   
35A-36   Definitions
   
35A-37   Application of payments
   
35A-38   Limitations
   
35A-39   Audit procedures
   
35A-40   Notice of tax assessment
   
35A-41   Appeals process for credits, refunds and protest
   
35A-42   Interest
   
35A-43   Installment contracts
   
35A-44   Voluntary disclosure
   
35A-45   Review of liens
   
35A-46   Publication of tax ordinances
   
35A-47   Penalties
   
35A-48 - 34A-49 Reserved for future use
Article VI. Municipal Motor Fuel Tax
(Ord. No. 2020-05-3471 (superseded by Ord. No. 2020-10-3476))
   
35A-50   Definitions and usage
   
35A-51   Municipal motor fuel tax imposed
   
35A-52   Collection and administration
   
35A-53 - 34A-54 Reserved for future use
Article VII. Food and Beverage Tax
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
   
35A-55   Definitions
   
35A-56   Tax imposed
   
35A-57   Records; inspections
   
35A-58   Filing of tax return and payment of tax
   
35A-59   Transmittal of excess tax collections
   
35A-60   Registration
   
35A-61   Collection
   
35A-62   Suspension of licenses
   
35A-63   Penalties for non-payment of food and beverage tax
   
35A-64 - 34A-69 Reserved for future use
Article VIII. Grocery Tax
(Ord. No. 2025-13-3617; Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
   
35A-70   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed
   
35A-71   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax imposed
   
35A-72   Collection and enforcement of taxes
   
35A-73   Effective date
Article IX: Home Rule Tax
(Ord. No. 2025-28-3633)
   
35A-74   Taxes imposed
   
35A-75   Collection and enforcement of taxes
   
35A-76   Effective date
ARTICLE I. TAXATION
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, the
consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any
other expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-2 IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   A tax at the rate specified is hereby established and levied by the village
on all persons engaged in the following occupation or privileges:
   (a)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
village, and not for resale, at a rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom;
and
   (b)   (1)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
(Ord. No. 98-10-2053)
         A.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.61 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         B.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.40 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         C.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.36 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         D.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.35 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         E.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.34 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         F.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.32 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         G.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         H.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.31 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         I.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
         J.   For the next 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.30 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-2, the rates set forth in amended subsection
35A-2(b) above shall be effective:
         A.   On April 1, 2013 for residential customers; and
         B.   On the earlier of
            1.   The first bill issued on or after April 1, 2013; or
            2.   The date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-
104, for non-residential customers.
      (3)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-2, the previous subsection
35A-2(b) of the Glencoe village code, imposing a utility tax upon persons
engaging in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
electricity for consumption within the corporate limits of the village, shall
remain in effect:
         A.   For receipts attributable to residential customers, until July
31, 1998; and
         B.   For receipts attributable to non-residential customers, until the
earlier of:
            1.   Through the last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000; or
            2.   The date of the first bill issued to such non-residential
customer pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
      (4)   The provisions of subsection
35A-2(b), as amended, shall not be effective until August 1, 1998.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016; Ord. No. 2013-7-3337)
§ 35A-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   No tax authorized by this article is imposed with respect to any transaction
in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent that such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject
of taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof nor shall any
person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
transmitting gas or electricity, or any person using or consuming electricity
acquired by a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions
of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation
under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act as
authorized by § 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3;
nor shall any tax authorized by §
35A-2(b) of this article be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on
any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate
upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the village or
exercising the same privilege within the village; nor shall any tax authorized
by §
35A-2(a) or §
35A-2(b) of this article be imposed upon transactions involving the
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling of gas or electricity to the
Village of Glencoe.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 98-10-2053; Ord. No. 98-16-2059; Ord. No. 2000-
34-3016)
§ 35A-4 TAX TO BE IN ADDITION TO AMOUNT FOR USE OF STREETS, ETC.
   The taxes enumerated in this article shall be in addition to the payment of
money of value or products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
for the installation and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment
used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-5 WITH RESPECT TO THE TAXES IMPOSED PURSUANT TO §
35A-2(a) OF THIS ARTICLE, RETURNS TO BE FILED; PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   On or before the last day of August, 1983, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village treasurer for the month of July, 1983, stating
taxpayer's:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Principal place of business;
      (3)   Gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (b)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the village treasurer for the preceding one-month
period.
   (c)   The taxpayer shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the
village treasurer, the amount of tax imposed by this article; provided, that in
connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so elects, report
and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon
any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-5A COLLECTION OF ELECTRICITY TAX; RETURNS TO BE FILED; BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (a)   Collection of tax. The tax imposed upon persons using or consuming
electricity acquired by purchase at retail shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to §
35A-2(b) and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the village by such person delivering the
electricity. With respect to such debt owed to the village, the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed a credit against such debt to the
extent the tax related to deliveries of electricity is not collected because
the charges for such electricity are written off as uncollectible; provided
that if such charges are thereafter collected by the person delivering
electricity, such person shall be obligated to remit such tax to the village.
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity
for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and
filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
village in the manner prescribed by the village. The person delivering
electricity who files returns pursuant to this section shall, at the time of
filing such return, pay the village the amount of the tax to be collected
pursuant to §
35A-2(b).
(Ord. No. 98-16-2059)
   (b)   Monthly returns. Every collector of the tax imposed by §
35A-2(b) of this article shall file, on a monthly basis, a return in a form
prescribed by the village treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this article.
   (c)   Returns to be filed.
      (1)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer who has not
paid the tax imposed by §
35A-2(b) to a person delivering electricity as set forth in this article and
who is not otherwise exempted from paying such tax shall make a return to the
village treasurer for the preceding month, stating:
         A.   Taxpayer's name;
         B.   Taxpayer's principal place of business;
         C.   Taxpayer's kilowatt-hour usage during the month upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
         D.   Amount of tax; and
         E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
      (2)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the
time of making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein
imposed.
   (d)   Books and records. Every person delivering electricity to a purchaser
and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by §
35A-2(b) directly to the village shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under
this section. Subject to the applicable provisions of §
35A-39 of this code, the books and records shall be subject to and available
for inspection by the village at all times during the business hours of the
day.
(Ord. No. 98-10-2053; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-6 PAYMENTS IN ERROR.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid that was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due
or to become due under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior
to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
(Ord. No. 92-28-1894; Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-7 PENALTY.
   Any taxpayer who makes a late return or payment, who fails to make a return,
who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
35A-47 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
ARTICLE II. TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 35A-8 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of use, labor or service
costs or any other expenses whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount
thereof should be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES shall not,
however, include any item specifically excluded by state law.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
      (1)   In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but is not
limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and
wide area telephone service, channel service, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange services; cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service
or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic of similar
means between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges,
right-of-access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision used as a component of,
or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable
as sales for resale.
§ 35A-9 IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   A tax at the rate specified is hereby established and levied by the village
on all persons engaged in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
interstate or intrastate telecommunications at a rate of 5% of the gross
charges paid by such person.
§ 35A-10 EXEMPTIONS.
   No tax authorized by this article is imposed with respect to any transaction
in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent that such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject
of taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any
persons engaged in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this article
for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of any occupation tax authorized by Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, § 8-11-
2.
§ 35A-11 RETAILER RESPONSIBILITY; COLLECTION.
   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a
retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and making or
effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to the
village. For the purpose of this article RETAILER shall have the meaning
provided in Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 24, paragraph 8-11-17, as that section may be
amended from time to time. Retailers shall collect the tax authorized by this
article by adding the tax to gross charges for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for such use.
§ 35A-12 RETURNS TO BE FILED; PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   On or before the last day of September, 1992, and on or before the
last day of each month thereafter, each retailer required by this article to
collect the tax authorized by this article shall make a return to the village
treasurer for the preceding month, stating the following information:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Principal place of business;
      (3)   Gross charges during the month upon which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax collected from each taxpayer stated as a distinct
item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (b)   The retailer shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the
village treasurer, the amount of tax imposed by this article; provided, that in
connection with any return, the retailer may, if he or she so elects, report
and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed or paid) with prompt adjustments of later payments
based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross charges.
§ 35A-13 TAX LIABILITY.
   The tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any such tax
collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owned by the retailer to the
village. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the retailer who provides such taxable services until paid and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such taxable services. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
village in a manner determined by the corporate authorities.
§ 35A-14 PAYMENTS IN ERROR.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid that was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due
or to become due under this article from the retailer who made the erroneous
payment and, if necessary, the retailer shall make the necessary arrangements
to refund or credit the taxpayer who paid an erroneous tax to the retailer;
provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
§ 35A-15 PENALTY.
   Any taxpayer who makes a late return or payment, who fails to make a return,
who makes a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
35A-47 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
ARTICLE III. ENHANCED 9-1-1 SURCHARGE
(Ord. No. 93-21-1926)
§ 35A-16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   NETWORK CONNECTION. The number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and without the intervention of any other
telecommunications carriers switched network which would be required to carry
the subscriber's interpremises traffic.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. The meaning ascribed to that term in § 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 (1992).
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or
political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court engaged in the business of
transmitting messages by means of electricity.
§ 35A-17 IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   If authorized by 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/15.3, the village shall
impose a surcharge on monthly billed subscribers of telecommunication carriers
at a rate per network connection in order to implement and maintain a 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system.
   A surcharge is hereby imposed at a rate of zero dollars ($0.00) per month
per in-service network connection on all telecommunication carriers engaged in
the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating
within the corporate limits of the village and terminating within the State of
Illinois. A network connection shall not be deemed to be in service if the
subscriber’s account for such connection is uncollectible.
§§ 35A-18 - 35A-25 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE IV. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office
channel provided within the village. GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under:
         A.   The fee imposed by this section;
         B.   Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill under § 9-221 or
9-222 of the Public Utilities Act;
         C.   Amounts collected under § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
         D.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
         E.   9-1-1 surcharges; or
         F.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   Charges for a sent-collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under § 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith solely between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the
extent that such charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit other than a
regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
      (7)   Bad debts. BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; provided, however, that the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, then the retailer shall report
and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the
payment is made;
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications
devices; and/or
      (9)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-
way dedicated, or currently commonly used for, utility purposes, including
utility easements but only wherein the village has acquired the right and
authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with
telecommunications facilities. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real
or personal village property that is not specifically described in the previous
sentence and shall not include any village building, structure or other
improvement, regardless of whether it is situated in the public right-of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Or any like term,
means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or
any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the customer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in
Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
      (1)   Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless telecommunications as
hereinafter defined. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
      (2)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him, her or it to the ultimate retail consumer who
originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access
charges, right-of-access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities
and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a
component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall
not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall
not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following) as now
or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined
in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. §§ 76.1550 and
following) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
section. The village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the charge authorized by §
35A-29(a) by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this
state, who, in the determination of the village, furnishes adequate security to
ensure collection and payment to the village of the infrastructure maintenance
fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee
upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in § 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter
amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-27 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this article shall
register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of this
article or immediately on becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is
later, on a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to §
35A-29(d) of this article shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (b)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to subsection
35A-27(a) has an affirmative duty to and shall submit an amended registration
form or current return as required by §
35A-29(d), as the case may be, to the village within 30 days after the date of
the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the village.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-28 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (a)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the village for telecommunications originating or received in the
village.
   (b)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set
forth in §
35A-29 of this article.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-29 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.
   (a)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (b)   Unless otherwise approved by the village manager, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not later than the last day of the month following the month in which a
bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications
retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the village infrastructure
maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in
accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (c)   Interest at a rate of 9% of the total amount of the village
infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village shall be assessed upon the
telecommunications retailer if the fee is not paid by the last day of the month
following the month in which a bill is issued to the customer.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
   (d)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village manager,
which shall contain such information and certification of the
telecommunications retailer as the village manager may reasonably require.
   (e)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection
35A-29(a) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this article shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (f)   (1)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance
fee has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this article,
whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount
shall not be repaid by the village, but instead shall be credited against any
infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due, under this article, from
the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided,
however, the village manager may request, and telecommunications retailer shall
provide, written substantiation for such credit.
      (2)   However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless:
         A.   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the village within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
         B.   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (g)   Amounts paid under this article by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      (1)   Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      (2)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      (3)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code; and
      (4)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in § 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (h)   Subject to the applicable provisions of §
35A-39 of this code, the village shall have the right, in its discretion, to
audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
article to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
   (i)   The village manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to §
35A-27 of this article of such regulations.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-30 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including but not limited to:
   (a)   Generally applicable taxes;
   (b)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of or repair
of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as provided;
   (c)   The village code, the village zoning code, the village building code
and any other applicable village ordinance, regulation or requirement;
   (d)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within,
use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (e)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-31 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
article regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent and only to the extent waived.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-32 PENALTIES.
   Any telecommunications provider who violates disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to the penalties provided in §
35A-47 of this code.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-33 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-34 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
§ 35A-35 CONFLICT.
   This article supersedes all provisions of the Glencoe village code or parts
thereof adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
(Ord. No. 97-16-2039)
ARTICLE V. TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-36 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any village tax. The term TAXPAYER
generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the village tax to the village.
   VILLAGE TAX. A tax imposed, and collected or administered, by the village.
VILLAGE TAX does not include a tax imposed upon real property under the
Illinois Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village, except, however,
that VILLAGE TAX does include the village's infrastructure maintenance fees.
   VILLAGE TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The village's finance director or his or her
authorized designee.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-37 APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS.
   The village shall apply any payment or remittance received pursuant to a
village tax for a tax period in the following order:
   (a)   First: to the tax due for that period; and
   (b)   Second: to interest due for the period; and
   (c)   Third: to penalties due for the period.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-38 LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   Limitation on determination of tax or assessment. Subject to the
provisions of subsection
35A-38(b) of this section, and unless a specific section of the municipal code
provides for a shorter time period, the village shall not issue a determination
of tax due or assessment:
      (1)   More than four years after the end of the calendar year that the
return for the period was filed, or the end of the calendar year that the
return for the period was due, whichever occurs later; or
      (2)   More than six years after the end of the calendar year that the
return for the period was due or the end of the calendar year that the return
for the period was filed, whichever occurs later, if a taxpayer failed to file
a tax return, or if the taxpayer paid or remitted less than 75% of the tax due
during any four-year period that the village may issue a notice of tax
determination or assessment.
   (b)   Exception if fraud. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
35A-38(a) of this section, there shall be no time limitation imposed on a
determination or assessment of a village tax if the taxpayer filed a fraudulent
tax return.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-39 AUDIT PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Notice. The village shall notify a taxpayer in writing of a proposed
village audit of that taxpayer's books and records.
   (b)   Content of notice. Such notice shall specify the tax and time period
to be audited and shall detail the minimum documentation or books and records
that the taxpayer must make available to the village auditor.
   (c)   Audit timing. Audits shall be held only during reasonable times of the
day and, unless impracticable, at times agreed to by the taxpayer.
   (d)   Overpayments. A village auditor who determines that there has been an
overpayment of tax during the course of the audit shall identify the
overpayment to the taxpayer so that the taxpayer can take the necessary steps
to recover the overpayment. If the overpayment is the result of the application
of some or all of the taxpayer's tax payment to an incorrect village entity,
then the auditor shall notify the correct village entity of the taxpayer's
application error.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-40 NOTICE OF TAX ASSESSMENT.
   (a)   Notice of rights.
      (1)   Whenever the village sends a protestable notice of:
         A.   Tax due;
         B.   A bill;
         C.   A claim denial; or
         D.   A notice of claim reduction regarding any tax to a taxpayer,
then:
      (2)   Such notice shall include a written statement of rights, which
shall include the following information:
         A.   The reason for the assessment;
         B.   The amount of the village tax liability proposed;
         C.   The procedure for appealing the assessment;
         D.   The obligations of the village during the audit appeal, refund
and collection process;
         E.   A statement that the taxpayer shall have 45 days after service of
the notice to protest a notice of tax determination or notice of tax liability;
and
         F.   A statement that the taxpayer may request a hearing with the
village tax administrator.
   (b)   Delivery; receipt. The village shall send such notice by United States
registered or certified mail. Such notice shall be deemed received by the
taxpayer upon actual receipt or on the third business day after the village
deposits the notice in any main or branch United States post office.
   (c)   Time extension if good cause. Upon a showing of good cause by the
taxpayer satisfactory to the village tax administrator, the village tax
administrator may extend the 45-day protest period by an additional period of
time not exceeding 30 days. The village tax administrator, upon a showing of
good cause, also may open up any closed protest period, but only for a period
of time not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-41 APPEALS PROCESS FOR CREDITS, REFUNDS AND PROTEST.
   (a)   Appeal; procedure. Any taxpayer who desires to seek a credit or a
refund or desires to appeal a determination of tax due or an assessment
pursuant to a village tax shall adhere to the following procedures:
      (1)   File a request for credit or refund with the village tax
administrator on a form provided by the village or, within 45 days after
receipt of the village's protestable notice, file a written protest on a form
provided by the village;
      (2)   Provide any supportive documents or other evidence that may display
that the village's assessment of the tax was unauthorized, and direct such
protest or request to the village tax administrator; and
      (3)   Make any books or records of its business or activity available for
audit or inspection upon the written request of the village.
   (b)   Hearing. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a request
for credit or refund or a timely written protest, and has requested a hearing,
the village tax administrator shall conduct a hearing in the following manner:
      (1)   The village tax administrator shall fix the time and place for a
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within 14 days after receipt of the request for the
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
      (2)   No continuances of the hearing shall be granted after it has been
scheduled, except in cases when a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the taxpayer. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14
days.
      (3)   The village tax administrator shall preside at the hearing and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply.
   (c)   Village determination. The village tax administrator, by United States
registered or certified mail, shall send to the taxpayer the tax
administrator's written determination regarding the taxpayer's protest within
45 days after receiving the taxpayer's written protest or credit or refund form
if the taxpayer does not request a hearing, or within 30 days after the
conclusion of a hearing. Such determination shall include:
      (1)   A ruling as to whether the village tax as a whole or any portion of
it was unauthorized;
      (2)   A written determination as to why the village tax or any portion of
it was authorized; and
      (3)   If appropriate, a certified check equaling the unauthorized amount
paid by the taxpayer and the applicable amount of interest.
   (d)   No refund if voluntary payment. The village shall not be required to
refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time
of payment in the event that a village tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid a village tax voluntarily if the taxpayer
lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the village taxes at the
time of payment or if the taxpayer paid such taxes under duress.
   (e)   No credits or refunds if no remittance. The village shall not be
required to grant a credit, refund of taxes, interest or penalties to a person
who has not paid or remitted the amounts directly to the village.
   (f)   Four-year limitation. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this
municipal code or other village ordinance authorizing a village tax, no claim
for a credit or refund shall be made more than four years after the date of the
erroneous payment.
   (g)   Interest if overpayment. The village shall pay interest in the amount
of 6% per year for a taxpayer's overpayment of tax.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-42 INTEREST.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, interest in the amount of 9% per year
shall be assessed against all late payments, underpayments and non-payments of
a village tax.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-43 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   (a)   If the village shall enter into an agreement allowing a taxpayer to
make payments by installments, then the village shall not cancel such
installment agreement except if:
      (1)   The taxpayer fails to pay any amount due on time and fails to cure
the delinquency in the allowable time provided by the village; or
      (2)   The taxpayer fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment agreement.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied to require the
village to enter into any installment agreement.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-44 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   (a)   Application. A taxpayer may file an application, on a form prepared by
the village, with the village tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due for any village tax that a taxpayer has not received a written
notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the village tax
administrator.
   (b)   Payment and interest required. A taxpayer who files a voluntary
disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of the village tax due,
plus interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the
application, but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application.
   (c)   No extra liability. Except for the payment of the full amount of tax
and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary
disclosure application shall not be liable for any additional tax, interest or
penalty for any period before the date the application was filed; provided,
however, that if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount
of tax due as provided in this section, then the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax. If the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, then the
application shall be deemed invalid and void.
   (d)   Time limitation for payment. The payment of tax and interest required
under this section shall be made within 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application, or the date agreed to in writing by the
village tax administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under
this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed, or the date agreed to
by the village tax administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-45 REVIEW OF LIENS.
   The village tax administrator shall establish, by administrative order of
the village, a process of reviewing liens filed by the village against
taxpayers. If any lien is determined to be improper, then the village tax
administrator shall cause such lien to be removed at the village's own expense,
shall correct the taxpayer's credit record, and shall correct any public
disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-46 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   The village shall publish its taxing ordinances and shall make copies of its
taxing ordinances readily available to the public on request. The posting of
such tax ordinances on the internet shall be deemed to satisfy the publication
requirement of this section.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§ 35A-47 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Late filing and payment penalty. If a return is filed late, then the
taxpayer shall pay a penalty for such late filing of 5% of the amount of tax
required to be shown as due on a return. If the taxpayer makes a late payment,
then the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of 5% of the tax due and not timely paid
or remitted. Late filing and payment penalties shall not apply to a particular
taxpayer if, but only if, a failure to file penalty is imposed on that taxpayer
by the village. The village tax administrator may determine, in the sole
exercise of his or her sound judgment, that the late filing or late payment was
due to a reasonable cause and abate some or all the penalty.
   (b)   Failure to file penalty. If no return is filed before the issuance of
a notice of tax deficiency or of tax liability to the taxpayer, then the
penalty for such failure to file shall be 25% of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to have been
filed. A village tax administrator may determine, in the sole exercise of his
or her sound judgment, that the failure to file a return was due to reasonable
cause and abate some or all of the penalty.
   (c)   Additional penalties. In the event that any taxpayer noncompliance
with the provisions of a village tax is a result of willful or fraudulent
disregard of the village tax laws, such taxpayer shall be additionally subject
to the general penalty provisions of this municipal code (including any
criminal penalties) and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the
full amount of the tax due plus the applicable amount of interest.
(Ord. No. 2000-34-3016)
§§ 35A-48 - 35A-49  RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE VI. MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
(Ord. No. 2020-05-3471 (superseded by Ord. No. 2020-10-3476))
§ 35A-50 DEFINITIONS AND USAGE.
   Whenever used in this Article VI, the term MOTOR FUEL shall have the meaning
ascribed to it in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law, 35 ILCS 505/1 et seq. as
amended. All other terms used herein, unless otherwise defined, shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in the Illinois Retailer’s Occupation Tax, 35 ILCS
120/1 et sq. as amended.
(Ord. No. 2020-10-3476)
§ 35A-51 MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of Glencoe
in the business of selling motor fuel at retail for the operation of motor
vehicles on public highways or for the operation of recreational watercraft
upon waterways, at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per gallon of motor fuel
sold at retail in the municipality for the purpose of use or consumption and
not for the purpose of resale. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with
the provisions of  §  8-11-2.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
22-3, as amended, which is incorporated as through fully set forth herein. The
tax levied herein is in addition to all other applicable taxes and charges.
(Ord. No. 2020-10-3476)
§ 35A-52 COLLECTION AND ADMINISTRATION.
   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of  §  8-11-2.3 of
the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22-3, as amended. The Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 2020-10-3476)
§§ 35A-53 - 35A-54  RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE VII. FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
(Ord. No. 2020-05-3471; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
   BEVERAGES. Any alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer as set forth and regulated in
Chapter 4 of the Code of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois, 2011, which is sold
at retail either for consumption on the premises where sold or which is sold in
its original package for consumption off the premises, as well as soft drinks,
juices, coffee, or other non-alcoholic beverages prepared for consumption.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received, valued in U.S. currency, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, checks, credits, electronic
payments, property and services,  at a prepared food facility or retailer
liquor facility for prepared food or beverages furnished at the prepared food
facility or retailer liquor facility, whether located within or outside the
corporate limits of the village, and whether intended for consumption on or off
the premises. Gross receipts do not include amounts paid for federal, state and
local taxes, including the tax levied by this chapter, and do not include
amounts paid as gratuities for the employees of the prepared food facility or
retailer liquor facility. With respect to catering services operated within the
village, gross receipts shall not include consideration received in money or
otherwise for the food that is prepared within the corporate limits of the
village but is intended for delivery to and consumption at a location outside
of the corporate limits of the village. Gross receipts shall not include
consideration received in money or otherwise for the sale of prepared food or
beverages directly to consumers from automated vending machines or for prepared
food or beverages that are provided to students of cooking classes where no
charge is made for the prepared food or beverages other than the cost of
enrollment in the class.
   OWNER. Any person or entity of any kind that has any ownership in, or is
conducting the business or operation of, a prepared food facility or. retailer
liquor facility, including without any limitation: (a) any person; (b) any
firm, partnership, association, company, joint venture, corporation,, club,
organization, or other entity of any kind; and (c) any receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by law or by order of
any court. The term OWNER includes one or multiple owners of a single prepared
food facility or retailer liquor facility.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, club, fraternal organization, or a receiver, executor, trustee,
conservator or their representative appointed by order of any court.
   PREPARED FOOD FACILITY. All premises located within the corporate limits of
the village where prepared food or beverages are sold at retail for immediate
consumption, whether consumed on premises or not, and whether or not such
prepared food facility is conducted along with any other users in a common
premise or business establishment. The term PREPARED FOOD FACILITY includes,
but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called a restaurant,
eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, banquet facility, cafeteria,
cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner,
sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice
cream parlor, tea room, delicatessen, hotel, motel, private country club or
club, or any other establishment which sells at retail prepared food or
beverages for immediate consumption.
   PREPARED FOOD. Any substance, whether solid, liquid (including both
alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages), powder or item used or intended to be
used for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed, and
which has been prepared for immediate consumption on or off the premises.
   RETAILER. Any person who sells or offers for sale, prepared food or
beverages for use or consumption and not for resale.
   RETAILER LIQUOR FACILITY. Any establishment licensed under, the provisions
of Article III of Chapter 4 of the Code of the Village of Glencoe, Illinois,
2011.
   SOFT DRINKS. Any soft drink as set forth in Section 2-10 of the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act, which is sold at retail for immediate consumption on and/or
off the premises.
   SOLD AT RETAIL. To sell for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other
nature, and not for resale, with said transaction being subject to either the
Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 120 §§ 1 et seq.) or the
Illinois Service Occupation Tax (ILCS Ch. 35, Act 115 §§ 1 et seq.)
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-56 TAX IMPOSED.
   (a)   Commencing on January 1, 2026, a tax, in addition to any and all other
taxes, is imposed upon the retail purchase of prepared food and beverages at
any prepared food facility or retail liquor facility within the village, at the
rate of one percent (1.0%) of the purchase price of such prepared food or
beverages, the ultimate incidence of any liability for payment of the tax shall
be borne by the purchaser.
   (b)   The owner and operator of each prepared food facility and each
retailer liquor facility within the village shall jointly and severally, have
the duty to collect and account for the tax from each purchase at the time that
the consideration for the purchase is paid.
   (c)   In the event the prepared food or beverages are sold at retail on
credit, an owner or operator shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed
by this chapter on such a sale until he, she, they, or it receives payment for
the sale.
   (d)   This tax shall not be imposed upon any unit of local government that
sells prepared food or beverages within a facility owned or operated by such
unit of local government, if such sales are made directly by the unit of local
government.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2020-15-3481; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-57 RECORDS; INSPECTIONS.
   (a)   Required recordkeeping. The owner and operator of each prepared food
facility and each retailer liquor facility within the village shall jointly and
severally have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records, and
accounts of its gross receipts and payments of the tax imposed under this
article. The finance director, the village treasurer or their deputies or
representatives shall at all times have full access to the records, which shall
include a daily sheet showing the amount of gross receipts during that day. In
the event of a significant discrepancy, the village may, in its discretion,
hire an independent party to conduct an audit of said books and records. The
costs of such audit shall be borne by the owner or operator.
   (b)   Inspections. The finance director, the village treasurer or any person
designated by either of them as their deputy or representative, may enter the
premises of any prepared food facility or retailer liquor facility for
inspection, examination, copying and auditing of books and records including,
but not limited to, Illinois Retailers' Occupation Tax and Illinois Service
Occupation Tax returns filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue, in order
to effectuate the proper administration of this chapter, and to assure the
enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. To the extent
reasonably possible, said entry shall be done in a manner that is least
disruptive to the business of the prepared food facility or retailer liquor
facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere
with the finance director, the village treasurer or their deputies or
representatives in the discharge of their duties in the performance of this
subsection. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the village representative who is conducting, or attempting to conduct, any
inspection under this section.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-58 FILING OF TAX RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (a)   Tax returns. The owner or owners of each prepared food facility or
retailer liquor facility shall file tax returns showing the gross receipts
received during each calendar month period upon forms prescribed by the finance
director or may be filed electronically, through such website and/or
application as may be approved and implemented by the finance director. Returns
for each calendar month shall be due on or before the twentieth day of the
following calendar month, (e.g., the return for January shall be due on or
before the twentieth day of February; the return for February shall be due on
or before the twentieth day of March; etc.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in
the event that the owner of the prepared food facility or retailer liquor
facility is allowed to file Illinois Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Illinois
Service Occupation Tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue at
intervals which are greater than monthly, said owner shall be allowed to file
tax returns relative to the tax imposed by this chapter with the village at
said greater intervals. At the time of the filing of said tax returns, the
owner shall pay to the village all taxes due for the period to which the tax
return applies.
   (b)   Interest on late payments. Any tax due pursuant to this chapter that
is not paid when due, shall accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%)
monthly. In the event of collection proceedings initiated by the village, the
owner and operator shall be jointly and severally responsible for paying the
costs incurred by the village, including but not limited to reasonable attorney
fees and court costs. In addition, the owner and operator shall jointly and
severally be subject to suspension of licenses and penalties as set forth in
§§  
35A-63(a) through
35A-63(c) below.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-59 TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS.
   If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed
hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a
person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of tax so imposed
herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who paid
the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, said
person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the village along with
the tax properly collected.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-60 REGISTRATION.
   Every owner maintaining a prepared food facility or retailer liquor facility
in the village shall register with the Finance Department by January 1, 2026 or
the date of assuming ownership over the prepared food facility or retailer
liquor facility, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2020-15-3481; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-61 COLLECTION.
   Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this chapter, the
village attorney or village prosecutor shall, upon request of the village
manager, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470)
§ 35A-62 SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   If the village president, after a hearing held by him or his designee, shall
find that any owner or operator has willfully avoided the payment of any tax
imposed by this chapter, he may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by
such owner or operator, including business licenses and local liquor licenses.
The owner or operator shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to
be held not less than ten days after being mailed notice of the time when and
the place where the hearing is to be held, addressed to the owner or operator
at its last known place of business. Any suspension or revocation of any
licenses shall not release or discharge the owner or operator from his or her
civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such
offense.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§ 35A-63 PENALTIES FOR NON-PAYMENT OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX.
   (a)   Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or unlawfully resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180 day
period.
   (b)   Continuing violations. Each day upon which a person shall continue any
violation of this chapter, or permit any such violation exist after
notification thereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (c)   Continuing liability. Any owner subjected to the penalties provided
for by this subsection shall not be discharged or released from the payment of
any tax due.
(Ord. No. 2020-04-3470; Ord. No. 2025-29-3634)
§§ 35A-64 - 35A-69 RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.
ARTICLE VIII. GROCERY TAX
(Ord. No. 2025-13-3617; Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
§ 35A-70 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this Article VIII is in
effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
(Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
§ 35A-71 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the
business of making sales of service who transfer groceries as an incident to a
sale of service, at the rate of 1% of the selling price of all groceries
transferred incident to a sale of service while this Article VIII is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
§ 35A-72 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed by this article, and all civil penalties that may
be assessed as an incident of the taxes, will be collected and enforced by the
State of Illinois Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue has
the full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
§ 35A-73 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The taxes imposed by this Article VIII are and will be effective as of and
after January 1, 2026.
(Ord. No. 2025-17-3621)
ARTICLE IX: HOME RULE TAX
(Ord. No. 2025-28-3633)
§ 35 A-74 TAXES IMPOSED.
   (a)   Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property,
other than an item of tangible personal property titled or registered with an
agency of the State of Illinois government, at retail in the village at the
rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1).
   (b)   Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales of
service, at the rate of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-5).
   (c)   The Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax and Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax may not be imposed on tangible personal
property taxed at the rate of 1% under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and
the Service Occupation Tax Act.
   (d)   Under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act and the Service Occupation Tax
Act, the additional taxes may not be imposed on the sales of food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
(Ord. No. 2025-28-3633)
§ 35A-75 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed by this article, and all civil penalties that may
be assessed as an incident of the taxes, will be collected and enforced by the
State of Illinois Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue has
the full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2025-28-3633)
§ 35A-76 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The taxes imposed by this Article IX are and will be effective as of and
after July 1, 2026.
(Ord. No. 2025-28-3633)
CHAPTER 36: WATER
Section
Article I. In General
   
36-1   Polluting waters of Lake Michigan, etc.
   
36-2   Obstruction or pollution of watercourses or sources of water supply
   
36-3   Stagnant pools of water
Article II. Water Supply
   
36-4   Definitions
   
36-5   Powers and duties of director of public works as superintendent of water
   
36-6   Powers and duties of superintendent of water generally
   
36-7   Application of article and rules and regulations of board of trustees as
to use of water; enforcement of article, etc.
   
36-8   Application for supply of water or for tapping main or making
connection; requirements as to supplying water, tapping main or making
connection generally
   
36-9   Fees charge for connecting to water system
   
36-10   Buffalo or shut-off boxes generally
   
36-11   Only licensed or bonded plumbers to lay service pipes
   
36-12   Permit or order prerequisite to laying service pipe
   
36-13   Private supply pipes and connections - generally; application, etc.
   
36-14   Same - to be laid, etc., only by licensed or bonded plumber
   
36-15   Interfering with water mains, service pipes, etc.
   
36-16   Turning water supply back on after it has been cut off for nonpayment
of water rates, noncompliance with article, etc.
   
36-17   Maintenance and repair of service pipes, etc.; specifications for pipe
from main to meter
   
36-18   Water meters generally; use of water for construction purposes and
rates therefor
   
36-19   Location of water meters; specifications for boxes or vaults for meters
   
36-20   Right of entry of superintendent of water for examination, etc., of
water meters
   
36-21   Obstructing access of water department officer or employee to stopcock,
water meter, etc.
   
36-22   Unauthorized interference, etc., with water meters
   
36-23   Rates and charges generally - rates established
   
36-24   Same - minimum charge
   
36-25   Same - water bills due and payable quarterly
   
36-26   Same - penalties for failure to pay promptly
   
36-27   Turning off water for failure to pay bill within 60 days
   
36-28   Charge for water when meter fails to register
   
36-29   Deduction or rebate for leakage prohibited; amount of water registered
to be paid for
   
36-30   Use of water in improvements; rates therefor
   
36-31   Use of water for temporary purposes and for purposes not otherwise
specified in article; rates therefor
   
36-32   Turning off water from building, etc., upon notice from owner, etc.,
that property is to be vacant
   
36-33   Vehicles for sprinkling streets
   
36-34   Flooding vacant property for use as skating rink
   
36-35   Fire hydrants
   
36-36   Plumbing requirements
   
36-37   Superintendent of water, etc., as special police officer
   
36-38   Compliance with article and with rules and regulations; penalties
   
36-39   Disposition of fines recovered for violations of article
   
36-40   Reserved
   
36-41   Reserved
   
36-42   Flushing sanitary sewers with potable water prohibited
   
36-43   Illinois Plumbing Code
   
36-44   Cross-connection prohibited
   
36-45   Cross-connection control devices
   
36-46   Installation, inspection, maintenance and repair of cross-connection
control devices
   
36-47   Survey and investigations
   
36-48   Booster pumps
   
36-49   Cross-connection violations
   
36-50   Reserved
Article III. Water Shortage Crisis
   
36-51   Emergency powers of president
   
36-52   Notice of emergency orders
   
36-53   Failure to obey orders
   
36-54   Seasonal lawn sprinkling restrictions
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
§ 36-1 POLLUTING WATERS OF LAKE MICHIGAN, ETC.
   No person shall throw, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed or
deposited, or permit his or her servant, child or other member of his or her
family to throw, place or deposit into any street, alley, lot, public way or
public ground, or upon the margin or banks of, or into the waters of Lake
Michigan, within the village, any putrid or unsound beef, pork, fish, hides or
skins or any kind, or any filth, offal, dung, dead animals, decomposed
vegetables or any other unsound, putrid, filthy, decomposed, unwholesome or
offensive matter whatsoever, or any substance liable to become unwholesome,
filthy, decomposed or offensive or prejudicial or injurious to health.
(1929 Code, § 587)
§ 36-2 OBSTRUCTION OR POLLUTION OF WATERCOURSES OR SOURCES OF WATER SUPPLY.
   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute
any watercourse or source of water supply in the village.
(1929 Code, § 592)
§ 36-3 STAGNANT POOLS OF WATER.
   Any stagnant pool of water in the village is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any such nuisance to
remain or exist on property under his or her control.
(1929 Code, § 593)
ARTICLE II. WATER SUPPLY
§ 36-4 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a
different intention, the following terms shall, for the propose of this
article, have the meanings indicated in this section.
   AGENCY. Refers to the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   AGENCY'S REGULATIONS. Refers to 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.
   APPROVED. Those backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the
Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, the American Water Works Association, the American Society of
Sanitary Engineering, the American National Standards Institute or certified by
the National Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water source or system on or available to any
premises, other than the waterworks system, and includes the water so supplied.
These auxiliary waters may include water from a public water supply system; or
water from a private or emergency water supply system; or water from a source
such as wells, lakes or streams; or process fluids; or used water. These waters
may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water supply
system over which the village does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply system.
   BACK SIPHONAGE. A type of backflow in a pipe or plumbing device in which
used, contaminated or polluted water flows back from a receptacle, or other
source into a negative pressure in such pipe or plumbing device.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the waterworks system or
other potable water supply system by entrance of any substance to a degree that
could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other. A DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION is a
cross-connection formed when the waterworks system or other potable water
supply system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
An INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION is a cross-connection through which un unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by a vacuum or otherwise introduced into the
waterworks system or other water supply system.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE. Any approved device, method or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into the waterworks system or other
potable water supply system. The term BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE shall be
included in the definition of CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE. All devices used
for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the agency.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR. Any person approved by the agency
who is responsible for inspecting cross-connection control devices.
   CUSTOMER. The owner, occupant and/or person in possession, charge or control
of any premises.
   CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM. All parts of the water facilities beginning at the
service connection used to convey water from the waterworks system to the
premises, which facilities are deemed to be operated, controlled or owned by
the customers.
   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY. Any public or private organization established
for the protection of public or private property from fire.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY must include tight shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting in a real or potential danger to a person's health and well
being. The term SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a hazard to the
health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant
reduction in the quality of life.
   ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE. 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code and this article.
   NON-POTABLE. The quality of water that does not meet public health standards
for drinking water and is not suitable for human consumption.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE. The quality of water that meets public health standards for
drinking water and is suitable for human consumption.
   PREMISES. Includes a lot or a part of a lot, a building or a part of a
building, or any parcel or tract of land whatever.
   PROCESS FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the
waterworks system, a customer's water system, or any other potable water supply
system. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated water;
      (2)   Used water originating from the waterworks system that may have
deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (3)   Contaminated natural water taken from wells, lakes, streams or
irrigation systems;
      (4)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
      (5)   Oils, gases, acid, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at a water main of the waterworks system through which water is supplied to the
customer.
   SURVEY. The collection of information regarding the location of all
connections between a customer's water system and the waterworks system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
premises. The SURVEY must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by the waterworks system after it has passed
through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the
village.
   WATER FUND. The monies or revenues of every kind arising by the operation of
this article or any other ordinance relating to the waterworks system.
   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. Any water source, supply or system, including all
pipes, fittings and control valves, as well as the water so supplied. The term
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM shall not include the waterworks system, however.
   WATERWORKS SYSTEM. Includes all the system of pipes, hydrants, boxes, cocks,
taps, meters, connections, reservoirs, tanks, engines, property and all
appurtenances thereto, whereby water is or may be supplied to the public or to
private parties within the village, operated, controlled or owned by the
village. The term WATER-SERVICE SYSTEM shall be included in the definition of
waterworks system.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS AS SUPERINTENDENT OF
WATER.
   The director of public works shall act as superintendent of water and, as
such, shall have charge of the village waterworks and all equipment connected
therewith. The director of public works shall have all the powers and duties
assigned in this article to the superintendent of water.
(1929 Code, § 782)
§ 36-6 POWERS AND DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER GENERALLY.
   The superintendent of water shall have the management and control of all
matters and things pertaining to the service of the water department. He or she
shall preserve and protect the property of the village, in, by and relating to
the waterworks and water-service system. He or she shall supervise and direct
the laying of all service pipes or private water pipes in the streets, alleys
and public grounds of the village, and all tapping, and the insertion of all
service cocks in the water mains. He or she shall keep a complete and accurate
record of all taps inserted, their exact location, number and size, and the
lengths and sizes of all services pipes with locations of shut-off boxes. He or
she shall make or direct all necessary repairs to the water system and all
turning on or cutting off of water. He or she shall cause to be made readings
of all meters connected with the water system, and shall keep accurate records
of such readings. He or she shall, in addition, perform such other duties as
may be required of him or her by the provisions of this code or by ordinance or
resolution of the board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 782)
§ 36-7 APPLICATION OF ARTICLE AND RULES AND REGULATIONS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES AS
TO USE OF WATER; ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE, ETC.
   (a)   Every consumer of water and every owner, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any building, structure or premises supplied
at any time with water through the village waterworks or water-service system,
shall be governed by and be subject to the provisions of this article and such
rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted and approved by the
board of trustees governing or concerning the use of water.
   (b)   It is hereby made the duty of the superintendent of water to enforce
the provisions of this article and such rules and regulations as may be so
adopted.
(1929 Code, § 783)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to the authority of the village to regulate the use of
water supplied by the village waterworks, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, §
11-125-3
§ 36-8 APPLICATION FOR SUPPLY OF WATER OR FOR TAPPING MAIN OR MAKING
CONNECTION; REQUIREMENTS AS TO SUPPLYING WATER, TAPPING MAIN OR MAKING
CONNECTION GENERALLY.
   No water shall be supplied to any building, structure or premises in the
village where water is not now being supplied from the village waterworks or
water-service system, nor shall any person be permitted to tap any water main
or make connection with any service pipe or supply pipe for the purpose of
furnishing water to any building, structure or premises or for any other
purpose, until an application therefor in writing shall first have been made to
the superintendent of water by the person desiring such building, structure or
premises to be supplied with water, or desiring to tap any such main or to make
connection with any such service or supply pipe or for such other purpose. Such
application shall set out the full name and address of the applicant, and shall
state fully all purposes for which a water supply is desired, or for which it
is desired to tap such water main or make connection with such service or
supply pipe, or other purposes. Thereupon, such applicant shall be permitted to
have water supplied to his or her building, structure or premises from the
village waterworks or water-service system, and to tap any such water main or
make connection with any such service pipe or supply pipe for such purposes, as
requested in his or her application, and in accordance with the direction of
the superintendent of water and under his or her supervision and to his or her
satisfaction and approval; provided, that the tapping of any water main shall
be done only by an employee of the water department.
(1929 Code, § 784)
§ 36-9 FEES CHARGE FOR CONNECTING TO WATER SYSTEM.
   The fees to be charged for connecting to the village water system shall be
as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. Such fees
shall be established to cover all costs for a complete tap, including without
limitation corporation stop, roundway, service buffalo box and administrative
expenses.
(1929 Code, §785) (Ord. No. 1259; Ord. No. 96-21-2017; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 36-10 BUFFALO OR SHUT-OFF BOXES GENERALLY.
   Any person, whether owner or occupant or person in possession, charge or
control of any building, structure or premises with or to which it is desired
to make connection with the waterworks or water-service system of the village,
shall install, at his or her own expense, a buffalo or shut-off box, and such
buffalo or shut-off box will be furnished by the water department, the cost
being included in the price of tap used. The location of all buffalo or shut-
off boxes shall be approved by the superintendent of water. No permit shall be
issued to connect any building, structure or premises with the waterworks or
water-service system of the village unless such connection be equipped with a
buffalo or shut-off box in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(1929 Code, § 786)
§ 36-11 ONLY LICENSED OR BONDED PLUMBERS TO LAY SERVICE PIPES.
   No person shall lay any water service pipe for the supplying of any
building, structure or premises with water from village water-service system
unless he or she is a duly licensed or bonded plumber.
(1929 Code, § 787)
§ 36-12 PERMIT OR ORDER PREREQUISITE TO LAYING SERVICE PIPE.
   No plumber shall lay any water service pipe for the supplying of any
building, structure or premises with water from the village water-service
unless he or she has first obtained a permit for the doing of such work from
the superintendent of water or it is being done pursuant to order of the
village president or board of trustees.
(1929 Code, § 787)
§ 36-13 PRIVATE SUPPLY PIPES AND CONNECTIONS - GENERALLY; APPLICATION, ETC.
   (a)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date
of this ordinance (or any applicable amendments hereto), any building,
structure or premises, or a portion thereof, shall be required to connect to
the village waterworks system, or another municipal water system approved by
the village, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this code. No
building, structure or premises so connected to the village waterworks system
shall hereafter be connected to any auxiliary water supply. Except for such
uses or methods in existence before the effective date of this ordinance, no
person shall use the ground water as a potable water supply. The installation
of new potable water wells, cisterns or other ground water collection devices
is prohibited. No person including the village shall use the ground water as a
potable water supply. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to penalties as set forth in this code.
(Ord. No. 2000-27-3009; Ord. No. 2000-31-3013)
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, POTABLE WATER is any water used for
human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for
drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes or preparing foods.
(Ord. No. 2000-27-3009)
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, PERSON is any individual,
partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political
subdivision or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents
or assigns.
(Ord. No. 2000-27-3009)
§ 36-14 SAME - TO BE LAID, ETC., ONLY BY LICENSED OR BONDED PLUMBER.
   No private supply pipe shall be laid or connection made thereto by any
person other than a duly licensed and bonded plumber acting under authority of
a permit issued for the laying of such private supply pipe or connection
therewith or thereto as provided for in this article.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-15 INTERFERING WITH WATER MAINS, SERVICE PIPES, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any
water main, service pipe, water meter, buffalo or shut-off box or any water
pipe connected with the village waterworks or water-service system, or
comprising part of such system, without permission therefor from the
superintendent of water.
(1929 Code, § 789)
§ 36-16 TURNING WATER SUPPLY BACK ON AFTER IT HAS BEEN CUT OFF FOR NONPAYMENT
OF WATER RATES, NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE, ETC.
   (a)   Where the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall
have been cut off or stopped on account of the nonpayment of water rates or on
account of the violation of any of the provisions of this article, or for any
other reason or cause whatsoever, where such cutting off or stopping shall have
been done by the water department, water shall not again be supplied to such
building, structure or premises or permitted to be turned on therein or thereto
without a permit first issued for that purpose by the superintendent of water,
or upon order of the village president or board of trustees and the payment of
a reconnection fee. The reconnection fee shall be in an amount as set forth in
the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule. If it shall be found by the
water department that the water supply has been turned on or into any such
building, structure or premises from which it has been cut off or stopped, as
aforesaid, in violation of the provisions of this section, the superintendent
of water shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to see that
the service or supply pipes by and through which water is supplied to such
building, structure or premises are cut off at the water mains or as near
thereto as is practicable, and no water shall again be supplied to such
building, structure or premises or be permitted to be turned on therein,
thereto, until a fine as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule shall have been paid for and on account of the unlawful and
unauthorized turning on for such water supply to such premises.
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253; Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (b)   The amounts hereinbefore provided for shall be paid by the person
owning, occupying or in possession, charge or control of such building,
structure or premises at the time it is desired to have the water turned on or
supplied thereto, irrespective of whether such person shall have been the one
guilty of violating the provisions of this section, such person being hereby
declared to be held responsible for any tampering with the buffalo or shut-off
boxes on his or her premises or in his or her building or structure and also
for any unlawful or unauthorized turning on of water into or upon his or her
building, structure or premises.
§ 36-17 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SERVICE PIPES, ETC.; SPECIFICATIONS FOR PIPE
FROM MAIN TO METER.
   (a)   Every person supplied with water from the village waterworks or water-
service system shall, at his or her own cost and expense, keep in repair all
pipes and appurtenances leading from the water main to his or her meter and
prevent all waste of water from such pipes. If any person shall permit any such
pipe or appurtenances to become broken or out of repair so that water is wasted
thereby, the superintendent of water may, two days after serving a written
notice on such person to repair such pipes or appurtenances, cut off the water
from such premises, and whenever the water is so cut off it shall not be turned
on again until the pipes or appurtenances have been placed in proper repair.
The notice herein provided for may be served by personal service upon the owner
or occupant or person in possession, charge or control of the premises or by
mailing such notice to such person in possession, charge or control. The cost
of installing the service pipe leading from the water main to the meter shall
be borne by the person whose premises are supplied with water through such
service pipe. All service pipes hereafter laid from the water main to the meter
shall be not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and of copper.
   (b)   The superintendent of water may repair any leaks or breaks in a
service pipe in the event of a failure on the part of the owner or occupant of
the premises served to do so, and may do so in emergencies. If any such repairs
are made by the superintendent of water, the cost thereof shall be a charge
against and shall be paid by the person entitled to service from or through the
pipe so repaired or replaced.
(1929 Code, § 791)
§ 36-18 WATER METERS GENERALLY; USE OF WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES AND
RATES THEREFOR.
   (a)   At every building, structure or premises that is supplied with water
from the village waterworks or water service system, there shall be furnished
and installed a water meter of a design approved by the board of trustees, for
the purpose of controlling and measuring such water supply, which meter shall
be furnished, installed and maintained at the cost and expense of the owner or
person in control.
   (b)   Water for construction purposes shall be furnished subject to the
following provisions:
      (1)   A water meter of suitable size shall be purchased and installed
inside of the walls of the building at the time the main is tapped for service.
The meter shall be protected from freezing in the winter months;
      (2)   A check and waste shall be fitted after the meter with riser
extending above the box, provided with proper connections;
      (3)   At the time a building permit is secured, a deposit shall be made
to cover the cost of water used in construction. The amount of the deposit will
be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and vary
with the size of the building as follows:
 
Cubic Contents of Building
Up to 40,000 cubic feet
40,000 to 80,000 cubic feet
80,000 to l20,000 cubic feet
 
      (4)   The amount of deposit for buildings of greater size than mentioned
above will be determined by the water department in each case.
   (c)   When water is no longer needed for construction, the water department
will, upon 24 hours' notification, read the meter and the deposit, less amount
deducted for water, will be returned to the depositor. Water will then be shut
off by this department until regular application for water service has been
made. The depositor will be held responsible for the condition of the meter and
any repairs or replacements will be deducted from the deposit.
   (d)   The rate to be charged for water used for construction purposes will
be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
   (e)   If upon inspection at any time it is found that the charge for water
consumed exceeds, or probably will exceed, the amount of the deposit, the
depositor will be given 48 hours' notice in which to deposit an amount
sufficient, in the opinion of the water department, to cover the quantity of
water to be used to complete the building. If the additional deposit is not
made in the time specified, water will be shut off and no further service given
until proper deposit is made.
(1929 Code, § 792)
§ 36-19 LOCATION OF WATER METERS; SPECIFICATIONS FOR BOXES OR VAULTS FOR
METERS.
   Water meters shall be located at such place, within or without the premises
and in such manner as the superintendent of water shall direct. Boxes or vaults
in which meters are to be placed shall be made in accordance with
specifications prescribed by the superintendent of water.
(1929 Code, § 793)
§ 36-20 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER FOR EXAMINATION, ETC., OF
WATER METERS.
   If any water meter is installed or located within any building, structure or
premises, the owner or person in possession, charge or control thereof shall at
all times permit the superintendent of water or any duly authorized officer or
employee of the village water department free entry, for the purpose of
examining, testing, reading or repairing such meter.
(1929 Code, § 793)
§ 36-21 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS OF WATER DEPARTMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE TO STOPCOCK,
WATER METER, ETC.
   No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free
access of any officer or employee of the water department to any stopcock,
water meter, buffalo or shut-off box, or connection with any water main or
service pipe by means of any coal, lumber, brick, building material or by any
other means, shift or device whatsoever, or refuse or prevent free access
thereto by such officer or employee whenever such officer or employee shall
desire access thereto. In the event that the owner or person in possession,
charge or control shall refuse or fail to permit free access thereto, or cause
to be placed any such obstruction, the water supply to such premises shall
forthwith be cut off.
(1929 Code, § 794)
§ 36-22 UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE, ETC., WITH WATER METERS.
   (a)   No person other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the
village water department shall be permitted to examine, read, repair or in any
way interfere with any water meter installed in any building, structure or
premises for the control of water supplied thereto. Any person not so
authorized who shall tamper or interfere with any such water meter shall be
subject to the penalties provided by §
16-1.
   (b)   If it be found that such water meter is being tampered with or
interfered with by any unauthorized person, the owner of the building,
structure or premises in which such meter is installed or located, or the
person in possession, charge or control thereof, shall be held responsible for
such unauthorized tampering and interference, and the water supply to such
building, structure or premises shall be cut off, and such water supply so cut
off shall not again be turned on until such owner or person shall have paid to
the water department for the use of the village, the cost and expense of
cutting off and turning on such water supply as provided for in §
36-16, and the further sum as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule as liquidated damages for and on account of such unauthorized
tampering and interference.
(1929 Code, § 795) (Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
Cross-reference:
   As to tampering with, etc., meters generally, see §
24-37
§ 36-23 RATES AND CHARGES GENERALLY - RATES ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   Rate established. The rate for consumers receiving water from the
water system of the village shall be as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule and shall include both a fixed charge based
on the size of the water meter installed on the premises as well as a
volumetric charge based on water usage as recorded by water meters.
   (b)   Establishment of accounts and responsibility for payment.
      (1)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity occupying any
premises requests or obtains potable water service from the village’s water
system there shall be established a water account for such premises that shall
remain in effect unless and until a final water service bill is requested and
paid, and a certified receipt of final payment is issued from the village
relating to such account. Any person, firm, corporation or entity owning or
occupying the premises shall be responsible for all fees, charges, rates,
penalties, fines, obligations and liabilities relating to such account, whether
such person, firm, corporation or entity originally opened such account or
assumed such account upon the transfer of property ownership or occupancy and
irrespective of the water usage by such person, firm, corporation or entity;
provided, however, that any person, firm, corporation or entity who is a
transferee of premises for which an account exists shall be relieved of any
obligations and liabilities with respect to such account if such person, firm,
corporation or entity obtains a certified receipt of final payment from the
village relating to such account. If more than one person, firm, corporation or
entity has occupied or owned the premises during the pendency of such account,
each such person, firm, corporation and entity shall be jointly and severally
liable for all matters and charges relating to such account.
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity that owns or occupies the
premises may seek a certified receipt of final payment by requesting a final
water meter reading and water bill, and paying all outstanding sums due on such
account.
      (3)   Whenever a person, firm, corporation or entity occupying or owning
a premises requests a final utility bill for such premises, the requestor must
pay the fee or charge for generating the final utility bill set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, and the village shall have the
right to terminate water service to such premises following the issuance of a
final bill for water services for such premises, unless the village receives a
request to establish a new water account for such premises. If water service is
terminated before any request for a new water account is received, the
applicable reconnection fee or charge must be paid to the village before water
service to such premises will be re-activated.
(Ord. No. 2003-15-3085)
   (c)   Notice and enforcement; exceptions. If the charges for service are not
paid within 30 days within the rendition of the bill for such services, the
village shall follow the notice and enforcement procedures as set forth in
chapter 34A of this code, except that:
(Ord. No. 09-20-3253)
      (1)   Following delivery of a final notice, both the water and sewer
service to the premises shall be discontinued for failure to pay services
rendered. Such notice can be combined with other notices concerning services
similarly billed; and
      (2)   Upon written request of the owner/occupant, the director of public
works will affirm whether or not services were indeed rendered. If the services
are determined to have been rendered, the full payment, including the late
payment penalty, will be required. Services are deemed to be rendered even if
the resident did not notify the village in writing that the services should be
stopped, even if the service was not utilized by the owner/occupant.
(Ord. No. 10-06-3264; Ord. No. 2011-01-3282; Ord. No. 2012-04-3305; Ord. No.
2016-04-3394; Ord. 2017-08-3416; Ord. No. 2018-05-3436)
§ 36-24 SAME - MINIMUM CHARGE.
   The minimum charge for water from the water system of the village during
each three-month period shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive
Fee and Fine Schedule, when such meter is connected to the village water main
by a separate service line and when the meter has not been turned off by the
village and shall be in addition to the village’s fixed charge based on the
size of the water meter installed on the premises authorized by § 36-63.
(Ord. No. 10-06-3264; Ord. No. 2011-01-3282; Ord. No. 2012-04-3305; Ord. No.
2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2018-05-3436)
§ 36-25 SAME - WATER BILLS DUE AND PAYABLE QUARTERLY.
   All water bills shall be due and payable quarterly on the first day of the
month for the water consumed or taken during the preceding quarter.
(Code 1929, § 799) (Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 1006; Ord. No. 1133; Ord. No. 1314A;
Ord. No. 1393, § 4)
§ 36-26 SAME - PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO PAY PROMPTLY.
   If water bills are not paid on or before the last day of the month in which
such bills are due or payable, such water bill shall be subject to an
additional charge of 10% of the water bill.
§ 36-27 TURNING OFF WATER FOR FAILURE TO PAY BILL WITHIN 60 DAYS.
   If, at the end of 60 days from the date of the original water bill, (and
subject to the issuance of a final notice as provided for in
chapter 34A), the full amount of the bill has not been paid and no payment plan
has been approved by the village manager or the manager's duly authorized
designee, the water supply shall be shut off from the building, structure or
premises involved and not turned on until the unpaid bills for water consumed
and charges for shutting off and turning on such supply of water are paid by
the consumer, as provided in §
36-16.
§ 36-28 CHARGE FOR WATER WHEN METER FAILS TO REGISTER.
   If at any time a water meter shall fail to register the quantity of water
used or flowing through the same, the quantity used or flowing through such
meter shall be determined by making an average of the four readings last
preceding the discovery of the defect in such water meter and a charge shall be
made for the period during which such water meter failed to register or during
which such defect existed based upon such average unless it shall be made to
appear by evidence satisfactory to the superintendent of water that the
conditions during such period were materially different from those which
existed during the period covered by the last preceding four readings. In case
it shall appear that the conditions were such during the period of such failure
or defect that a change in conditions had taken place or that a lesser amount
of water was used during such period on account of changed conditions, the
superintendent of water shall make a charge for the water used during such
period based upon the amount of water estimated to be used during such period,
as shown by the evidence submitted to him or her.
(1929 Code, § 797)
§ 36-29 DEDUCTION OR REBATE FOR LEAKAGE PROHIBITED; AMOUNT OF WATER REGISTERED
TO BE PAID FOR.
   No deduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any consumer of water under
meter control by or on account of any leakage or alleged leakage in any water
pipe, tank or other apparatus or device. The amount of water registered by any
meter controlling the water supply to any building, structure or premises shall
be charged and paid for in full, irrespective of whether such water, after
having been registered, was lost by leakage, accident or otherwise.
(1929 Code, § 798)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to prevent the unnecessary waste of
waters, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24, § 11-l25.1
§ 36-30 USE OF WATER IN IMPROVEMENTS; RATES THEREFOR.
   Public service corporations, contractors and other persons or corporations
requiring water from the village for use in puddling trenches, ditches or for
other purposes incident to public or private work or improvement or otherwise,
shall make application to the superintendent of water for permission to use
water for such purposes, stating in such application the name of the applicant
and, if such applicant be a person, his or her place of business and residence,
and if a corporation, the name and residence of its principal officers,
together with its place of business. Such applications shall also set forth the
particular use to which the water so desired is to be put. If it shall appear
to the superintendent of water that the use of water as desired is necessary
and will not create a shortage so as to deprive regular consumers of water of
their usual supply of water, the superintendent shall issue a permit in writing
authorizing the use of water by such applicant upon such conditions and under
such restrictions as the superintendent of water shall impose, such conditions
and restrictions to be fixed according to the circumstances existing in each
case. The supply of water to be used by any such applicant shall be paid for in
accordance with the rates prescribed in §
36-18 to be charged for water used for construction purposes and the
superintendent of water shall be the judge of the amount of water used and his
or her estimate of such amount shall be final.
(1929 Code, § 800)
§ 36-31 USE OF WATER FOR TEMPORARY PURPOSES AND FOR PURPOSES NOT OTHERWISE
SPECIFIED IN ARTICLE; RATES THEREFOR.
   (a)   When water is used for temporary purposes or for purposes not
otherwise specified in this article, the quantity of water so used, or to be
used, shall be estimated by the superintendent of water and shall be charged
for at the rate set forth in §
36-23 of this chapter.
   (b)   The amount to be charged for the use of water for such temporary or
other purposes, when the quantity of water used or to be used shall have been
estimated by the superintendent of water, shall be paid in advance to the water
department by the person desiring to use such water, at the rates herein fixed
for such use.
§ 36-32 TURNING OFF WATER FROM BUILDING, ETC., UPON NOTICE FROM OWNER, ETC.,
THAT PROPERTY IS TO BE VACANT.
   Whenever the owner, agent, lessee or person in charge, possession or control
of any building, structure or premises shall give notice in writing to the
superintendent of water that any building is vacant or unoccupied, and request
the water department to turn off the water, the superintendent of water shall
at once cause the water supply of such building to be cut off. When the owner,
agent or lessee shall make a formal request that the supply of water be turned
on, it shall be done free of charge.
(1929 Code, § 802)
§ 36-33 VEHICLES FOR SPRINKLING STREETS.
   The owner or operator of all vehicles used for the purpose of street
sprinkling within the village, shall be charged for a license, the sum of $5
per annum, for each such vehicle, which sum shall be in addition to the sum
charged for permission to sue water from the village hydrants for such vehicle;
provided, however, that before issuing such license the superintendent of water
shall prescribe the kind of vehicle to be used, specifying particularly the
capacity of the tank, the number and size of the holes in the sprinkler, and
the distance of the same from the ground, and also such general regulations as
he or she may deem necessary concerning the use of such vehicles on the public
streets and the use by them of village hydrants. For the due observance of such
requirements, the superintendent of water may require from the person taking
such license a good and sufficient bond in an amount and with sureties as may
be approved by him or her.
(1929 Code, § 803)
Cross-reference:
   As to streets generally, see
ch. 30
§ 36-34 FLOODING VACANT PROPERTY FOR USE AS SKATING RINK.
   The village manager is duly authorized and empowered, from time to time, as
he or she in his or her discretion may see fit, to permit the use of water from
the village hydrants, free of charge, for the purpose of flooding vacant
property, subject to the consent of the owner or such property, where it may be
desired to use such property when so flooded for the purpose of skating;
provided, that no charge shall be made to any person for the privilege of
skating on property so flooded.
(1929 Code, § 804)
§ 36-35 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All hydrants erected in the village for the purpose of extinguishing fires
are hereby declared to be public hydrants. No person other than the members of
the department of public safety and employees of the water department, in the
exercise of their duties, shall open any such hydrant or attempt to draw from
the same, or in any manner interfere with any of such hydrants or use them for
any purpose whatever, except as provided for in §
36-33.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
Cross-reference:
   As to fire prevention generally, see
ch. 17
§ 36-36 PLUMBING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following rules and regulations are hereby established relating to
plumbers and in connection with the village water department.
   (a)   Forty-eight hours' notice shall be given by plumbers before taps will
be installed.
   (b)   Service pipes shall be of copper pipe and not less than three-fourths
inch in diameter and shall extend to the meter.
   (c)   The line of such service pipe shall be at right angles to the main,
and the sidewalk stopcock shall be located directly opposite the tap in the
main. It shall be laid to not less than five feet below the established grade
of the street in which it is laid, without regard to the depth of the street
main, and shall have sufficient length to prevent fracture by settlement of
earth.
   (d)   Each service pipe shall have its own independent tap and within the
line of the curb at the edge of the sidewalk a stopcock with a cast iron shut-
off box five feet long.
   (e)   The sidewalk stopcock shall be one inch, round way and the top of the
stop-box shall be visible and even with the sidewalk, and placed at the outer
edge of the sidewalk line. It shall be set plumb and in a substantial manner.
   (f)   Before back filling, the service pipe shall be inspected by the water
department. Backfilling shall be rammed or puddled to the satisfaction of the
water department.
(1929 Code, § 806)
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to authority of village to regulate construction, etc., of
waterworks, see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1963, ch. 24 § 11-125-3
§ 36-37 SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER, ETC., AS SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER.
   The superintendent of water or any officer he or she may designate for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be qualified as a
special police officer of the village.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-38 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE AND WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS; PENALTIES.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or any
rule or regulation governing or concerning the use of water supplied through
the village waterworks or water-service system, which shall have been adopted
and approved by the board of trustees, shall be fined as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule, except as may be otherwise
provided by this article. The cutting off of the water supply to any premises
or the forfeiture of water rates paid or the imposition of any liabilities or
expense otherwise provided for by this article or on account of any violation
of any of the provisions of this article shall not be held to exempt any such
person from the imposition of the penalty provided by this section.
(1929 Code, § 809) (Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 36-39 DISPOSITION OF FINES RECOVERED FOR VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE.
   All fines recovered for violations of the provisions of this article shall
be placed in the treasury of the village to the credit of the water fund.
(1929 Code, § 810)
§ 36-40 RESERVED.
§ 36-41 RESERVED.
§ 36-42 FLUSHING SANITARY SEWERS WITH POTABLE WATER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to use potable water to flush any sanitary sewers
within the village.
(Ord. No. 77-12-1554, § 1)
§ 36-43 ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE.
   Subpart J of the Illinois Plumbing Code is hereby adopted hereto and by this
reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-44 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Connections between the waterworks system or other potable water
supply systems and other systems or equipment containing non-potable water or
other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when
and where approved cross-connection control devices or methods are installed,
tested and maintained to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. No
physical connection shall be permitted between the waterworks system or any
potable water supply system and any auxiliary water supply not of equal or
better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and
analysis by the agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an
unsafe substance may enter the waterworks system or other potable water supply
system or an auxiliary water supply approved by the superintendent of water and
the agency.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
   (b)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or maintain, or permit
to be established or maintained, any connection whereby an auxiliary water
supply may enter the waterworks system or the customer's water system, unless
such auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply
shall have been approved by the superintendent of water and the agency.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-45 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   Only approved cross-connection control devices or methods can be used
to satisfy the requirements of this article.
   (b)   The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard
that exists as follows.
      (1)   An approved fixed air gap separation shall be installed where the
waterworks system may be contaminated with substances that could cause a severe
health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
waterworks system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a
system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device or a double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the waterworks system may be polluted with substances
that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      (4)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on premises
where it is impractical to determine whether cross-connections exist or is
impossible to make a complete cross-connection survey or on premises having a
repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.
   (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the waterworks system when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains anti-freeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from a source other than the
waterworks system;
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source of water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any source other than the waterworks
system; or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby a source other than the waterworks
system can be introduced into the fire safety system.
   (d)   All other fire safety systems connected to the waterworks system shall
be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines and a
double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
   (e)   The type of cross-connection control devices required for any other
potable water supply system shall be equivalent to the devices used to protect
the waterworks system from similar hazards, unless the superintendent of water
permits otherwise.
   (f)   Cross-connection control devices shall be accessibly located for
observation, maintenance and replacement services.
§ 36-46 INSTALLATION, INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF CROSS-CONNECTION
CONTROL DEVICES.
   (a)   The customer shall prevent backflow and back-siphonage into the
waterworks system by ensuring that either all cross-connections are removed or
cross-connection control devices are installed, inspected, maintained and
repaired.
   (b)   The customer shall ensure that a cross-connection control device be
installed wherever necessary to prevent cross-connections to the waterworks
system or any other potable water supply system. Cross-connection control
devices shall be installed and maintained as provided for in the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the agency's regulations and in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on the premises.
   (c)   In addition to the foregoing, the customer shall ensure that a cross-
connection control device be installed on each service line to a customer's
water system serving premises having any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Premises for which the superintendent of water makes an independent
determination that actual or potential hazards to the waterworks system exist;
      (2)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and
the source is approved by the agency;
      (3)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the waterworks system. This shall include
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the waterworks system that are no longer under the sanitary
control of the superintendent of water;
      (4)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the superintendent of water and/or the cross-connection control device
inspector, are not correctable;
      (5)   Premises having intricate plumbing arrangements that make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (6)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey; or
      (7)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (d)   An approved cross-connection control device shall be installed, on
each service line to a customer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following types of facilities, unless the superintendent of
water determines that no actual or potential hazard to the waterworks system
exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (10)   Car washes;
      (11)   Pesticide, herbicide or extermination plants and trucks;
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks; or
      (13)   All underground sprinkler systems.
   (e)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually, or more frequently if recommended by the
manufacturer, by a cross-connection control device inspector. The inspection of
mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
   (f)   Each cross-connection control device shall have a tag attached listing
the date of the most recent test or visual inspection, the name of the cross-
connection control device inspector, and the type and date of repairs.
   (g)   (1)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         A.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
         B.   Name and approval number of the person performing the test or
visual inspection;
         C.   Test results;
         D.   Repairs or servicing required;
         E.   Repairs and date completed; and
         F.   Servicing performed and date completed.
      (2)   The cross-connection control device inspector shall report test
results to the village by the test due date, in a manner determined by the
village’s director of public works and publicized through an annual notice to
customers.
   (h)   The installation, inspection and maintenance of all cross-connection
control devices shall be at the sole cost and expense of the customer. Whenever
cross-connection control devices required by these regulations are defective,
they shall be repaired or replaced at the sole cost and expense of the customer
without delay.
   (i)   Cross-connection control devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the superintendent of water.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823; Ord. No. 2023-31-3576)
§ 36-47 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (a)   The superintendent of water shall cause surveys and investigations to
be made of all premises served by the waterworks systems to determine whether
actual or potential hazards to the waterworks system may exist. A reasonable
fee covering the cost of the survey or investigation may be levied against each
customer whose premises are surveyed and investigated. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at
least once every three years, or more often as the superintendent of water
shall deem necessary. Such surveys may be conducted by telephone, mail or
personal visit to the premises and is not intended to include an actual visual
inspection of piping or plumbing systems. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five year.
   (b)   On request by the superintendent of water, the customer shall furnish
information regarding the piping system or systems or water use within the
customer's premises. The refusal of such information, when requested, shall,
within the discretion of the superintendent of water, be deemed evidence of the
presence of improper connections as provided in this article.
   (c)   The customer shall arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on
his or her premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-
connections to the customer's water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could backflow into the customer's water system or the waterworks
system. Such surveys shall be conducted by a duly licensed and bonded plumber
and shall be at the sole cost and expense of the customer, and a copy of the
results shall be forwarded to the superintendent of water.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823; Ord. No. 2023-31-3576)
§ 36-48 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any
premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off device
designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on
the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less. It shall be the duty of
the customer to maintain the low pressure cut-off device in proper working
order and to certify to the superintendent of water, at least once a year, that
the device is operable.
(Ord. No. 90-14-1823)
§ 36-49 CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
cross-connection control device inspector and the superintendent of water or
his or her designees for the purposes of verifying the presence or absence of
cross-connections, inspecting the installation, testing, maintenance and repair
of cross-connection control devices, verifying information submitted by the
customer regarding the required cross-connection control device inspection, and
ensuring that the requirements of this article have been properly executed.
   (b)   If in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of
the superintendent of water, a cross-connection control device is necessary for
the safety of the waterworks system, the superintendent of water may, two weeks
after serving a written notice on the customer to install a cross-connection
control device, deny or discontinue water service to such customer's premises,
and wherever water service is denied or discontinued it shall not be turned on
again until the cross-connection control device shall be properly installed.
The superintendent of water may, after two weeks written notice to a customer,
deny or discontinue the water service to any customer's premises wherein any
cross-connection control device required by this article is not installed,
tested, maintained or repaired in a manner acceptable to the superintendent of
water, or if it is found that the cross-connection control device has been
removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the
premises, or if a low pressure cut-off or other device required by this article
is not installed and maintained in working order, or if any person is found to
be violating any provision of this article.
   (c)   If in the judgment of the superintendent of water an emergency exists
whereby the waterworks system is immediately threatened, the superintendent of
water shall have the right to enter the premises of a customer, providing oral
notice only if such is possible, and may immediately without any notice deny or
discontinue the water supply to a customer's premises. In the event of such
denial or discontinuance, the superintendent of water shall as soon as
practical serve written notice as herein provided.
   (d)   The written notice herein provided for shall state the nature of the
request or violation and shall provide a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. This written notice may be served by personal
service or by mailing such notice upon the customer.
   (e)   Water service that has been denied or discontinued shall not be
restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated any conditions or
defects in conformance with this article and to the satisfaction of the
superintendent of water, and a reconnection fee as set forth in the village’s
Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule shall have been paid.
   (f)   Neither the village, the superintendent of water, nor their agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customers of the waterworks system for any
injury, damages or lost revenue which may result from the termination of a
customer’s water supply, whether or not such termination was with or without
notice.
   (g)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in
addition to the foregoing, shall become liable to the village for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by the village by reason of such violation, whether
the same was caused before or after notice. If contamination of the waterworks
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired cross-connection control device, or a cross-connection
control device which has been bypassed, the customer responsible for such
contamination shall bear the cost of cleanup of or repair to the waterworks
system.
   (h)   The cross-connection device lock box cost will be as set forth in the
village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (i)   Failure to report test results in a manner required by §
36-46(g)(2) will result in the application of the cross-connection non-
conformance fee set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule
to the customer’s water account.
(Ord. No. 2014-05-3357; Ord. No. 2016-04-3394; Ord. No. 2023-31-3576)
§ 36-50 RESERVED.
ARTICLE III. WATER SHORTAGE CRISIS
§ 36-51 EMERGENCY POWERS OF PRESIDENT.
   In the event that the Secretary of the Illinois Department of Transportation
declares a water shortage crisis, the village president may order the following
measures to reduce the water demand of the village to the minimum level
necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
village:
   (a)   The reduction or prohibition of external water use, including the
sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass,
groundcovers, plants, vines, washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station
aprons, porches and other outdoor services; the washing of the outside of
dwellings; the washing of the inside and outside of office buildings; the
washing and cleaning of any business or industrial equipment and machinery; the
operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making a similar use of
water; the use of swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and
recirculating system;
   (b)   The curtailment or closing of any commercial car wash and the
prohibition of the washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses or
any other type of mobile equipment;
   (c)   The reduction of consumer per capita consumption of water;
   (d)   The installation of water-saving devices; and
   (e)   Reduction in water pump pressure.
(Ord No. 77-13-1555, § 1)
§ 36-52 NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ORDERS.
   Orders entered by the village president pursuant to §
36-51 shall be posted and published as in the manner provided by law for the
posting and publication of village ordinances.
(Ord. No. 77-13-1555, § 1)
§ 36-53 FAILURE TO OBEY ORDERS.
   It shall be unlawful not to obey an order promulgated under this article.
(Ord. No. 77-13-1555, § 1)
§ 36-54 SEASONAL LAWN SPRINKLING RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Lawn sprinkling shall not be permitted on any day during the period of
May 15 to September 15 of any year, except as follows:
      (1)   Any property that bears or has been assigned an odd-numbered street
address shall be allowed to sprinkle only on the days of the month having odd
numbers, and only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 p.m. the subsequent
afternoon; and
      (2)   Any property that bears or has been assigned an even-numbered
street address shall be allowed to sprinkle only on the days of the month
having even numbers, and only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 p.m. the
subsequent afternoon.
   (b)   Upon the written request of the owner or owner’s agent of any property
having a newly seeded or sodded lawn, the village manager may, at his or her
discretion, issue a permit temporarily suspending these seasonal lawn
sprinkling restrictions upon the premises. The permit shall be issued only upon
a finding that it is necessary to preserve and promote the newly installed
lawn, and that a hardship would result from the strict application of the
sprinkling restrictions. The village manager may impose such conditions and
limitations on the permit as he or she deems necessary or appropriate.
   (c)   Any new/replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense-labeled irrigation controller, and shall be in compliance with § 2.5
(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law (225 ILCS 320).
   (d)   It shall be unlawful to violate these seasonal lawn sprinkling
restrictions.
(Ord. No. 2015-11-3383, § 2)
CHAPTER 37: ZONING
Editor's note:
   The zoning ordinance of the village is not set out in this code but will be
found on file in the office of the village clerk. Copies of the zoning
ordinance may be obtained from the director of public works.
Cross-reference:
   As to plan commission, see §§
2-119 to
2-126
   As to powers and duties of the director of public works in connection with
zoning, see §
2-76
Statutory reference:
   For state law as to zoning generally, see Ill. Rev. Stat., 1963, ch. 24, §§
11-13-1 to 11-13-20
CHAPTER 38: CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS
Section
Article I. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
   
38-1   Definitions
   
38-2   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
38-3   PEG access support fee imposed
   
38-4   Applicable principles
   
38-5   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
38-6   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
38-7   Late fees; payments
   
38-8 - 38-19   Reserved
Article II. Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
38-20   Customer service and privacy protection law
   
38-21   Enforcement
   
38-22   Penalties
   
38-23   Customer credits
ARTICLE I. CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
§ 38-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         A.   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         B.   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         C.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         D.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and
repair charges;
         E.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         F.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         G.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         H.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection
38-1(1)(I);
         I.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         J.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         A.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
         B.   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         C.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         D.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         E.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a village, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         F.   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         G.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of CABLE SERVICE or VIDEO SERVICE to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public Internet.
§ 38-2 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (a)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (b)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be as set
forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (c)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (d)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   (e)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (f)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (g)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection
38-2(b).
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 38-3 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (a)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine
Schedule.
   (b)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and Fine Schedule.
   (c)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
38-2(e) of this code.
   (d)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (e)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under subsection
38-3(b).
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 38-4 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
§ 38-5 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
telecommunications tax, telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee, or
any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A
state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with
respect to payment of the local unit of government's 9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees,
taxes or charges.
§ 38-6 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (a)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (b)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the village's submission of an invoice for the sum.
§ 38-7 LATE FEES; PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of
Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
§§ 38-8 - 38-19 RESERVED.
ARTICLE II. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
§ 38-20 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (a)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services
within the village's boundaries.
   (b)   Amendments. Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be
incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
§ 38-21 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village.
§ 38-22 PENALTIES.
   (a)   The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide
for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable and video
protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall be as set forth in the village’s Comprehensive Fee and
Fine Schedule.
   (b)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (c)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (d)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection
38-22(c).
(Ord. No. 2016-04-3394)
§ 38-23 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501
(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing
cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
ZONING CODE
Current through Ordinance 2025-31-3636, passed 11-20-2025
ARTICLE I
TITLE AND PURPOSES
1-101 TITLE
   This document shall be known, and may be referred to, as the GLENCOE
ZONING CODE.
1-102 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSES
   This Code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Village of
Glencoe by the Illinois Municipal Code for the following purposes.
   A.   Overall Purpose. The overall purpose of this Code is to maintain
Glencoe as a community comprised principally of well-maintained single family
residential neighborhoods and separately located, thriving business areas that
complement the residential neighborhoods.
   B.   Land Use Patterns. The purposes of this Code related to land use
patterns are to:
      1.   Implement and foster the goals and policies of the Village's
Official Comprehensive Plan; and
      2.   Establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most
appropriate use of individual parcels of land in the Village; and
      3.   Encourage compatibility between different land uses and protect the
scale and character of existing development from the encroachment of
incompatible uses and structures having excessive bulk or providing inadequate
open space; and
      4.   Encourage and promote detached single family homes as the principal
land use in the Village; and
      5.   Provide for the gradual elimination of non-conforming uses that
adversely affect the character and value of permitted development; and
      6.   Encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources,
aesthetic amenities, and natural features; and
      7.   Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, a safe
environment, and convenience of access to property; and
      8.   Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and the
general welfare of the Village.
   C.   Public Infrastructure. The purposes of this Code related to public
infrastructure are to:
      1.   Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public
facilities and utilities; and
      2.   Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being
overloaded due to excess development or development incompatible with the
capabilities of the Village's utility systems; and
      3.   Protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways
that is unified, integrated, safe, effective, and efficient; and
      4.   Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by
limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity; and
      5.   Avoid or lessen the hazards of flooding and storm water accumulation
and run-off; and
      6.   Establish and regulate set back lines along streets and highways,
property lines, and storm flood water runoff channels or basins.
   D.   Justifiable Expectations and Taxable Value. The purposes of this Code
related to justifiable expectations and taxable value are to:
      1.   Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents,
businesspeople, and taxpayers on the continuation of existing, established land
use patterns; and
      2.   Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings.
   E.   Administration. The purposes of this Code related to administration are
to:
      1.   Define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies
necessary to administer this Code; and
      2.   Establish procedures for the efficient and effective use of the
provisions of this Code; and
      3.   Establish standards for the review of applications filed pursuant to
this Code; and
      4.   Prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Code.
ARTICLE II
ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
2-101 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
   To carry out the purposes of this Code, the Village is hereby divided into
the following zoning districts:
   A.   Residential Districts -- Single Family and Multiple Family (Article
III)
      R-A - Single Family Residential District
      R-B - Single Family Residential District
      R-C - Single Family Residential District
      R-D - Single/Multiple Family Residential District
   B.   Business Districts (Article IV)
      B-1 - Central Business District
      B-2 - Neighborhood Business District
2-102 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT SEQUENCE
   A.   General Rule. This Code rejects as outdated and inappropriate the
concept of hierarchical and cumulative zoning districts and, except as noted
below, is based on the concept that each district should be designed to
accomplish a specific purpose, to encourage a particular type of development,
and to protect that development from being encroached upon by incompatible
types of development.
   B.   Special Rule. Within the foregoing philosophy, however, it is
recognized that when different districts are juxtaposed, their differing
characters may require special treatment to ameliorate incompatibilities that
might otherwise result. For this limited purpose, this Code recognizes the
concept of "more restrictive" and "less restrictive" districts. For this
purpose, the districts established by this Code shall be considered "more
restrictive" or "less restrictive" in accordance with the following rules:
      1.   The residential districts shall be deemed to be more restrictive
than any non-residential districts.
      2.   The single family residential districts shall be deemed to be more
restrictive than the R-D single/multiple family residential district.
      3.   The B-1 District shall be deemed to be a more restrictive business
district than the B-2 District.
2-103 ANNEXED LAND
   A.   Annexation of Land. All land annexed to the Village after the effective
date of this Code shall be classified automatically upon such annexation in the
R-A Single Family Residential District. The owner of any land proposed to be
annexed to the Village shall file, with the petition for annexation, an
application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance pursuant to Section
7-301 of this Code. In the case of an involuntary annexation, the Village
Manager shall complete the required application.
   B.   Application for Different Classification. When any land is classified
pursuant to this Section, it shall remain so classified unless and until an
application to amend such classification is filed and granted pursuant to
Section
7-501 of this Code. Such application may be filed prior to or contemporaneously
with the annexation of the land in question.
2-104 ZONING MAP
   A.   Map Incorporated. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts
established by this Code are as shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the
Village of Glencoe, Illinois," hereafter referred to as the Zoning Map, which
is by this reference incorporated as part of this Code. All notations,
references, and other information shown on the Zoning Map, and all amendments
thereto, shall be as much a part of this Code as if specifically set forth and
literally described herein.
   B.   Omitted Land. It is the intent of this Code that the entire area of the
Village, including all land and water areas, be included in the districts
established by this Code. Any area lying within the Village but not shown on
the Zoning Map as being included in such a district shall be deemed to be, and
it is hereby, classified in the R-A Single Family Residential District.
   C.   District Boundaries. In the event that any uncertainty exists with
respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   The district boundaries are the center lines of expressways,
highways, streets, alleys, waterways, railroads, and other rights-of-way unless
otherwise indicated. When the designation of a boundary line on the Zoning Map
coincides with the location of any such right-of-way, the center line of such
right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
      2.   When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the
centerline of any right-of-way but does coincide with a lot line, such lot line
shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
      3.   When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the
centerline of any right-of-way or lot line, the district boundary shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
   D.   Maintenance and Availability of Official Zoning Map. The official copy
of the Zoning Map shall be maintained by the Village Manager and shall be
available for public inspection during Village business hours at the Village
Hall. Any amendment to zoning district boundaries or any change in any other
information shown on the Zoning Map made by amendment to this Code shall be
indicated on the official copy of the Zoning Map.
   E.   Mapping of Parcels Affected by Court Decrees. Parcels of land affected
by court decrees shall be shown on the Zoning Map in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection
8-106B of this Code.
ARTICLE III
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS - SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTIPLE FAMILY
3-101 PURPOSES
   Four zoning districts are provided for residential development. Of these,
three districts are provided for single family residential development, while
one district is provided for both single and multiple family residential
developments.
   The single family districts provide for a limited range of housing densities
consistent with the Village's established residential neighborhoods. The R-
A District allows for lower density residential use and larger lot sizes. The
R-B and R-C Districts allow for somewhat higher density residential use and
smaller lot sizes.
   The R-D District permits single family residential developments and permits
as a special use higher density residential building types consistent with
existing development patterns. (Amended 6/2003)
   The single family district regulations are intended to preserve established
neighborhoods and encourage new residential development consistent with the
overall character of the Village. The multiple family district regulations are
designed to encourage a moderate density residential area including alternate
housing types in a suburban residential environment.
3-102 PERMITTED USES
   The following uses and no others are permitted as of right in residential
districts.
   A.   R-A and R-B Single Family Residential Districts
      1.   Single family dwellings.
      2.   Religious congregations. (Amended 8/2004)
      3.   Elementary schools.
      4.   Pre-kindergarten schools.
      5.   Parks, playgrounds, and municipal buildings and uses, including
public libraries and public golf courses. (Also see 3-111-G-17)
      6.   Private golf clubs.
      7.   Personal Wireless Services Antennae, with or without antenna support
structures and related equipment, but only if:
         (a)   located on property owned or occupied by the Village and lying
west of the Edens Expressway, subject to the standards in Paragraph 5-101D12 of
this Code, and not including personal wireless services antennae located on a
tower; or
         (b)   on existing utility poles on zoning lots or rights-of-way,
subject to the standards in Paragraph 5-101D14.
(Adopted July 19, 2012)
   B.   R-C Single Family Residential District
      1.   All the uses permitted in the R-A and R-B Districts.
      2.   Secondary schools.
      3.   Colleges.
   C.   R-D Single/Multiple Family Residential District
      1.   All the uses permitted in the R-C District.
3-103 SPECIAL USES
   Except as specifically limited in the following subsections, the following
uses may be permitted in any residential district subject to the issuance of a
special use permit as provided in Section
7-502 of this Code and subject to the additional standards hereinafter set
forth:
   A.   Major Golf Events provided that such golf events shall: (1) be for a
period of time not to exceed seven days; (2) not involve the construction of
any permanent structures; and (3) not involve the construction or installation
of any temporary structures unless expressly authorized in the special use
permit. A major golf event shall be sponsored by the private golf club hosting
such event plus any other person or entity approved by the Board of Trustees
and expressly identified in the special use permit.
   B.   Railroad Passenger Stations.
   C.   Parking Lots As a Principal Use in any single family  residential
district when owned and used by religious congregations; otherwise, only in the
R-C and R-D Districts on lots adjacent to a business district. In no event
shall parking spaces in said lots be closer than 10 feet from any lot line.
This provision shall not apply to municipal uses that serve as parking lots.
(Amended 6/2003)
   D.   Housing for Senior Citizens and Handicapped Persons (but only in the R-
D District); provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may, in approving a
special use permit for such housing:
      1.   allow dwelling unit sizes smaller than those required by Paragraph
3-111C5 of this Code;
      2.   allow a building of up to but not to exceed three stories and 40
feet in height;
      3.   waive or modify the lot area requirements otherwise applicable; and
      4.   allow a reduction in the number of otherwise applicable required
parking spaces; provided, however, that no such reduction shall allow for less
than one space for every two dwelling units.
   E.   Bulk, Space and Yard Requirement Relief for Relocated Landmark
Structures in excess of the stated limits for variations under Section
7-403 of this Code; provided, however, that any such relocated structure shall
be certified as a landmark in the Village; provided further that such zoning
relief is essential to permit the relocation and such relocation shall serve to
preserve the special features of the landmark. The Board of Trustees may, in
granting such special use permit for a relocated landmark, similarly grant
relief from the bulk, space, and yard requirements for an adjoining lot that is
directly and substantially affected by the relocation of such landmark
structure. In addition, the Board of Trustees shall require the owners of the
lot or lots to which the special use permit applies to execute and record a
declaration of covenants prohibiting the construction of any new structure or
an addition to an existing structure on such lot except upon the prior written
approval of the Board of Trustees. (May 3, 1993)
   F.   Parking Spaces for Religious Congregations on Host Lot. Notwithstanding
the location of Paragraph 5-104B2 of this Code or the screening and buffering
requirements of Subsection
5-106A of this Code, a religious congregation may use a portion of a host lot
for either required or supplemental parking spaces, a parking area, or a
parking lot to serve the religious congregation; provided, however, that (i)
such parking spaces, parking area, or parking lot does not create any
violations of any other provisions of this Code on either the lot used for a
religious congregation or on the host lot; (ii) an easement satisfactory to the
Village Attorney is recorded to establish the rights for such parking spaces,
parking area, or parking lot and access thereto from a street; (iii) the
parking spaces, parking area, or parking lot on the host lot shall abut the lot
used for a religious congregation, and (iv) any relief from the provisions of
Paragraph 5-104B2 or Subsection
5-106A of this Code granted pursuant to such special use permit shall be
terminated in the event that the lot abutting the host lot is no longer used
for a religious congregation. (May 28, 1993)
   G.   Personal Wireless Service Antennae with or without Antenna
Support Structures or Located on Towers, provided that such personal wireless
services antennae may be located only on a zoning lot owned or occupied by the
Village, the Glencoe Park District, the Glencoe Elementary School District, the
Forest Preserve District of Cook County, a place of public worship, a place of
public right-of-way, or a private golf club. No special use permits authorizing
construction of a new antenna support structure or addition to, enlargement of,
or expansion of use of an existing antenna support structure shall be
authorized unless the applicant is able to demonstrate: (1) that no lawfully
pre-existing antenna support structure, or (2) for a proposed tower, that no
lawfully pre-existing building or structure is available, on commercially
reasonably terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna necessary for
the provision of personal wireless services. Any such personal wireless
services antennae shall also be subject to the standards in Paragraph 5-101D12
or Paragraph 5-101D13, as applicable. (Adopted July 19, 2012)
   H.   Multiple Family Dwellings in the R-D Single/Multiple Family Residential
District; provided, however, that no special use shall be authorized unless (i)
the proposed use satisfies the standards in Subsection
7-502E of the Code, (ii) the proposed use complies with the Village’s
Comprehensive Plan, and (iii) the proposed use secures Exterior Appearance
Review approval pursuant to Section
7-503 of this Code. (June 3, 2004)
   I.   Any use occurring at or on a lot serving a religious congregation that
is not part of the authorized principal use of a religious congregation or an
authorized accessory or temporary use, provided that such use can be reasonably
accommodated by the religious congregation without causing undue disruption to
neighboring properties and otherwise meets the standards for a special use
permit and the requirements of the Village Code and other applicable law.
(Amended 8/2004)
   J.   Relief for any building or structure devoted to a Village use that does
not meet the bulk, space, and yard requirements contained in Section
3-111 of this Code, subject to such restrictions and conditions on the special
use permit as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary or appropriate. (2/2009)
   K.    Golf Course Protective Structure. With the approval of a Special Use
Permit, such structures are not subject to otherwise applicable height,
setback, or setback plane Zoning Code requirements.
(Amd. Ord. 2023-19-3568, passed 10-19-2023)
3-104 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
   Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all residential districts
subject to the provisions of Section
5-101 of this Code. (Also see 3-111-G-20) 
3-105 TEMPORARY USES
   Temporary uses are permitted in all residential districts subject to the
provisions of Section
5-102 of this Code.
3-106 HOME OCCUPATIONS
   Home occupations are permitted in all residential districts subject to the
provisions of Section
5-103 of this Code.
3-107 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
   The parking requirements applicable in all residential districts are set
forth in Section
5-104 of this Code.
3-108 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
   No building or premises shall hereafter be used, no building shall hereafter
be erected or altered, and no accessory use shall hereafter be allowed within
any residential district, unless otherwise provided in this Code, except in
accordance with the following limitations:
   A.   Limit on Principal Uses and Buildings. No more than one principal use
or building shall be maintained on any lot in a residential district at any
time; provided, however, that more than one principal multiple family dwelling
may be permitted on a lot in the R-D Single/Multiple Family District pursuant
to a special use permit under Subsection
3-103H of this Code. (Amended Feb 6, 2003)
   B.   Exterior Appearance Review. No construction or development requiring a
building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure on a lot
in the R-D Single/Multiple Family Residential District shall be permitted
except upon exterior appearance review approval pursuant to Section
7-503 of this Code and approval of a building permit application pursuant to
the Glencoe Village Code; provided, however, that no exterior appearance review
and approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for a
detached single family residence.
   C.   Garage Door Limitations.
      1.   In the R-A and R-B Districts, no garages hereafter erected shall
have its vehicular doors extend along the building front or the corner building
front for a distance greater than 25% of the lot width or of the corner side
lot line, respectively, or 18 feet, whichever is less.
      2.   In the R-C District, no garages hereafter erected shall have its
vehicular doors extend along the building front or the corner building front
for a distance greater than 33% of the lot width or of the corner side lot
line, respectively, or 18 feet, whichever is less; provided, however, that no
individual vehicular door shall extend more than 9 feet along the building
front. (Adopted 2/2003)
   D.   Restrictions on Below Grade Living Space. In the R-D Single/Multiple
Family District, no multiple family dwelling shall be constructed or used such
that either:
      1.   The primary entrance to either a building or any dwelling unit shall
be located below grade, or
      2.   The gross horizontal area of any basement or cellar exceeds the
gross floor area of the story immediately above such basement or cellar.
(Amended 6/2003)
3-109 SIGNS
   Signs are permitted in all residential districts subject to the provisions
of Section
5-105 of this Code.
3-110 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPING
   The buffer and landscaping requirements applicable in all residential
districts are set forth in Section
5-106 of this Code.
3-111 BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
   The building height, lot, yard, floor area, and coverage requirements
applicable in the residential districts are set forth in the following table.
Footnote references appear in Subsection G of this Section at the end of the
table.
 R-A R-B R-C R-D             R-D
             (Single Family) (Multiple Family)
                                                                                               R-D     R-D
                                                                         R-A    R-B     R-C    (Single (Multiple
                                                                                               Family) Family)
FOOTNOTE REFERENCES APPEAR IN SUBSECTION G
(a) also see “ground coverage”, total definition) 
A.   Maximum Height (14) (R-D see August 20, 1996 interpretation at end of definition section) 
1. Principal Structures
a. Feet (whichever is less) (17 August 2000)                            31     31      31     31      31
b. Stories                                                               3      3       3      2       N/A
2. Accessory Structures                                                 18     18      18     18      18
(17 August 2000) 
B.   Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions (1)(2) 
1. Lot Area-Dwelling (sq. ft.)(18)                                      20,000 13,000/ 7,000  N/A     N/A
                                                                                15,000
2. Lot Area-Principal Building or Use Other Than Dwelling (sq. ft.)      40,000 26,000  14,000 20,000  20,000
3. Average Width of Lot (feet)                                           100    80      50     50      50
C.   Minimum Yards and Areas(1)(3)(4)(5)(6)(19) 
1. Front (feet)(7)                                                       40-50  40-50   30-50  25      25
2. Side (feet)(7)(8)                                                                               
a. Corner Lot                                                                                      
                                                                                               5
(i) interior yard                                                        12     10      8      (3-111- 10
                                                                                               8-G-
                                                                                               (c))
                                                                         FOR ALL DISTRICTS: 15% of
                                                                         average lot width minimum 15-
(ii) corner side yard                                                    25, (except multiple family   25
                                                                         developments in the R-
                                                                         D District):
                                                                                               25%
(iii) total (percent of average lot width)                               25%    25%     25%    (3-111- N/A
                                                                                               8-G-
                                                                                               (c))
b. Interior Lot                                                                                    
(i) per side yard                                                        12     10      8      5       10
(ii) total (% of average lot width)                                      25%    25%     25%    25%     N/A
3. Rear (% of lot depth and minimum dimension in feet)                   20%    20%     20%    15%     N/A
(accessory structures see 3-111-G-8-(b))                                 30     30      30     10      10
                                                                                               (8-c)
4. Courts (see measurements in Paragraph G10 of this Section)                                       
5. Dwelling Units in Multiple Family Dwellings 
(see measurements in Section                                                                        
3-111, G, #11)
D.   Maximum Ground Coverage                                                                     
1. Total Ground Coverage                                                                            
a. Interior Lots                                                         30%    30%     30%    30%     30%
b. Corner Lots                                                           35%    35%     35%    35%     35%
2. Accessory Buildings Coverage                                         6%     6%      6%             
(also see F and 5-101-E)
3. Total Impervious Coverage                                            N/A    N/A     N/A    N/A     50%
E. Maximum Gross Floor Area (12)(13)(15)(16) (17 August 2000)                                       
1. Lots less than 8,000 sq. ft. (percent of lot area                     40%    40%     40%    40%     N/A
                                                                         FOR ALL DISTRICTS ( except
2. Lots equal to or greater than 8,000 sq. ft. but not more than 9,185   multiple family developments  N/A
sq. ft. (percent of lot area)                                            in the R-D District): 27% +
                                                                         720 sq. ft.
                                                                         FOR ALL DISTRICTS:( except
                                                                         multiple family developments
3. Lots equal to or greater than 9,185 sq. ft. but not greater than      in the R-D District):        N/A
20,000 sq. ft.                                                           [.27 (lot area) + 720] [1-
                                                                         (.10) (lot area-9185)]
                                                                         10,815
                                                                         FOR ALL DISTRICTS:( except
4. Lots greater than 20,000 sq. ft. (percent of lot area)                multiple family developments  N/A
                                                                         in the R-D District): 23.76%
                                                                         + 634 sq. ft.
F. Minimum Spacing Between Principal and
Accessory                  Structures and Uses (feet)  10     10      10     10      10
(Accessory Bldgs - see 5-101-E) 
(no accessory structure with no principal structure (5-101-F))
 
   G.   Exceptions and Explanatory Notes.
      1.   Nonconforming Lots. See Section
6-104 of this Code for lot requirements with respect to legal nonconforming
lots of record.
      2.   Reserved.
      3.   Visibility Across Corners. Any other provision of this Code to the
contrary notwithstanding, nothing more than two and one-half feet high shall be
erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow, or maintained on any corner lot in
any residential district within the area bounded by the street lines and a line
drawn between points on the street lines 12 feet from the corner.
      4.   Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks established for some
signs by Section
5-105 of this Code shall control over the yard and setback requirements
established in the table.
      5.   Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following
structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard or court:
         (a)   Statuary and ornamental light standards having a height of 8
feet or less and having a ground coverage (including overhangs) not exceeding
one square foot; and
         (b)   Open patios and walkways; and(c) Eaves projecting not more than
30 inches from an exterior wall, plus any gutters or down-spouts projecting not
more than six inches from such eaves; and
         (d)   Gutters, downspouts, ornamental features, cornices, belt
courses, leaders, sills, lintels, and the like projecting not more than 12
inches from an exterior wall; and
         (e)   Outside stairways and ramps to first floors; provided that any
platforms therefor shall not project more than four feet from an exterior wall,
exceed four feet in height, or extend more than one foot on either side of the
door opening; provided further that no stairways or ramps shall be wider than
such platform; and
         (f)   Flagpoles; and
         (g)   Nonmechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards;
and
         (h)   Terraces; and
         (i)   Recreational devices, but only freestanding basketball standards
and no other recreational devices in any front yard; and
         (j)   Fences and walls subject to the limitations in the Glencoe
Village Code; and
         (k)   Driveways, parking lots, and parking areas subject to, and
satisfying the requirements and limitations of, Section
5-104 of this Code, except that no required parking spaces shall be located in
any front or corner side yard, or in any required buffer area; and
         (l)   Hedges; and
         (m)   Canvas or similar readily movable awnings and canopies attached
by temporary supports to the exterior wall of a residential building and not
extending more than 72 inches from such wall.
   Notwithstanding these exceptions, no portion of any cellar or any extended
window well in a single family dwelling shall be permitted to extend closer to
a lot line than the required setback for such dwelling in the district in which
the dwelling is located. (Amended 5/18/2006)
      6.   Platted Building Lines. See Subsection
8-101F of this Code.
      7.   Front and Corner Side Yard Adjustments.
         (a)   Where one-third or more of the frontage of a block in any R-A,
R-B, or R-C District consists of the linear frontage of lots utilized for
existing principal buildings, the front yard shall be established at the
average distance of such existing principal buildings from the  street line;
provided that in no case shall the front of a building be required to set back
more than 10 feet deeper than the front of an existing principal building on an
immediately  adjacent lot, nor more than 50 feet from the street line in any
case. (Amended 6/2003)
         (b)   If the rear lot line of a corner lot forms part or all of the
side lot line of an adjacent lot, then the minimum corner side yard of the
corner lot shall be 25 feet, except to the extent that, pursuant to
Subparagraphs (c) and (d) of this Paragraph 3-111G7, a special setback is
established. The corner side yard need not exceed the front yard herein
established for adjoining lots fronting on the side street.
         (c)   Where a district boundary line separates districts with
different setback requirements, a special building line shall be established in
the district of lesser setback requirement, located by connecting the following
points by a straight line: (i) a point on the established building line of the
district of lesser setback requirement, at a distance from the district
boundary line equivalent to the difference in the setback requirements of the
two districts, but this distance need not exceed 20 feet, and (ii) the point of
intersection of the building line of the district of greater setback
requirement, and the district boundary line.
         (d)   Where the setback requirements of this Code differ from two
adjoining lots, or where the side yard of one lot is less than the front yard
required along the same street for an adjoining lot, the side lot line of the
second  lot being formed partially or wholly by the rear lot line of the first
mentioned lot, the building line for the lot on which the deeper  setback is
required shall be modified for a distance of not more than 60 feet from the lot
line of the adjoining lot, to lie halfway between the lesser and greater of the
two required building lines.
         (e)   In the case of a lot that does not have a front lot line equal
to at least 50 feet, the front yard line shall be established by the Board of
Trustees so as to conform as closely as practicable to the intent and purpose
of this Code to require uniform setbacks and appropriate spacing between
buildings. Such front yard line shall be marked on the plat for any lot
hereafter divided and shall be established prior to the issuance of a building
permit for all other lots.
      8.   Exceptions in Yard Regulations.
         (a)   Alley. In computing the depth of the rear yard or of a side yard
or open court for any building where such yard or court opens onto an alley,
one-half of the alley width may be assumed to be a portion of the yard or
court.
         (b)   Accessory Buildings. No accessory building shall hereafter be
erected, altered, or maintained at a distance less than five feet from the rear
lot line; provided that, wherever the rear lot line of a corner lot forms part
of the front half of the side lot line of an adjacent  lot, no accessory
building shall, on said first mentioned lot, (i) be placed nearer to the rear
lot line of such lot than a dimension equal to the side yard requirement of the
adjoining lot, unless such accessory building is placed 50 feet or more from
the street line; or (ii) be placed nearer to the corner side line of said lot
than a dimension equal to the front yard requirement of the adjoining lot,
unless such accessory building is placed 25 feet or more from the rear lot
line.
         (c)   R-D District. For single family residential developments in the
R-D District, the total required side yards need not exceed 25 feet, and the
required rear yard need not exceed 25 feet.
      9.   Attached Garages. Any garage that is attached to a single family
dwelling shall be considered a part of the single family dwelling for purposes
of compliance with this Code but may extend into the required rear yard to
within five feet of the rear lot line; provided that such garage, together with
all detached accessory structures located within such rear yard, shall not
occupy more than 650 square feet of such required rear yard in the R-A District
or 550 square feet of such required rear yard in the R-B, R-C, and R-
D Districts. No such structure shall be used, maintained, or converted for any
use or purpose other than a garage, nor shall such structure have attic space
with a clear ceiling height of seven feet or greater at any point.
      10.   Courts. The following regulations shall apply to outer and inner
courts in the R-D District:
         (a)   Outer Court. The width of an outer court shall not be less than
eight feet nor less than one-sixth of the length of the court from the closed
end.
         (b)   Inner Court. An inner court shall not be less than 10 feet wide
nor shall its area be less than 100 square feet.
      11.   Dwelling Units in Multiple Family Dwellings. No dwelling unit in a
multiple family dwelling hereafter erected, constructed, or created in any
residential district shall have a gross floor area of less than 600 square feet
if an efficiency dwelling unit; 800 square feet if a one-bedroom dwelling unit;
or 800 square feet plus an additional 150 square feet for every bedroom in
excess of the first bedroom if a two or more bedroom dwelling unit.
      12.   Maximum Gross Floor Area. For purposes of calculating a lot's
maximum gross floor area, the following shall be excluded:
         (a)   The first 400 square feet of any detached garage; (17 August
2000)
         (b)   The first 200 square feet of any attached garage located in the
rear half of the lot, but not for any garage along a corner building front, and
not on any lot for which Subparagraph 3-111G12(a) also applies; (17 August
2000)
         (c)   That portion of a porch along a building front up to eight feet
in depth;
         (d)   The first 150 square feet of unfinished attic space having a
clear ceiling height of at least seven feet, provided that such attic is not
accessible via a fixed, permanent stairway;
         (e)   The first 64 square feet of underbay or undereave areas that
project not more than four feet from an exterior wall of a building; and
         (f)   That portion of a courtyard that is uninterrupted by walls as
measured perpendicularly from either the front yard line or the corner side
yard line.
         (g)   For any pre-FAR single family dwelling, the gross floor area of
any basement, provided that the average ceiling height of such basement shall
not be more than four feet above grade and provided further that for any single
family dwelling for which there is not a difference in elevation of at least
eight (8) feet between the floor surface of the basement and the floor surface
of at least 80% of the gross floor area of the story immediately above such
basement, the exclusion permitted by this paragraph (g) shall be restricted to
the lesser of (i) 12% of the gross floor area of the dwelling or (ii) 500
square feet, and no variation from the maximum gross floor area regulations may
be sought or obtained for any such dwelling; and (17 August 2000) (Amended
portions 16 December 2004)
         (h)   For any pre-FAR single family dwelling, (i) the gross floor area
of any attic up to a maximum of 400 square feet, or, (ii) if there is no attic
otherwise included in the calculation of gross floor area and such pre-FAR
single family dwelling has more than two stories (excluding any basement) that
have a difference in elevation of at least eight (8) feet between the floor
surfaces of such stories, the uppermost story of such dwelling, up to a maximum
of 400 square feet. In no event may the exception in Subparagraph 3-111G12(d)
of this Code be applied in conjunction with this Subparagraph (h).  (17 August
2000)
      13.   Reserved.
      14.   Setback Plane Height Restrictions.
         (a)   In addition to the general height restrictions in Subsection
3-111A of this Code, all buildings on any lot within the R-A, R-B, or R-
C Districts shall be subject to, and comply with, the setback plane height
restrictions herein set forth.
         (b)   Except as provided in subparagraph (c) or (d) no portion of a
building on any lot shall intercept the planes that begin at points 8 feet
directly above grade at the side lot lines and run at 45 degree angles toward
the interior of such lot until they reach the maximum building height permitted
on the lot.
         (c)   For lots having a lot width of 80 feet or less, no portion of a
building on any such lot [except as provided in subparagraph (d) below] shall
intercept any plane that begins at points directly above grade at a side lot
line at a height determined by the following formula:
   Height (in feet) of beginning points for setback plane = 8 + [0.15 (80 - W)]
where "W" is the lot width of the lot in question, and runs at a 45 degree
angle toward the interior of such lot until it reaches the maximum building
height permitted on the lot.
         (d)   The following structures and architectural features shall be
permitted to extend into and through the setback plane, but only to the extent
set forth below:
         (i)   Eaves and associated gutters and downspouts projecting not more
than is permitted under Subparagraph 3-111G5(c) of this Code;
         (ii)   Dormers may extend into and through a setback plane, provided
that: (a) the total length of such dormer extensions at the points of
intersection with a setback plane shall not exceed the greater of 12 feet or 25
percent of the length of the side of the building from which the daylight plane
is measured; (b) no single dormer extending beyond a setback plane shall have a
length in excess of 12 feet at its intersection with the setback plane; and (c)
no dormer shall extend beyond the setback plane at any point closer than ten
feet from the intersection of the building front and the side of the building
from which the setback plane is measured.
         (iii)   Chimneys, roof-mounted antennae, and other similar
architectural features and appurtenances not otherwise considered in
determining building height may extend through the setback plane.
         (iv)   Gable roof ends, hip roof ends, and gambrel roof ends (as
depicted in Illustrations A, B, and C to this Code, respectively) may extend
into and through the setback plane, provided that: (a) the total length of such
roof end extensions at their intersection with a setback plane shall not exceed
20 feet for lots with a width of 50 feet or less, which length shall be ratably
increased to 30 feet at the rate of one inch in length for each increase of
three inches in the lot width; and (b) no dormer may project from any roof end
extending through the setback plane.
      15.   Allowable Gross Floor Area for Lots With 8,000 Square Feet.
Notwithstanding anything in Paragraph
3-111E2 of this Code to the contrary, any lot with a lot area of 8,000 square
feet or more shall be allowed at least 3,200 square feet of gross floor area.
      16.   Allowable Gross Floor Area for Lots Over 20,000 Square Feet.
Notwithstanding anything in Paragraph
3-111E4 of this Code to the contrary, any lot with a lot area in excess of
20,000 square feet shall be allowed at least 5,508 square feet of gross floor
area. (17 August 2000)
      17.   Special Lot Area and Yard Requirements for Glencoe Park District
and Winnetka Park District Park Sites. If not improved with a building, a park
site shall meet the following lot area and yard requirements, notwithstanding
any  contrary provision in Section
3-111 of this Code.
         (a)   Minimum lot area of 7,000 square feet;
         (b)   No required front yard or required corner side yard;
         (c)   Minimum interior side and rear yards of 12 feet in the R-
A District, 10 feet in the R-B District, 8 feet in the R-C District, and 5 feet
in the R-D District; and
   No park site may be used for dwelling purposes, nor may a park site be
improved with a building, unless such building complies with all applicable
setback requirements of Subsection
3-111C and the gross floor area limitations for single family dwellings as
prescribed in Subsection
3-111E. (Adopted March 11, 1999)
      18.   R-B Overlay Regulations for Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area
for lots within the R-B District shall be 13,000 square feet, except that the
minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet for lots located in the area
bounded by Westley Road on the north, Sunset Lane on the south, Hohlfelder Road
on the east, and Longmeadow Lane on the west. (Adopted Nov. 15, 2001) 
      19.   Special Yard Considerations for Multiple-Family Dwellings.
Notwithstanding the yard restrictions set forth in Subsection
3-111C, the required minimum side and rear yards for a lot in the R-D District
shall be increased by one additional foot for each additional foot that the
multiple family dwelling exceeds 20 feet in building height, provided, however
that this Paragraph shall not apply to corner side yards. (Added Feb 6, 2003)
      20.   Special Side Yard Setbacks for Certain Detached Garages.
Notwithstanding the setback requirements otherwise applicable to structures
accessory to a single family dwelling, not more than one detached accessory
garage may be erected and maintained on a zoning lot in accordance with the
following reduced requirements for the setback from an interior side lot line,
but only in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Paragraph:
         (a)   The setback from not more than one interior side lot line may be
reduced:
         (i)   For lots having a lot width of 40 feet or less, to a distance of
not less than three (3) feet from such interior side lot line;
         (ii)   For lots having a lot width of more than 40 feet but less than
80 feet, to a distance of not less than four (4) feet from such interior side
lot line;
         (b)   To the extent that a detached garage is located in accordance
with a reduced interior side lot line setback authorized under Subparagraph
3-111G20(a), such garage shall not be considered in determining compliance with
the minimum total side yard requirement for such lot.
         (c)   For the reduced setback requirements set forth in this Paragraph
to apply, the entire detached garage must meet all of the following conditions.
         (i)   Consist of only one story;
         (ii)   Not exceed 15 feet in height;
         (iii)   Be located in the rear 25% of lot; and
         (iv)   The total length of the garage that is located closer to the
interior side lot line than is otherwise authorized pursuant to Subparagraph
3-111C2b(i) of this Code does not exceed 22 feet.
   No variation shall be permitted from any of the foregoing conditions. Any
detached garage constructed in accordance with the reduced side yard setback
authorized pursuant to this Paragraph shall not subsequently be eligible for a
variation with respect to such interior side yard setback.
      21.   Special Front Yard Setback for Certain Entryways.
   Notwithstanding the setback requirements otherwise applicable to structures
accessory to a single family dwelling, not more than one entryway may be
erected and maintained in the required front yard on a zoning lot, but only in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Paragraph.
         (a)   The entryway shall be open on three sides, except for column
supports.
         (b)   The entryway shall be one-story; shall not exceed 13 feet in
covered height or 6 feet in uncovered height, nor 6 feet in depth; and shall
consist of no more than 72 square feet in area.
   No variation shall be permitted from any of the foregoing conditions. Any
entryway constructed in accordance with the reduced front yard setback
authorized pursuant to this Paragraph shall not subsequently be eligible for a
variation with respect to such front yard setback.
(New Section 21, 18 November 2004; Am. Ord. 2022-17-3537, passed 10-20-2022;
Am. Ord. 2025-31-3636, passed 11-20-2025)
ARTICLE IV
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
4-101 PURPOSES
   Two zoning districts are provided for business and commercial uses. When
taken together, these districts are intended to permit development of property
for the full range of business and commercial uses needed to serve the citizens
of Glencoe and nearby suburban areas.
   The business districts are intended to serve the everyday shopping needs of
Village residents as well as to provide opportunities for specialty shops
attractive to the wider suburban residential community around the Village. They
permit uses that are necessary to satisfy the most basic and frequently
occurring shopping needs. They also permit compatible uses that, while not used
as frequently, would be desirably located in close proximity to potential
users. The districts are normally located on primary or secondary
thoroughfares, are relatively small in size, and have bulk standards that
provide for compatibility with nearby residential uses. Business uses are to be
limited to retail and service establishments dealing directly with customers.
   The B-1 Central Business District is located in the center of the Village.
It is intended to be a contiguous area serving the entire Glencoe suburban
community with a wide variety of retail and service uses. The bulk standards
are intended to reflect the generally more intense development of property
existing in this area.
   The B-2 Neighborhood Shopping District is located at the south end of the
Village and is functionally a part of the Hubbard Woods commercial area that is
partially located in Winnetka. The regulations are designed to encourage a
broad range of attractive retail and compatible service uses, and the bulk
standard are intended to reflect the development of a contiguous business area
consisting primarily of property fronting on one of the major thoroughfares in
the Village.
4-102 PERMITTED USES
I.   Permitted Uses in the B-1 (Central Business District) Zoning District
   A.   Uses Permitted By Right on Any Floor in the B-1 Zoning District. The
uses indicated in the following table and no others are permitted as of right
on any floor in the B-1 District. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the standards in Section
7-401E of this Code. Where applicable, NAICS codes are given in parentheses for
reference only in applying interpretative standards.
      1.   Apparel and Accessory Stores (448)
      2.   Auto and Home Supply Stores (441310, 452990), but not including
service bays
      3.   Department Stores (45211)
      4.   Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores (446110)
      5.   Eating Places (72251), but not including live entertainment or
drive-in eating places, and subject to the parking limitations set forth in
Paragraph
5-104E4 of this Code
      6.   Fiorists (453110)
      7.   Food Stores (445110), but not including retail bakeries employing
more than 8 persons or open-air markets
      8.   Hardware Stores (444130)
      9.   Home Furniture, Furnishings, and Equipment Stores (442)
      10.   Lawn and Garden Supply Stores (444220)
      11.   Liquor Stores (445310)
      12.   Locksmiths (561622)
      13.   Medical Cannabis Dispensaries but not (a) within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary
school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day
child care facility, or (b) within a house, apartment, or condominium.
      14.   Miscellaneous General Merchandise Stores (45299)
      15.   Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores (451110, 451211, 453210,
448310, 451120, 443130, 453220, 448320, 451130)
      16.   Miscellaneous Retail Stores (453998), but not including firework
sales, gravestone sales, monument sales, sales barns, tombstone sales, or open
air markets.
      17.   Musical Instrument Supply Stores (451140)
      18.   New and Used Motor Vehicle Dealers (441110)
      19.   News Dealers and Newsstands (451212)
      20.   Optical Goods Stores (446130)
      21.   Paint, Glass, and Wallpaper Stores (444120, 444190)
      22.   Tobacco Stores and Stands (453991)
      23.   Used Merchandise Stores (453310)
      24.   Variety Stores (452990)
      25.   Personal Wireless Services Antennae, with or without antenna
support structures and related equipment, but only if located on property owned
or occupied by the Village, and subject to the standards in Paragraph
5-101D12 of this Code, and not including personal wireless services antennae
located on a tower.
   B.   Uses Permitted By Right on Any Floor Other Than a Ground Floor in the
B-1 Zoning District. The uses indicated in the following table and no others
are permitted as of right on any floor other than a ground floor in the B-
1 Zoning District. These uses may be permitted on ground floors with the
approval of a Special Use Permit, as provided in Section
4-103 and Section
7-502 of this Code. In interpreting the use designations, reference should be
made to the standards in Section
7-401E of this Code. Where applicable, NAICS codes are given in parentheses for
reference only in applying interpretative standards.
      1.   Commercial Printing (32311)
      2.   Photocopying and Duplicating (561439)
      3.   Depository and Nondepository Credit Institutions (5221-5222), but
not including drive-in establishments or facilities
      4.   Holding and Other Investment Offices (523)
      5.   Insurance Carriers (5241)
      6.   Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Services (5242)
      7.   Real Estate Offices (5312)
      8.   Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and Services
(5231)
      9.   Accounting, Auditing, and Bookkeeping Services (5412)
      10.   Barber Shops (812111)
      11.   Beauty Shops (812112)
      12.   Bicycle Repairs (811490)
      13.   Computer Programming, Data Processing, and Other Computer Related
Services (5415, 5812)
      14.   Dance/Music/Art Instruction (611610)
      15.   Electrical Repair Shops (811211)
      16.   Engineering, Architectural, and Surveying Services (5413)
      17.   Exercise Studios, Fitness, Yoga, Training, Dieting (713490, 611699,
812191)
      18.   Game Rooms (713120)
      19.   Home Health Care Services (621160)
      20.   Interior Design Services (541410)
      21.   Janitorial Services (561720)
      22.   Laundry, Cleaning, and Garment Services (8123), employing not more
than eight persons, but not including coin-operated laundries and dry-cleaning
(812310), dry cleaning plants (812320), or industrial launderers (812332)
      23.   Legal Services (5411)
      24.   Management Services (54161)
      25.   Management Consulting Services (541611-541614)
      26.   Management and Public Relations Services (541820)
      27.   Medical and Dental Laboratories (621511, 339116)
      28.   Miscellaneous Business and Professional Office Uses not listed
above
      29.   Miscellaneous Services not listed above
      30.   Offices and Clinics of Doctors of Medicine, Dentists, Osteopaths,
and Other Health Practitioners (6211-6213)
      31.   Personnel Supply Services (5613)
      32.   Pet Grooming Services (812910)
      33.   Photographic Studios, Portrait (541921)
      34.   Plumbing, Heating, and Air Conditioning (238220)
      35.   Re-upholstery and Furniture Repair (811420)
      36.   Secretarial and Court Reporting Services (561410, 561492)
      37.   Shoe Repair Shops and Shoeshine Parlors (811430)
      38.   Tax Preparation Services (541213)
      39.   Taxidermists (711510)
      40.   Tutoring Services for Children, Special Education, SAT/ACT
Preparation (611691).
      41.   Video Tape and Disc Rental (532230)
      42.   Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair (811490)
      43.   Courier and Postal Services (491110, 492110, 492220)
      44.   Travel Agencies (561510)
      45.   Tour Operators (561520)
      46.   Dwelling Units
      47.   Parks, playgrounds, and Village buildings and uses, including
public libraries
      48.   Civic and Social Associations (813410)
      49.   Parking lots and parking structures (812930), subject to the
provisions of Section
5-104 of this Code.
II.   Permitted Uses in the B-2 (Neighborhood Business District) Zoning
District. The uses indicated in the following table and no others are permitted
as of right in the B-2 Zoning District. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the standards in Section
7-401E of this Code, Where applicable, NAICS codes are given in parentheses for
reference only in applying interpretative standards. Uses not permitted on the
ground floor may be permitted upon issuance of a special use permit pursuant to
Section
4-103 of this Code.
   A.   Printing, Publishing, and Allied Industries.
      1.   Commercial Printing (32311)
      2.   Photocopying and Duplicating (561439)
   B.   Retail Trade.
      1.   Apparel and Accessory Stores (448)
      2.   Auto and Home Supply Stores (441310, 452990), but not including
service bavs
      3.   Department Stores (45211)
      4.   Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores (446110)
      5.   Eating Places (72251), but not including live entertainment or
drive-in eating places, and subject to the parking limitations set forth in
Paragraph
5-104E4 of this Code
      6.   Florists (453110)
      7.   Food Stores (445110), but not including retail bakeries employing
more than eight persons or open-air markets
      8.   Hardware Stores (444130)
      9.   Home Furniture, Furnishings, and Equipment Stores (442)
      10.   Lawn and Garden Supply Stores (444220)
      11.   Liquor Stores (445310)
      12.   Locksmiths (561622)
      13.   Medical Cannabis Dispensaries but not (a) within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary
school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day
child care facility, or (b) within a house, apartment, or condominium.
      14.   Miscellaneous General Merchandise Stores (45299)
      15.   Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores (451110, 451211, 453210,
448310, 451120, 443130, 453220, 448320, 451130)
      16.   Miscellaneous Retail Stores (453998), but not including firework
sales, gravestone sales, monument sales, sales barns, tombstone sales, or open
air markets.
      17.   Musical Instrument Supply Stores (451140)
      18.   New and Used Motor Vehicle Dealers (441110)
      19.   News Dealers and Newsstands (451212)
      20.   Optical Goods Stores (446130)
      21.   Paint, Glass, and Wallpaper Stores (444120,444190)
      22.   Tobacco Stores and Stands (453991)
      23.   Used Merchandise Stores (453310)
      24.   Variety Stores (452990)
   C.   Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate.
      1.   Depository and Nondepository Credit Institutions (5221-5222), but
not including drive-in establishments or facilities
      2.   Holding and Other Investment Offices (523), but not on the ground
floor
      3.   Insurance Carriers (5241), but not on the ground floor
      4.   Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Services (5242)
      5.   Real Estate Offices (5312)
      6.   Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and Services
(5231), but not on the ground floor
   D.   Services.
      1.   Accounting, Auditing, and Bookkeeping Services (5412)
      2.   Barber Shops (812111)
      3.   Beauty Shops (812112)
      4.   Bicycle Repairs (811490)
      5.   Computer Programming, Data Processing, and Other Computer Related
Services (5415, 5812), but not on the ground floor
      6.   Dance/Music/Art Instruction (611610)
      7.   Electrical Repair Shops (811211)
      8.   Engineering, Architectural, and Surveying Services (5413)
      9.   Exercise Studios, Fitness, Yoga, Training, Dieting (713490, 611699,
812191)
      10.   Game Rooms (713120)
      11.   Home Health Care Services (621160), but not on the ground floor
      12.   Interior Design Services (541410)
      13.   Janitorial Services (561720)
      14.   Laundry, Cleaning, and Garment Services (8123), employing not more
than eight persons, but not including coin-operated laundries and dry-cleaning
(812310), dry cleaning plants (812320), or industrial launderers (812332)
      15.   Legal Services (5411)
      16.   Management Services (54161), but not on the ground floor
      17.   Management Consulting Services (541611-541614), but not on the
ground floor
      18.   Management and Public Relations Services (541820), but not on the
ground floor
      19.   Medical and Dental Laboratories (621511, 339116)
      20.   Miscellaneous Business and Professional Office Uses not listed
above, but not on the ground floor
      21.   Miscellaneous Services not listed above, but not on the ground
floor
      22.   Offices and Clinics of Doctors of Medicine, Dentists, Osteopaths,
and Other Health Practitioners (6211-6213)
      23.   Personnel Supply Services (5613), but not on the ground floor
      24.   Pet Grooming Services (812910)
      25.   Photographic Studios, Portrait (541921)
      26.   Plumbing, Heating, and Air Conditioning (238220)
      27.   Re-upholstery and Furniture Repair (811420)
      28.   Secretarial and Court Reporting Services (561410, 561492), but not
on the ground floor
      29.   Shoe Repair Shops and Shoeshine Parlors (811430)
      30.   Tax Preparation Services (541213), but not on the ground floor
      31.   Taxidermists (711510)
      32.   Tutoring Services for Children, Special Education, SAT/ACT
Preparation (611691)
      33.   Video Tape and Disc Rental (532230)
      34.   Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair (811490)
   E.   Transportation and Utility Services.
      1.   Courier and Postal Services (491110, 492110, 492220)
      2.   Travel Agencies (561510)
      3.   Tour Operators (561520), but not on the ground floor
   F.    Personal Wireless Services Antennae, with or without antenna support
structures and related equipment, but only if located on property owned or
occupied by the Village, and subject to the standards in Paragraph
5-101D12 of this Code, and not including personal wireless services antennae
located on a tower.
   G.   Dwelling Units, but not on the ground floor
   H.   Parks, playgrounds, and Village buildings and uses, including public
libraries.
   I.   Civic and Social Associations (813410), but not on the ground floor.
   J.   Parking lots and parking structures (812930), subject to the provisions
of Section
5-104 of this Code.
(Adopted July 19, 2012; Am. Ord. 2013-01-3331, passed 1-17-13; Am. Ord. 2014-
15-3367, passed 10-16-14; Am. Ord. 2024-10-3587, passed 6-20-24)
4-103 SPECIAL USES
   Except as specifically limited in the following paragraphs, the following
may be permitted in any business district subject to the issuance of a special
use permit as provided in Section
7-502 of this Code, and subject to the additional standards hereinafter set
forth:
   A.   Financial Institution Drive-In Facilities; provided, however, that no
special use permit shall be granted unless the Board of Trustees shall find
that the evidence establishes that there is a community need for such a
facility at the location proposed.
   B.   Gasoline Service Stations (4471); provided, however, that no special
use permit shall be granted unless the Board of Trustees shall find that the
evidence establishes that there is a community need for such a station at the
location proposed. Such special use permit may authorize the outdoor storage of
service vehicles and outdoor vehicle maintenance and service activities that
are routine in nature, subject to such conditions as the Board of Trustees may
deem necessary or appropriate, notwithstanding the limitations of Subsection
4-107D.
   C.   Housing for Senior Citizens and Handicapped Persons; provided, however,
that the Board of Trustees may, in approving a special use permit for such
housing:
      1.   Allow dwelling unit sizes smaller than those required by Paragraph
4-110C11 of this Code;
      2.   Waive or modify the restriction on residential use below the second
floor level of buildings;
      3.   Waive or modify the lot area requirements otherwise applicable;
      4.   Allow a reduction in the number of otherwise applicable required
parking spaces; provided, however, that no such reduction shall allow for less
than one space for every two dwelling units.
   D.   Relief for buildings in the business districts that do not meet the
parking requirements contained in Paragraphs 5-104E1(h)(i) and (ii) of this
Code; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may, in approving a special
use permit for parking relief:
      1.   restrict the size of any proposed new building or addition to an
existing building;
      2.   restrict the uses of the building, including without limitation
restricting the use of one or more floors in the building to retail uses only;
      3.   require that the owner provided off-site parking; and/or
      4.   place any other restrictions or conditions on the special use permit
as the Board of Trustees deems necessary or appropriate. (Section D adopted Feb
19, 2004)
   E.   Personal Wireless Services Antennae either: 1)   located on the ground,
a building or a utility pole within a a zoning lot or right-of-way but not
otherwise permitted; or 2) located on Towers, provided, however, that no such
special use permit shall be granted unless the Board of Trustees shall find
that, in addition to the other applicable standards for a special use permit,
the evidence establishes that there is a community need for such antenna and
tower at the location proposed and that such antenna and tower comply with the
standards set forth in Paragraph 5-101D13 of this Code. No special use permits
authorizing construction of a new tower or addition to, enlargement of, or
expansion of use of a lawfully existing tower shall be authorized unless the
applicant is able to demonstrate that no lawfully pre-existing antenna support
structure or lawfully pre-existing building or structure is available on
commercially reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna
necessary for the provision of personal wireless services. (July 19, 2012)
(Also see 5-101 D 13)
   F.   Residential Use Below the Second Floor ins the B-1 District only,
provided that: 
      1.   Any dwelling unit below the second floor is setback at least 120
feet from any zoning lot frontage along either Vernon, Park, or Green Bay Road;
      2.   The zoning lot abuts a residential district; and
      3.   Each such dwelling unit is oriented on the zoning lot so as to
provide a buffer between nonresidential uses on the zoning lot and the
residential uses on the abutting lot or lots.
   In granting a special use permit pursuant to this Subsection, the Board of
Trustees may approve the design and layout of any parking area or parking lot
for the required parking spaces serving such residential use, notwithstanding
any of the particular requirements in Subsections 5-104B and 5-104C of this
Code. (4/1995)
   G.   Projecting Signs: but only if such signs are integrally related to the
restoration of a building on a block where all the buildings having frontage on
such block were constructed before 1920, and provided that such signs are
demonstrably shown to be consistent with the restoration of such buildings. No
projecting signs authorized pursuant to this Subsection shall be permitted to
extend more than 48 inches from the wall of the building to which such sign is
attached. (4/1995)
   H.   Relief for any building or structure devoted to Village use that does
not meet the bulk, space, and yard requirements contained in Section
4-110 of this Code, subject to such restrictions and conditions on the special
use permit as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary or appropriate. (2/2009)
   I.   Uses on a ground floor that are permitted on floors other than the
ground floor pursuant to Section 4-102.
   J.    Greater maximum building height within the B-2 Zoning District,
subject to the following conditions:
      1.    Such relief shall be available only for buildings entirely within
those portions of the B-2 Zoning District that are either located:
         a.   no more than 130 feet from the Scott Avenue right-of-way and no
less than 100 feet from the Green Bay Road right-of-way; or
         b.   no more than 100 feet from the Scott Avenue right-of-way and no
more than 100 feet from the Green Bay Road right-of-way.
      2.    Such relief shall not be available within any portion of the B-
2 Zoning District that is west of Green Bay Road.
      3.    The maximum allowable building height allowed with the approval of
a Special Use Permit in the B-2 Zoning District shall not exceed 45 feet.
   K.   Permanent Outdoor Dining. Such outdoor dining may include permanent
accessory structures.
   L.    Golf Course Protective Structure. With the approval of a Special Use
Permit, such structures are not subject to otherwise applicable height,
setback, or setback plane Zoning Code requirements.”
(Am. Ord. 2013-01-3331, passed 1-17-13; Am. Ord. 2022-19-3539, passed 11-17-
2022; Am. Ord. 2023-02-3547, passed 1-19-2023; Amd. Ord. 2023-19-3568, passed
10-19-2023)
4-104 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
   Accessory structures and uses are permitted in all business districts
subject to the provisions of Section
5-101 of this Code.
4-105 TEMPORARY USES
   Temporary uses are permitted in all business districts subject to the
provisions of Section
5-102 of this Code.
4-106 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
   The parking requirements applicable in all business districts are set forth
in Section
5-104 of this Code.
4-107 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS
   No building or premises shall hereafter be used, no building shall hereafter
be erected or altered, and no accessory use pursuant to Section
5-101 of this Code shall hereafter be allowed, within any business district,
unless otherwise provided in this Code, except in accordance with the following
use limitations:
   A.   Exterior Appearance Review. No construction or development requiring a
building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted in any business district except upon appearance review approval
pursuant to Section
7-503 of this Code and approval of the building permit application pursuant to
the Glencoe Village Code.
   B.   Incidental Use. Any building primarily used for any of the above
enumerated permitted or special uses may not have more than 40 percent of the
floor area devoted to manufacturing or storage purposes incidental to such
primary use; provided further that no more than five employees shall be engaged
at any time on the premises in any such manufacturing or storage use.
   C.   Use of Lot for Residential Purposes. Whenever part of any building is
used for residential purposes, such building shall be constructed on a lot
having at least 1,200 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit.
   D.   Enclosed Building. All operations including sales and storage shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building, except for permitted temporary
uses, operations at a financial institution drive-in facility, and the
dispensing of gasoline and oil at gasoline service stations.
   E.   Products. All products produced, kept, handled, or offered for sale
shall be sold only at retail on the premises.
   F.   Motor Vehicle Sales. No business establishment, other than an
authorized financial institution drive-in facility or an authorized gasoline
service station,  shall offer goods or services directly to customers waiting
in vehicles or, by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging
procedures, encourage or permit customers to receive any product which may be
used or consumed in a vehicle on the premises.
   G.   Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting in the business districts
shall be so arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams onto any residential
district by the  use of luminare cutoffs.
   H.   Noise. No noise from operations of any use in the business districts
shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is located
so as to constitute a nuisance or offense.
   I.   Glare and Heat. No glare or heat from any operations of any use in the
business districts shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which
the use is located so as to constitute a nuisance or offense.
   J.   Air Pollution. No air pollution, including smoke or gas, odors, and
particulate matter, from any operations of any use in the business districts
shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use is
located, unless in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   K.   Firearm and Ammunition Sales. The sale or transfer of firearms or
ammunition in connection with a business shall not be permitted within one mile
of any public or private school or public park, as measured from the lot lines
of the respective properties. (July 19, 2001 Amendment)
4-108 SIGNS
   Signs are permitted in all business districts subject to the provisions of
Section
5-105 of this Code.
4-109 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPING
   The buffer and landscaping requirements applicable in all business districts
are set forth in Section
5-106 of this Code.
4-110 BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
   The building height, lot, yard, setback, floor area, and coverage
requirements applicable in the business districts are set forth in the
following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection C of this Section at
the end of the table.
                                                                            B-1   B-2
A.   Maximum Height.(1)                                                         
1.   Principal Structures                                                       
a. Feet (whichever                                                           40    33/45
                                                                                   (1)
b. Stories is less)                                                          3     3
2.   Accessory Structures                                                 25    25
B.   Minimum Yards and Areas.(2)(3)(4)(5)                                       
1.   Front (feet) (6)                                                           
a. Along Green Bay Road                                                      0     15
b. All Others                                                                0     0
2.   Side (feet)(6)(7)(8)                                                       
a. Along Green Bay Road                                                      0     15
b. All Others                                                                0     0
3.   Rear (feet) (8)(9)                                                         
                                                                             10,   10,
                                                                             but   but
                                                                             not   not
                                                                             less  less
a. Abutting Residential District                                            than  than
                                                                             10%   10%
                                                                             of    of
                                                                             lot   lot
                                                                             depth depth
                                                                             10,
                                                                             but
                                                                             not
                                                                             less
b. All Others                                                                than  0
                                                                             10%
                                                                             of
                                                                             lot
                                                                             depth
c. Accessory Buildings                                                       5     0
4.   Courts(10) (see measurement in paragraph C10 of this Section)              
5.   Dwelling Units in Multiple Family Dwellings(11) (see measurement  in       
paragraph C11 of this Section)
 
   C.   Exceptions and Explanatory Notes.
      1.   Height Exceptions. Chimneys, elevator bulkheads, monuments,
penthouses for machinery only, stacks, ornamental towers and spires, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances may extend not more than seven feet above
the highest point of the roof of the principal structure, provided that such
appurtenances are screened in accordance with Section
5-106 of this Code.  Certain properties within the B-2 District may be built to
a maximum height of up to 45 feet with a special use permit as provided in
Subsection 4-103(J).
      2.   Visibility Across Corners. Any other provision of this Code to the
contrary notwithstanding, nothing more than two and one-half feet high shall be
erected, placed, planted, allowed to grow, or maintained within the area
bounded by the street lines and a line drawn between points on the street lines
12 feet from the corner on any corner lot in any business district where a
front or side yard is required or provided.
      3.   Special Setbacks for Signs. Special setbacks established for some
signs by Section
5-105 of this Code shall control over the yard and setback requirements
established in the table.
      4.   Specified Structures and Uses in Required Yards. The following
structures and uses, except as limited below, may be located in any required
yard:
         (a)   Statuary and ornamental light standards having a height of 8
feet or less and having a footprint not exceeding two square feet; and
         (b)   Open patios and walkways; and
         (c)   Eaves projecting not more than 30 inches from an exterior wall,
plus any gutters or downspouts projecting not more than six inches from such
eaves; and
         (d)   Gutters, downspouts, ornamental features, cornices, belt
courses, leaders, sills, lintels, and the like projecting not more than 12
inches from an exterior wall; and
         (e)   Outside stairways and ramps to first floors; provided that any
platforms therefor shall not project more than four feet from an exterior wall,
exceed four feet in height, or extend more than one foot on either side of the
door opening; provided further that no stairways or ramps shall be wider than
such platform; and
         (f)   Flagpoles; and
         (g)   Terraces; and
         (h)   Fences and walls subject to the limitations in the Glencoe
Village Code; and
         (i)   Driveways, parking lots, and parking areas subject to the
limitations of Section
5-104 of this Code; and
         (j)   Hedges; and
         (k)   Canvas or similar readily movable awnings and canopies attached
by temporary supports to the exterior wall of a building and not extending more
than 72 inches from such wall; provided that the bottom of the structural
elements of any awning or canopy (other than ground supports) shall be
maintained at least seven feet above grade and all other elements thereof shall
extend at least six and one-half feet above grade.
      5.   Platted Building Lines. See Subsection
8-101F of this Code.
      6.   Front and Corner Side Yard Adjustments.
         (a)   B-1 District. Where the setback requirements of this Code differ
from two adjoining lots, or where the side yard of one lot is less than the
front yard required along the same street for an adjoining lot, the side lot
line of the second lot being formed partially or wholly by the rear lot line of
the first mentioned lot, the building line for the lot on which the deeper
setback is required shall be modified for a distance of not more than 60 feet
from the lot line of the adjoining lot, to lie halfway between the lesser and
the greater of the two required building lines.
         (b)   B-2 District. On corner lots, a setback line is here established
at a distance from the corner defined by a triangle formed by two lines each 30
feet in length measured along the two street lines and a third line connecting
the first two such lines.
      7.   Side Yards. Whenever a side yard is provided on a lot, said side
yard shall be not less than five feet wide.
      8.   Alley. In computing the depth of the rear yard or of a side yard or
open court for any building where such yard or court opens onto an alley, one-
half of the alley width may be assumed to be a portion of the yard or court.
      9.   Exception to Rear Yard Requirements. In the case of a through lot in
the B-1 District, there shall be a rear yard having a depth equal to the
required front yard for such lot.
      10.   Courts. The following regulations shall apply to outer and inner
courts in business districts:
         (a)   Outer Court. The width of an outer court shall not be less than
five feet nor less than one-sixth the length of such court from the closed end.
         (b)   Inner Court. An inner court shall not be less than five feet
wide, nor shall its area be less than 50 square feet.
      11.   Dwelling Units in Multiple Family Dwellings. No dwelling unit in a
multiple family dwelling hereafter erected, constructed, or created in any
business district shall have a gross floor area of less than 600 square feet if
an efficiency dwelling unit; 800 square feet if a one-bedroom dwelling unit; or
800 square feet plus an additional 150 square feet for every bedroom in excess
of the first bedroom if a two or more bedroom dwelling unit.
(Am. Ord. 2022-19-3539, passed 11-17-2022)
ARTICLE IV-A
HIGHWAY FRONTAGE DISTRICT
(Adopted July 2000)
4A-101 PURPOSES
   The Highway Frontage (HF) District addresses the special circumstances
affecting a unique and isolated corridor of land lying west of the Edens
Expressway in the Village. The District is intended to accommodate certain
public open spaces within the Village as well as public buildings and uses, as
well as other uses identified below. Because the property within the Highway
Frontage District is remote from other property in the Village, it creates
particular challenges to the Village with respect to utility and public
services for development and use of the property. Thus, the most appropriate
uses on the property in this district are open space and municipal uses. In
addition, under certain limited circumstances, motor vehicle dealerships may
also be permitted, subject to specific restrictions and conditions. No other
use shall be permitted as of right; however, certain office uses may be
permitted pursuant to a special use permit, recognizing that the special use
permit process permits a careful review of the type of use proposed, the impact
of such use on the Highway Frontage District, neighboring properties, and the
Village as a whole, and the capability of the Village to serve such uses,
whether directly or indirectly.
4A-102 PERMITTED USES
   The uses indicated in the following table, and no others, are permitted as
of right in the Highway Frontage District. In interpreting the use
designations, reference should be made to the standards in Section
7-401E of this Code. Where applicable, SIC codes are given in parentheses for
reference only in applying interpretive standards.
   A.   Open Space.
   B.   Municipal Buildings and Uses.
   C.   Motor Vehicle Dealers (5510.02)
4A-103  SPECIAL USES
   A.    Business, Professional, and Administrative Offices.
   B.    Buildings and structures devoted to a Village use that do not meet the
bulk, space, and yard requirements contained in Section
4A-110 of this Code, subject to such restrictions and conditions on the special
use permit as the Board of Trustees may deem necessary or appropriate. (2/2009)
   C.    Golf Course Protective Structure. With the approval of a Special Use
Permit, such structures are not subject to otherwise applicable height,
setback, or setback plane Zoning Code requirements.
(Am. Ord. 2023-23-3568, passed 10-19-2023)
4A-104 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
   Accessory structures and uses are permitted in the Highway Frontage District
subject to the provisions of Section
5-101 of this Code or as otherwise permitted pursuant to a special use permit.
In connection with any motor vehicle dealer use, auto-related accessory uses
are authorized including, without limitation, sales and service, body shop, car
wash, car rental, and detailing operations and facilities.
4A-105 TEMPORARY USES
   Temporary uses are permitted in the Highway Frontage district subject to the
provisions of Section
5-102 of this Code, or as otherwise permitted pursuant to a special use permit.
4A-106 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
   The parking requirements applicable in the Highway Frontage District are set
forth in Section
5-104 of this Code, unless otherwise modified pursuant to a special use permit.
4A-107 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE REGULATIONS
   No building or premises shall hereafter be used, no building shall hereafter
be erected or altered, and no accessory or temporary use pursuant to Section
5-101 of this Code shall hereafter be allowed, within the Highway Frontage
District, unless otherwise provided in this Code, except in accordance with the
following use limitations.
   A.   Exterior Appearance Review. No construction or development requiring a
building permit and affecting the exterior appearance of any structure shall be
permitted in the Highway Frontage District except upon appearance review
approval pursuant to Section
7-503 of this Code and upon approval of the building permit application
pursuant to the Glencoe Village Code.
   B.   Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting in the Highway Frontage
District shall be so arranged as to prevent direct glare of beams unto any
residential district by the use of luminare cutoffs.
   C.   Noise. No noise from any operations of any use in the Highway Frontage
District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use
is located so as to constitute a nuisance or offense.
   D.   Glare and Heat. No glare or heat from any operations of any use in the
Highway Frontage District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot
on which the use is located so as to constitute a nuisance or offense.
   E.   Air Pollution. No air pollution, including smoke or gas, odors, and
particulate matter, from any operations of any use in the Highway Frontage
District shall be detectable at any point off the zoning lot on which the use
is located, unless in compliance with all applicable regulations of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   F.   Tree Preservation. The use and development of lots in the Highway
Frontage District shall comply with the tree preservation regulations of the
Village.
   G.   Motor Vehicle Dealers. Motor vehicle dealers with open sales lots shall
be subject to the following additional conditions and restrictions:
      1.   Only the manufacturer’s sticker and the model year may be displayed
on vehicles that are parked outside of the showroom. No other information,
including, but not limited to, price, make, or model may be displayed, either
on vehicles parked outside or on showroom windows.
      2.   The use of balloons, pennants, streamers, and similar attention-
getting devices shall be prohibited.
      3.   Any vehicle parked outside, and displayed for sale, shall be parked
on a paved surface.
      4.   Screening from residential areas shall be provided through the use
of landscaping, fencing, or both. Such screening shall be a minimum of four
feet in height. If a fence is used, the maximum height shall be eight feet. Any
storage of vehicles that are being serviced, or any outdoor repair area, shall
be completely screened from the view of residential areas.
      5.   Exterior lighting shall be such that there is no “spill over” of
light onto the residential properties. All signs and open parking lots shall
comply with the illumination requirements of Paragraph 5-105E1 and Subparagraph
5-104C3(d), respectively.
      6.   Reasonable efforts shall be taken to preserve any oak, maple (except
silver), hickory, ash, elm, or similar tree of more than six inches in diameter
that is not located in an area to be developed or paved.
      7.   Onsite utility lines shall be buried.
      8.   Stormwater detention shall be designated, engineered, and installed
to ensure that any development shall not increase the rate of runoff of
stormwater to adjacent properties.
      9.   No motor vehicle dealer use shall be permitted in the Highway
Frontage District except upon site plan review approval pursuant to Section
7-504 of this Code.
      10.   No use on a zoning lot that is accessory to a motor vehicle dealer
shall be permitted unless it is under the same ownership or control as the
motor vehicle dealer that is the principal use on the zoning lot. In addition,
the accessory uses on any zoning lot shall not, in combination, occupy more
than one-third of the lot area of such zoning lot.
4A-108 SIGNS
   Signs are permitted in the Highway Frontage District subject to the
provisions of Section
5-105 of this Code, unless otherwise provided pursuant to a special use permit.
4A-109 BUFFER AND LANDSCAPING
   The buffer and landscaping requirements applicable in the Highway Frontage
District are set forth in Section
5-106 of this Code, unless otherwise provided pursuant to a special use permit.
4A-110  BULK, SPACE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
   The building height, lot, yard, setback, floor area, and coverage
requirements applicable in the Highway Frontage District are set forth in the
following table. Footnote references appear in Subsection E of this Section at
the end of the table:
                                       Motor Vehicle Office Permitted Uses
A.   Maximum Height1.                
1.  Principal Structures 
A.   Feet (whichever is less)       45            65     65
B.   Stories                        2             5      2
2.   Accessory Structures          25            25     25
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Dimensions  
1.   Total Lot Area (sq ft)         40,000        75,000 N/A
2.   Lot Width (feet)               100           200    N/A
3.   Lot Depth (feet)               125           N/A    N/A
2.   Minimum Yard Requirements. 
1.   Front and Corner Side (feet)2 30            30     N/A
2.   Side (feet)                    5             5      N/A
3.   Rear (feet)                    5             5      N/A
2.   Maximum Floor Area Ratio.3    .50           .50    N/A
 
   E.   Exception and Explanatory Notes.
      1.   For purposes of the Highway Frontage District only, “height” (as
otherwise defined in Subsection
8-302H) shall be modified so that is shall be measured from grade at the front
of a structure. Where a structure faces more than one street, the structure
face with the greater height when measured as herein required shall be deemed
to be the front of the structure for purposes of measuring structure height.
Additionally, mechanical equipment and any wall or similar structure designed
for screening such equipment shall be considered in determining height.
      2.   In addition to the specified yard requirement, no building
constructed in connection with a motor vehicle dealer use or office shall be
closer to a front or corner side lot line than 80 feet.
      3.   For purposes of the Highway Frontage District only, “floor area
ratio” shall be defined as the gross floor area of a building divided by the
total lot area of the zoning lot on which it is located. “Gross floor area” (as
otherwise defined in Subsection
8-302F) shall be modified so that it shall also include the sum of the gross
horizontal areas in a structure devoted to a specific use.
ARTICLE V
DISTRICT REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
5-101 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
   A.   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section, accessory
structures and uses are permitted in any zoning district in connection with any
principal use lawfully existing within such district.
   B.   Definition.
      1.   An accessory structure or use, except for structures and uses
accessory to a religious congregation, is a structure or use that:
         a.   Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal
structure or use; and
         b.   Is customarily found as an incident to such principal structure
or use; and
         c.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of those
occupying, working at, or being served by such principal structure or use; and
         e.   Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of
this Code, is located in its entirety on the same zoning lot as such principal
structure or use; and
         f.   Is under the same ownership and control as such principal
structure or use. (Amended 8/2004)
      2.    A structure or use accessory to a religious congregation is a
structure or use located entirely on the same zoning lot as the principal
religious congregation that satisfies each of the following standards:
         a.   An accessory use shall be not-for-profit, except that
instructional or educational uses for profit may be permitted as accessory uses
as long as they do not alter the not-for-profit character of the
religious congregation.
         b.   No such accessory use shall use or occupy at any time more than
51% of the gross floor area of the buildings on a lot used for a religious
congregation for more than 90 days in any calendar year.
         c.   No accessory structure or use may be for dwelling purposes,
unless occupied by clergy or staff serving the religious congregation.
         d.   The accessory use must be consistent with the physical
capabilities of the lot and facilities serving the religious congregation and
the requirements of the village Code and other applicable law. (Amended 8/2004)
   C.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance . When required by Section
7-301 of this Code, certificates of zoning compliance evidencing the compliance
of the accessory use or structure with the provisions of this Code shall be
obtained before any such accessory use or structure is established or
constructed.
   D.   Special Regulations Applicable to Particular Accessory Struc-tures and
Uses. In addition to the requirements of Subsection E of this Section, the
following regulations shall apply to particular accessory structures and uses.
      1.   Residential Recreational Facilities. Residential recreational
facilities shall be limited to use by the occupants of the
principal residential use and their guests. Such facilities shall be screened
in accordance with Section
5-106 of this Code and shall comply with the use, bulk, space, and yard
requirements of the applicable zoning district, except that residential
recreational facilities may occupy more than six percent of the lot area of any
zoning lot. In addition, the following special regulations shall apply to
tennis courts:
         (a)   The back court areas may be enclosed with a fence not exceeding
10 feet in height, which fence may extend not more than 20 feet along each side
of the back court areas. All other fencing shall comply with the general
requirements of the Glencoe Village Code.
         (b)   No more than four light poles may be installed per tennis court,
which poles shall not exceed 30 feet in height. No tennis court shall be
illuminated at a level exceeding 25 foot candles within the area bounded by the
base and side lines of the court, nor shall the level of illumination exceed
one foot candle at any lot lines, or any other limitation established in the
Village Code.
         (c)   No tennis court shall be used between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
      2.   Storage. Outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an accessory use,
except as otherwise expressly permitted by this Code and except for the outdoor
storage of materials such as firewood, compost, and mulch. When so permitted,
such outdoor storage shall be screened as required by in Section
5-106 of this Code.
      3.   No Accessory Parking in Single Family Residential Districts. Except
when approved as part of a special use permit application, parking lots
required for or accessory to any business use shall not be permitted on any lot
in any single family residential district.
      4.   Off-Street Storage of Vehicles in All Residential Districts. The
following provisions shall govern the off-street storage of all vehicles in all
resi-dential districts:
         (a)   Storage Defined. For purposes of this Paragraph, the term
storage shall mean the parking of a vehicle for a continuous period of longer
than 48 hours.
         (b)   Classification of Vehicles. For purposes of this Code, vehicles
shall be classified as follows accord-ing to size, regardless of the use to
which the vehicle is put or intended or designed to serve and regardless of any
other classification system made applicable to vehicles by any other
governmental body:
            (i)   Class I Vehicle: A vehicle that does not exceed 20 feet in
length, seven feet in width, or eight feet in height.
            (ii)   Class II Vehicle: A vehicle that is not a Class I vehicle
and that does not exceed 30 feet in length, eight feet in width, or 11 feet in
height and that, if used in commerce, does not exceed 8,000 pounds in gross
weight, including vehicle and maximum load.
            (iii)   Class III Vehicle: A vehicle that is neither a Class I
vehicle nor a Class II vehicle.
         (c)   Storage of Vehicles in Garages: Any number of Class I, Class II,
or Class III vehicles may be stored in a garage in a residential district
provided that said garage complies with all applicable provisions of this Code
and provided further that Class III vehicles shall be stored only in a
completely enclosed garage. In addition, no garage shall be used for repairing
any motor vehicle not regularly stored in said garage or for repairing any
motor vehicle for remuneration.
         (d)   Storage of Vehicles in Parking Lots. Subject to the provisions
of Subparagraph D4(f) of this Section, any number of Class I or Class II
vehicles may be stored in lawfully existing  parking lots in the R-D District
(or any such  parking lot approved in a residential district as part of a
special use permit); provided, however, that no vehicle shall be stored so as
to reduce the availability of off-street  parking spaces below the minimum
number of spaces required pursuant to Subsection
5-104E of this Code. No Class III vehicle shall be stored in any parking lot in
a residential district.
         (e)   Storage of Vehicles in Parking Areas. Vehicles may be stored in
parking areas only in compli-ance with the provisions of Subparagraph D4(f) of
this Section and only in the following locations on a lot in a residential
district:
            (i)   Class I Vehicle: Anywhere on the lot, including any required
yard; provided, however, that no Class I recreational vehicle may be stored in
the front yard of any lot and provided further that no more than one such
recreational vehicle may be stored in the required side yards.
            (ii)   Class II Vehicle: Anywhere on the lot, including the
required side and rear yards, but excluding the required front and corner side
yards, and provided that no Class II recreational vehicle may be stored in any
required side yard.
            (iii)   Class III Vehicle: Nowhere on the lot.
         (f)   General Regulations and Standards: The following standards and
regulations shall apply to the storage of vehicles in parking lots and parking
areas on a lot in a residential district:
            (i)   Distance from Lot Line, Public Sidewalk. No Class II or III
vehicle shall be stored in a parking lot within ten feet of any lot line or any
vehicular or pedestrian right-of-way.
            (ii)   Surface. No motorized vehicle shall be stored except on an
all-weather stone, gravel, asphaltic, or cement pavement surface.
            (iii)   Screening. See Subsection
5-106C of this Code for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to
the storage of Class II vehicles on a lot in a residential district.
            (iv)   Permanent Location Prohibited. No vehicle shall have its
wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent its ready removal.
            (v)   Residential Use Prohibited. No vehicle shall be used for
living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes.
            (vi)   Utility Hookups. No vehicle shall be connected to the
facilities or equipment of any public utility except for required servicing.
            (viii)   Unsafe Conditions. No vehicle shall be parked or stored so
as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition. The ground under or surrounding
the location wherein a vehicle is stored shall be free of noxious weeds,
debris, and combustible material.
         (g)   Renting of Garage Space. Storage of vehicles in a garage shall
be limited to vehicles owned or used primarily by occupants of the principal
residential use on the lot and their guests, except that garage space may be
rented for the storage of a vehicle of a person not residing on said lot in
accordance with the following limitations:
            (i)   All Residential Districts. In any residential district, one
space in a garage may be so rented.
            (ii)   Multiple Family District. In the R-D District, two spaces in
a two-car or three-car garage may be so rented, but not more than one-half of
the spaces may be so rented in any garage that exceeds three--car capacity.
      5.   Storage of Inoperable Vehicles. No vehicle incapable of being driven
or used for the purpose or use for which it was designed, other than a vehicle
awaiting timely repair at a gasoline service station or new or used car dealer,
shall be stored in any parking lot or parking area in the Village.
      6.   Accessory Building as Residential Structure. No accessory building
in a residential district shall be used for dwelling purposes; provided,
however, that domestic servants may use second floors of garages for dwelling
purposes.
      7.   Antennae With Surface Areas of 10 Square Feet or Less Other than
Personal Wireless Services Antennae: Antennae and antenna support structures,
other than personal wireless services antennae, having an antenna surface area
not greater than 10 square feet, and no single dimension exceeding 12 feet,
shall be permitted as accessory structures; provided, however, that such
antennae and antenna support structures may be located closer than 10 feet
from, and may be attached to, any other building on the same lot. (3/1999)
      8.   Antennae, other than Amateur Radio Facilities and Personal
Wireless Services Antennae, With Surface Areas Exceeding 10 Square Feet. Except
for amateur radio facilities permitted pursuant to Paragraph D9 of this
Section, personal wireless service antennae permitted or specially permitted
pursuant to Paragraph D12 of this Section, and personal wireless
services antennae which may be permitted as a special use pursuant to Paragraph
D13 of this Section, antennae and antenna support structures having an
antenna surface area greater than 10 square feet, or having any single
dimension exceeding 12 feet, shall be permitted as accessory structures only in
compliance with the following regulations:    (3/1999)
         (a)   Number Limited. No more than one such antenna and antenna
support structure may be located on any zoning lot.
         (b)   Height Limited. No such antenna and antenna support structure
shall exceed 12 feet in height unless such antenna and antenna support
structure is attached to a building pursuant to Subparagraph D8(c) of this
Section.
         (c)   Attachment to Buildings Limited. No such antenna or antenna
support structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure
unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
            (i)   Size. The antenna and its support structure shall not exceed
15 square feet in antenna surface area or 12 feet in any dimension.
            (ii)   Height. The antenna and its support structure shall not
extend more than three feet above the highest point of the build-ing on which
it is mounted or the maximum permissible building height, whichever is less.
            (iii)   Mounting. The antenna and its support structure shall not
be attached or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The
antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front
of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street,
including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and
its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles
per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
            (iv)   Color. The antenna and its support structure shall be a
color that blends with the roof or building side on which it is mounted.
            (v)   Grounding. The antenna and its support structure shall be
bonded to a grounding rod.
            (vi)   Other Standards. The antenna and its support structure shall
satisfy such other design and construction standards as are required in the
Building Code and other ordinances, codes, or regulations to ensure safe con-
struction and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.
         (d)   Setback Requirements. Antenna and antenna support structures
shall comply with the applicable district yard and area requirements, except
that:
            (i)   Street Setback. No such antenna or its support structure
shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the required front or
corner side yard or the wall of the principal building to which it is accessory
that is nearest to such street.
            (ii)   Setbacks from Other Buildings. Antennas and antenna support
structures may be located closer than 10 feet from any other structure on the
same lot.
         (e)   Guy Wires Restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be
used in connection with such antenna or its support structure except when used
to anchor the antenna or support structure to an existing building to which
such antenna or support structure is attached.
         (f)   Screening. See Subsection
5-106E of this Code for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to
ground mounted antennas.
      9.   Amateur Radio Facilities With Surface Area Exceeding 10 Square Feet.
Any antenna and antenna support structure having an antenna surface area
greater than 10 square feet or having any single dimension exceeding 12 feet
that is capable of transmitting as well as receiving signals and is licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission as an amateur radio facility must satisfy
each of the following conditions:
         (a)   Number Limited. No more than one such antenna support structure
with an antenna surface area greater than 10 square feet or any single
dimension exceeding 12 feet may be located on any zoning lot.
         (b)   Height Limited. No such antenna support structure shall, if
ground mounted, exceed 65 feet in height or, if attached to a building pursuant
to Subparagraph D9(c) of this Section, the height therein specified.
         (c)   Attachment to Buildings Limited. No such antenna or its support
structure shall be attached to a principal or accessory structure unless all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
            (i)   Height. The antenna support structure shall not extend more
than 20 feet above the highest point of the building on which it is mounted.
            (ii)   Mounting. The antenna and its support structure shall not be
attached to or mounted upon any building appurtenance, such as a chimney. The
antenna and its support structure shall not be mounted or attached to the front
of any principal building or to the side of any building facing a street,
including any portion of the building roof facing any street. The antenna and
its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 80 miles
per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
            (iii)   Grounding. The antenna and its support structure shall be
bonded to a grounding rod.
            (iv)   Other Standards. The antenna support structure shall satisfy
such other design and construction standards as are required in the Building
Code and other ordinances, codes, or regulations to ensure safe construction
and maintenance of the antenna and its support structure.
         (d)   Setback Requirements. Antennas and antenna support structures
shall comply with the applicable district yard and area requirements, except
that:
            (i)   Street Setback. No such antenna or its support structure
shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the required front or
corner side yard or the wall of the principal building to which it is accessory
that is nearest to such street.
            (ii)   Setbacks from Other Buildings. Antennas and their support
structures may be located closer than 10 feet from any other structure on the
same zoning lot, but no such antenna or its support structure shall be located
nearer than one-half the height of the antenna and support structure to any
habitable building on any adjacent lot.
      10.   Antennas of Public Bodies. The regulations in Paragraphs D8 and D9
of this Section shall not apply to antennas and antenna support structures
owned or maintained by the Village, the Glencoe Park--Recreation District, or
the Glencoe Elementary School District.
      11.   Uses Subject to Special Restrictions. When the district regulations
of this Code require compliance with any procedures or standards with respect
to a specific use, such use shall not be established as an accessory use except
in compliance with those procedures and standards.
      12.   Personal Wireless Services Antennae with or without Support
Structures and Related Equipment. Personal wireless services antennae, antenna
support structures (other than towers), and related equipment shall be
permitted in the Residential and Business Districts, subject to the issuance of
a special use permit as provided in Section
7-502 of this Code (except as otherwise provided in paragraphs
3-102A7 and
4-102E4, provided that such antenna, antenna support structure, and related
equipment comply with the following regulations:
         (a)   Unavailability of Village Sites. No personal wireless services
antenna or antenna support structure shall be permitted on any lot that is not
owned or occupied by the Village unless the applicant is able to demonstrate
that no such Village owned or occupied property is available, on commercially
reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna necessary for
the provision of personal wireless services.
         (b)   Number Limitation. No more than four (4) such personal wireless
services antennae and antenna support structures may be located on any zoning
lot.
         (c)   Height Limitation. No such personal wireless services antenna
and antenna support structure shall exceed twelve (12) feet in height or any
other dimension nor ten (10) square feet in antenna surface area unless such
personal wireless services antenna and antenna support structure is attached to
a building pursuant to Subparagraph D12(d) of this Section.
         (d)   Attachment to Buildings Limitation. No such personal wireless
services antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a principal
or accessory structure on the same lot unless all of the following conditions
are satisfied:
            (a)   Size. The personal wireless services antenna and its support
structure shall not exceed fifty-six (56) square feet in antenna surface area
or sixteen (16) feet in any dimension.
               ii)   Height . The personal wireless services antenna and its
support structure shall not extend more than eight (8) feet above the height of
the point at which the antenna or its support structure is attached to the
building, or structure or its chimney.
               iii   Mounting. Unless located on a Village owned or occupied
lot or expressly provided in an ordinance granting a special use permit, the
personal wireless services antenna and its support structure shall not be
mounted on or attached to the front of any principal building including any
portion of the building roof facing any street. The personal wireless services
antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force
of 100 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
               iv   Color. The personal wireless services antenna and its
support structure shall be a color that blends with the roof or portion of the
building on which it is mounted.
               v   Grounding. The personal wireless services antenna and its
support structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
               vi   Other Standards. The personal wireless services antenna and
its support structure shall satisfy such other design and construction
standards as are required in the Building Code and other ordinances, codes, or
regulations to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the personal
wireless services antenna and its support structure.
         (e)   Setback Requirements . Personal wireless services antennae and
antenna support structures shall comply with the applicable district yard and
area requirements, except that:
            (i)   Street Setback. No such personal wireless services antenna or
its  support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than
the required front or corner side yard line or the wall of the principal
building on the same lot that is nearest to such street.
            (ii)   Setbacks from Other Buildings . Personal wireless services
antennae and antenna support structures may be located closer than ten (10)
feet from any other structure on the same lot.
         (f)   Guy Wires Restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be
used in connection with such personal wireless services antenna or its support
structure except when used to anchor such antenna or support structure to an
existing building to which such antenna or support structure is attached.
         (g)   Equipment Enclosures. All electronic and other related equipment
and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless services
antenna:
            (i)   in any Residential District shall be located within the
principal building on the zoning lot unless it is either (A) located on a lot
lying west of the Edens Expressway that is owned or occupied by the Village, or
(B) otherwise expressly provided in an ordinance granting the special use
permit.
            (ii)   in any Business District, shall be located either within the
principal building on the zoning lot or on the rooftop of such building, in
which case such equipment and appurtenances shall be subject to the
requirements of subsection 5-106F of this Code.
         (h)   Screening. See Subsections
5-106E of this Code for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to
ground mounted antennae.
         (i)   Licenses and Permits. The provider of every personal wireless
services antenna shall maintain all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of such antenna. In addition, any such operation shall
provide copies of such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or
extension thereof when requested by the Village Manager.
         (j)   Limited to Applicant. Every ordinance granting approval of a
special use permit for a personal wireless services antenna or tower shall
state that any assignment or transfer of the special use permit or any of the
rights thereunder may be made only with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
         (k)   Term Limitation. Every ordinance granting approval of a special
use permit for a personal wireless services antenna or tower may provide that:
            (i)   where the provider of personal wireless services is not the
owner of the land on which such antenna or tower is located, the term of the
special use permit is limited to the term of the lease or other agreement
granting rights to use the land; and
            (ii)   the special use permit shall be subject to review by the
Board of Trustees, at ten year intervals, to determine whether the technology
in the provision of personal wireless services has changed such that the
necessity for the special use permit at the time of its approval has been
eliminated or modified, and whether the special use permit should be modified
or terminated as a result of any such change.
         (l)   Abandonment and Removal. When one or more personal wireless
services antennae, an antenna support structure, or related equipment are not
operated for the provision of personal wireless services for a continuous
period of 12 months or more, such personal wireless services antenna, antenna
support structure, or related equipment may be deemed to be abandoned by the
Village. The owner of such personal wireless services antenna, antenna support
structure, or related equipment shall remove such items within 90 days
following the mailing of written notice that removal is required. Such notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the
Village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. If two or more
providers of personal wireless services use an antenna support structure or
related equipment to provide personal wireless services, then the period of
non-use under this provision for any support structure or personal wireless
services facilities shall be measured from the cessation of operation by all
such providers of the support structure or personal wireless services
facilities. (3/1999)    
      13.   Personal Wireless Services Antennae Located on Towers and Related
Equipment. Personal wireless services antenna located on towers and related
equipment may be allowed in any district subject to (i) the requirements of
Sections
3-103E or
4-103 F; (ii) the issuance of a special use permit as provided in Section
7-502 of this Code; and (iii) the additional standards hereinafter set forth:
         (a)   Unavailability of Village Sites. No personal wireless services
antenna or antenna support structure shall be permitted on any lot that is not
owned or occupied by the Village unless the applicant is able to demonstrate
that no Village owned or occupied property is available, on commercially
reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna necessary for
the provision of personal wireless services.
         (b)   Number Limitation. No more than one tower may be located on any
zoning lot, and no more than one provider of personal wireless services may be
permitted on such tower unless expressly authorized by special use permit.
         (c)   Height Limitation. No such personal wireless services antenna
and tower shall exceed a combined height of 90 feet. (Adopted 26 October 2000)
         (d)   Design of New Antenna Support Structures for Co-Location .
Unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees for good cause shown,
every new tower shall be designed, constructed, and installed to be a
sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least one additional personal
wireless service provider to locate personal wireless services antennae on such
tower in the future. Any special use permit for a tower may be conditioned upon
the agreement of the applicant to allow co-location of other personal wireless
services providers on commercially reasonable terms specified in such special
use permit.
         (e)   Tower Design. Every new tower shall:
            (i)   be of monopole rather than latticework design, unless
otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees for good cause shown, and without
catwalks;
            (ii)   not be illuminated or have any signs installed thereon
unless otherwise required by federal law or regulations; and
            (iii)   be separated from any principal building by a distance that
is not less than 110 percent of the height of the tower. For the purposes of
this requirement, this distance shall be measured horizontally from the center
of the base of the tower to the point where the ground meets a vertical wall of
such principal building
   Any deck on such tower shall be centered on the tower and the radius from
the center of the tower to the outside of the deck shall not exceed six feet.
No side of any such deck shall exceed six feet vertically.
         (f)   Protection Against Climbing. Every personal wireless services
antenna and tower shall be protected against unauthorized climbing or other
access by the public.
         (g)   Equipment Enclosures. All electronic and other related equipment
and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless
services antenna installed on a tower shall, whenever possible, be located
within a lawfully pre-existing structure or completely below grade and shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the tower unless otherwise expressly provided
in the special use permit. (Adopted 26 October 2000) When a new structure is
required to house such equipment, such structure shall be used exclusively to
house such equipment and shall be harmonious with, and blend with, the natural
features, buildings, and structures surrounding such structure, and shall not
exceed 360 square feet for each provider of personal wireless services using
the tower. Any free-standing structure that is not attached to or within an
existing building or located completely below grade shall not exceed a maximum
height of 15 feet.
         (h)   Licenses and Permits. The provider of every personal wireless
services antenna shall maintain all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of such antenna. In addition, any such provider shall
provide copies of such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or
extension thereof when requested by the Village Manager.
         (i)   Limited to Applicant. Every ordinance granting approval of a
special use permit for a personal wireless services antenna or tower shall
state that any assignment or transfer of the special use permit or any of the
rights thereunder may be made only with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
         (j)   Term Limitation. Every ordinance granting approval of a special
use permit for a personal wireless services antenna or tower may provide that:
            (i)   where the provider of personal wireless services is not the
owner of the land on which such antenna or tower is located, the term of the
special use permit is limited to the term of the lease or other agreement
granting rights to use the land; and
            (ii)   the special use permit shall be subject to review by the
Board of Trustees, at ten year intervals, to determine whether the technology
in the provision of personal wireless services has changed such that the
necessity for the special use permit at the time of its approval has been
eliminated or modified, and whether the special use permit should be modified
or terminated as a result of any such change.
         (k)   Abandonment and Removal. When one or more personal wireless
services antennae, an antenna support structure, or related equipment are not
operated for the provision of personal wireless services for a continuous
period of 12 months or more, such personal wireless services antenna, antenna
support structure, or related equipment may be deemed by the Village to be
abandoned. The owner of such personal wireless services antenna, antenna
support structure, or related equipment shall remove such items within 90 days
following the mailing of written notice that removal is required. Such notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the
Village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. If two or more
providers of personal wireless services use an antenna support structure or
related equipment to provide personal wireless services, then the period of
non-use under this provision for any support structure or personal wireless
services facilities shall be measured from the cessation of operation by all
such providers of the support structure or personal wireless services
facilities.
         (l)   Setback Requirements. Personal wireless services antenna and
towers shall comply with the applicable district yard and area requirements
except that:
            (i)   Street Setback . No such personal wireless services antenna
or tower shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the required
front or corner side yard or the wall of the principal building on the same lot
that is nearest to such street.
            (ii)   Setbacks from Other Buildings . Personal wireless services
antennae and towers may be located closer than 10 feet from any other structure
on the same lot, subject to the limitations of subparagraph (e)(iii) of this
Paragraph 13.
         (m)   Guy Wires Restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be
used in connection with any tower.
         (n)   Screening. See Subsection
5-106E of this Code for landscaping and screening requirements applicable to
ground mounted antennas.
         (o)   Relief. The Board of Trustees may, in approving a special use
permit for such personal wireless service antennae located on towers, reduce,
waive, or otherwise modify the applicable setback, street setback, and/or use,
bulk, space, and yard requirements otherwise applicable under this Code,
provided that any such reduction, waiver, or modification comports with the
applicable standards for the granting of special use permits under this Code.
(Adopted 26 October 2000)
      (14)   Personal Wireless Services Antennae and Related Equipment on
Existing Utility Poles.  Personal wireless services antennae and related
equipment shall be permitted to be attached to existing utility poles within
public rights-of-way and on zoning lots in the Residential and Business
Districts, subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   Unavailability of Village Sites; Rights-of-Way. No personal
wireless services antenna shall be permitted on any utility pole located on a
lot that is not owned or occupied by the Village unless the applicant is able
to demonstrate that no such Village-owned or occupied property is available, on
commercially reasonable terms, and sufficient for the location of an antenna
necessary for the provision of personal wireless services. Any personal
wireless services antenna or related equipment may only be attached to an
existing utility pole within a public right-of-way in accordance with the
requirements of Article IX of Chapter 30 of the Village Code (or any successor
provisions of the Village Code governing construction of utility facilities in
the rights-of-way).
         (b)   Number Limitation. Not more than one personal wireless services
antenna or antenna support structure may be located on a single utility pole.
         (c)   Attachment to Utility Poles; Limitations. No such personal
wireless services antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached to a
utility pole unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
            (i)   Size. The personal wireless services antenna and related
equipment shall not exceed four (4) square feet in antenna surface area or four
(4) feet in any dimension.
            (ii)   Height. The personal wireless services antenna and related
equipment shall not extend more than seven (7) feet above the height of the
utility pole to which it is attached.
            (iii)   Mounting. The personal wireless services antenna and
related equipment shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 100 miles per
hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
            (iv)   Color. The personal wireless services antenna and related
equipment shall be a color that blends with the surroundings of the pole on
which it is mounted. Any wiring on the pole must be covered with an appropriate
cover or cable shield.
            (v)   Grounding. The personal wireless services antenna and related
equipment structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod.
            (vi)   Other Standards. The personal wireless services antenna and
related equipment shall satisfy such other design and construction standards as
are required in the Building Code and other ordinances, codes, or regulations
to ensure safe construction and maintenance of the personal wireless services
antenna and its support structure.
         (d)   Separation and Setback Requirements. Personal wireless services
antennae and related equipment attached to a utility pole shall be located no
closer than 100 feet to any residential building, and no closer than 500 feet
from any other personal wireless services antenna, unless expressly authorized
in writing by the Village Manager or the Manager's designee pursuant to Article
IX of Chapter 30 of the Village Code.
         (e)   Guy Wires Restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be
used in connection with such personal wireless services antenna or its related
equipment.
         (f)   Equipment Enclosures. All electronic and other related equipment
and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless services
antenna shall comply fully with the Article IX of Chapter 30 of the Village
Code.
         (g)   Screening. See Subsection 30-86(e) of the Village Code for
landscaping and screening requirements applicable to ground mounted antennae
and related equipment.
         (h)   Licenses and Permits. The provider of every personal wireless
services antenna shall maintain all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction,
location and operation of such antenna. In addition, any such operation shall
provide copies of such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or
extension thereof when requested by the Village Manager.
         (i)   Abandonment and Removal. When one or more personal wireless
services antennae or related equipment are not operated for the provision of
personal wireless services for a continuous period of 12 months or more, such
personal wireless services antenna, antenna support structure, or related
equipment may be deemed to be abandoned by the Village. The owner of such
personal wireless services antenna or related equipment shall remove such items
within 90 days following the mailing of written notice that removal is
required. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to such owner at the last known address of
such owner.
(Adopted July 19, 2012)
      (15)   Arbors.  Arbors are permitted in the Residential Districts. An
arbor will be exempt from the regulations in the Zoning Code, and will not be
included in the floor area calculations for a residential structure, if the
arbor complies with all of the following conditions:
         (a)   Only one arbor is located on the zoning lot;
         (b)   No part of the arbor is located closer than two feet from the
front lot line, corner side lot line, or side lot line of any adjacent
property;
         (c)   The arbor is no more than nine feet in height, six feet in
width, and three feet in depth;
         (d)   The top and sides of the arbor are no less than 50 percent open
and the front and rear of the arbor are no less than 100 percent open; and
         (e)   Any gate or fence attached to or incorporated into the arbor
complies with all of the Village's fence regulations as set forth in Article XI
of Chapter 9 of the Village Code. (Adopted December 15, 2011)
      (16)   Pergolas. Pergolas shall be permitted in the Residential
Districts. A pergola will be exempt from the regulations in the Zoning Code,
and will not be included in the floor area calculations for a residential
structure, if the pergola complies with all of the following conditions:
         (a)   Only one pergola is located on the zoning lot;
         (b)   The pergola is no more than 12 feet in height and no more than
250 square feet in area;
         (c)   Open top and sides. Those portions of the pergola that are not
comprised of the walls of the residential structure or the support columns for
the pergola must each be no less than 100 percent open and unscreened. The roof
of the pergola must also be no less than 50 percent open and unscreened;
         (d)   The pergola must comply with all applicable setback
requirements. (Adopted December 15, 2011)
      (17)   Emergency Generators.
         a.   Emergency Generators shall be permitted in the Residential
Districts.
         b.   The total side yard setback requirement of Subparagraph 3-111C2
(a)(iii) or 3-111C2(b)(iii) will not apply to the location of an emergency
generator, and one emergency generator will be exempt from the floor area ratio
requirements for the associated residential structure.
         c.   The operation of the emergency generator may be tested only
between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on weekdays, excluding holidays.
         d.   Not more than one emergency generator on a lot will be exempt
from the otherwise applicable bulk and space requirements of the Zoning Code if
such emergency generator complies with all of the following conditions:
            1.   The emergency generator serves the principal building or use
on the lot.
            2.   The emergency generator does not exceed 39 inches in height,
and does not exceed 53 inches in its length or width.
            3.   The emergency generator is located in the rear yard or the
required minimum side yard and is not farther than three feet from the side or
rear wall of the building or structure that the emergency generator serves.
            4.   Sound attenuation measures are provided that limit the sound
output from the emergency generator at all times to a level no higher than 70
db as measured from any lot line of the property on which the generator is
located. No permit shall be issued for the emergency generator unless the
permit applicant has provided satisfactory evidence demonstrating that such
sound restrictions will be satisfied. (Am. Ord. 2012-01-3302, passed 1-19-2012)
   E.   Use, Bulk, Space, and Yard Regulations. Except as expressly provided
otherwise in this Section, every accessory structure and use shall comply with
the use, bulk, space, and yard requirements made applicable to them by the
regulations of the district in which they are located. In addition, unless
provided otherwise in this Section, no accessory structure or structures shall
be nearer to the street front lot line than the furthest point from the front
lot line along the building front of the principal structure on the lot, plus
ten feet. On through lots, this additional front setback requirement for
accessory structures shall only apply to one front lot line, as determined by
the Village Manager or their designee to be the lot line closest to what is
functionally the front of the principal structure. (Am. Ord. 2024-16-3593,
passed 10-17-2024)
   F.   Use Limitation. No accessory structure or use shall be constructed,
established, or maintained on any lot prior to the substantial completion of
construction of the principal structure to which it is accessory.
5-102 TEMPORARY USES
   A.   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section, temporary
uses as hereinafter specified are permit-ted in the zoning districts
hereinafter specified.
   B.   Definition. A temporary use is a building or use that:
      1.   Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to
discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time; and
      2.   Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent
structure.
   C.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance Required: Special Standards for
Issuance and Revocation.
      1.   Certificate Required. Except as provided in Paragraph D1 of this
Section, no temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a
certificate of zoning compliance evidencing the compliance of such use with the
provisions of this Code shall have first been issued in accordance with Section
7-301 of this Code.
      2.   Bases for Certificate Denial. A certificate of zoning compliance may
be denied if the Village Manager determines that the applicant has failed to
comply with the terms or conditions of any previ-ously issued zoning
certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject prop-
erty fails to comply in all respects with the provisions of all Village
ordinances regulating the development, use, and maintenance of the property.
Such a certificate shall be denied if the Village Manager determines that the
public health, safety, or welfare would be, or may reasonably be expected to
be, impaired by the issuance thereof.
      3.   Conditions on Certificate. A certificate of zoning compliance may be
conditioned upon such special requirements as the Village Manager may determine
are necessary to achieve the purposes of this Code and to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
      4.   Revocation of Certificate. A certificate of zoning compliance shall
be revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this
Section, or such certificate, are violated.
   D.   Permitted Temporary Uses. Subject to the specific regulations and time
limits that follow and to the other applicable regulations of the district in
which the use is permitted, the following temporary uses and no others are
permitted in the zoning districts herein specified:
      1.   House, Apartment, Garage, and Yard Sales: In any residential
district. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed three consecutive
days, and no more than two such sales shall be conducted from the same dwelling
in any 12-month period. No certificate of zoning compliance shall be required
for such use.
      2.   Indoor and Outdoor Art, Craft, Rummage, Plant, and Sidewalk Sales,
Shows, and Exhibits: In any business district; provided, however, that any such
use shall require the specific prior approval of the Village Manager on the
basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic
access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. No such
sale shall exceed a period of three days.
      3.   Contractors' Offices, Portable Toilets, and Equipment Sheds: In any
district when accessory to a construction project. No such use shall contain
any sleeping or cooking accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period
not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project,
but in no event for more than one year. The Village Manager may allow such
temporary structures to be located within required yards.
      4.   Tents. In any district, in connection with any permitted, accessory,
temporary, or special use. No tent shall be allowed to remain for a period of
more than 10 days. Unless waived in writing by the Village Manager, every tent
shall comply with the bulk, space, and yard requirements applicable to
accessory uses pursuant to Subsection
5-101E of this Code. For purposes of this Paragraph, the word "tent" shall
include awnings or canopies extending more than 72 inches from the exterior
wall of a building.
      5.   Civic Uses of Public Property: In any district, any civic use of any
public building or property when authorized by the governmental agency owning
or controlling such property; provided, however, that no certificate of zoning
compliance shall be issued for such use unless the Village Manager finds that
such use shall impose no undue adverse effect on neighboring streets or
property.
      6.   Open Air Markets: In any business district; provided, however, that
any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the Village Manager
on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking and sanitation
provisions, available utilities, and traffic access, as well as the absence of
undue adverse impacts on other properties; provided further that no such use
shall be permitted unless the Village Manager also finds that such use will
contribute directly to the preservation and enhancement of an attractive and
active business district. Such uses shall not be permitted at any location more
than once in any seven day period or for more than eight consecutive hours;
provided, however, that a single certificate of zoning compliance per calendar
year may be issued for a recurring open air market. Unless waived in writing by
the Village Manager, open air markets shall comply with the applicable
district bulk, space, and yard requirements of this Code.
      7.   Outdoor Storage of Construction Materials. In any district when
accessory to a construction project on the lot for which a valid building
permit exists. Such materials shall be kept in a neat, safe and secure
condition so as not to constitute a nuisance or offense.
      8.   Outdoor Cafes. In the B-1 Central Business District and the B-
2 Neighborhood Business District; provided, however, than any such use shall
require the specific prior approval of the Village Manager on the basis of
adequacy of public access provisions, public health safeguards, litter
controls, and the absence of undue adverse impact on other businesses in the
area. No outdoor cafe shall be permitted to operate except between the days of
April 1 and November 30 in any calendar year. Such outdoor cafes may be
operated upon the Village sidewalks if the Village Manager determines that
there is adequate sidewalk space for the operation of the cafe and that the use
of the public way by pedestrians will not be unduly impeded; provided, however,
that no outdoor cafe shall be permitted upon the sidewalks or other property of
the Village unless a permit therefor has also been obtained pursuant to Article
VI of
Chapter 5 of the Glencoe Village Code.
      9.   Theaters Presenting Live Theater Performances. In the B-1 Central
Business District; provided, however, that any such use shall require specific
prior approval by the Village Manager on the basis of the adequacy of the
parcel size, public health safeguards, parking and sanitation provisions,
available utilities, pedestrian and traffic access, the absence of undue
adverse impact on other properties, and the compliance of the theater with all
applicable provisions of the Village Code, including without limitation the
approval of a certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to Section
7-301 of this Code; provided further that no such use shall be permitted at any
location for a period exceeding two consecutive years, unless the Village Board
approves a longer period by resolution; and provided further that under no
circumstance may any such temporary use permit issued under this provision be
valid after December 31, 2016.
   E.   Bulk, Space, and Yard Regulations. Except as expressly provided
otherwise in Subsection D of this Section, every tempo-rary use shall comply
with the bulk, yard, and space requirements applicable in the district in which
such temporary use is located.
   F.   Use Limitations.
      1.   General Limitations. Every temporary use shall comply with the
limitations made applicable to specified temporary uses by Subsection D of this
Section. No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would have a
significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on any adjacent
property or on the area, as a whole, in which it is located.
      2.   Hours and Days of Operation. No temporary use shall be operated
during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
the Village Manager in the certificate required by Subsection C of this
Section, on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character of
the surrounding area.
      3.   Public Safety. No temporary use shall be permitted that will result
in an undue on-site or off-site threat to public safety. No temporary use shall
be operated except in accordance with such restrictions and conditions as the
Village Manager may require in connection with such certification.
      4.   Traffic. No temporary use shall be permitted if addi-tional
vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be gener-ated by such temporary use
would have undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
      5.   Conflicts with Other Temporary Uses. No temporary use shall be
permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized
temporary use.
      6.   Parking. Before approving any temporary use, the Village Manager
shall make an assessment of the total number of off-street parking spaces that
will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed temporary use, on
the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the availability of other
parking facilities in the area, and shall approve such temporary use only if
such off-street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be authorized that
would, in the opinion of the Village Manager, unreasonably reduce the amount of
off-street parking spaces available for use in connection with permanent uses
located on the zoning lot in question.
      7.   Sign Limitations. Except as otherwise expressly authorized by
Section
5-105 of this Code, signs shall be located only on the same zoning lot as the
temporary use, be limited to no more than one per street frontage, be no larger
than six square feet in area in any single family residential district or 12
square feet in area in any other district; be of sturdy construction, and not
be detrimental to the character of the area. Such signs shall not be erected
sooner than 24 hours before the commencement of the temporary use and shall be
removed within 24 hours following the termination of the temporary use.
      8.   Additional Conditions. Every temporary use shall, in addition,
comply with, and the Village Manager may impose, such other conditions as may
reasonably be neces-sary to achieve the purposes of this Code or to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
5-103 HOME OCCUPATIONS
   A.   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section, any home
occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as
a dwelling shall be permit-ted in any dwelling unit.
   B.   Definition. A home occupation is a business, profession, occupation, or
trade that:
      1.   Is conducted for gain or support by a full-time occupant of a
dwelling unit;
      2.   Is incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit for
dwelling purposes; and
      3.   Does not change the essential residential character of such dwelling
unit.
   C.   Use Limitations.
      1.   Employee Limitations. The entrepreneur and every employee of a home
occupation shall be domiciled in the dwelling unit where such occupation is
conducted.
      2.   Structural Limitations.
         (a)   No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit
where a home occupation is conducted that would change its residential
character as a dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public utility
services beyond that customarily required for residential use.
         (b)   No separate entrance shall be provided in connection with the
conduct of any home occupation.
      3.   Operational Limitations.
         (a)   Every home occupation shall be conducted wholly within a
principal dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure.
         (b)   No article on the premises shall be sold or offered for sale
except such as may be produced in the dwelling unit by employees of the home
occupation.
         (c)   No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment that produces
noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, emissions,
odor, or radiation outside the dwelling  unit or any permitted accessory
structure that is greater or more frequent than that typical of equipment used
in connection with residential occupancy shall be used in connection with any
home occupation.
         (d)   No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connec-tion with any home
occupation.
         (e)   No refuse in excess of the amount allowable for regular
residential pick-up shall be generated by any home occupation.
         (f)   Vehicles used in connection with any home occupation shall be
subject to the requirements of Paragraph
5-101D4 of this Code.
         (g)   The sale or transfer of firearms or ammunition shall not be
allowed as a home occupation. (July 19, 2001 Amendment)
      4.   Signage and Visibility.
         (a)   No sign shall advertise the presence or conduct of the home
occupation.
         (b)   No home occupation shall be in any manner visible or apparent
from any public or private street.
      5.   Traffic Limitations. No home occupation shall generate more
vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of residences in the area.
      6.   Nuisance Causing Activities. In addition to the foregoing specific
limitations, no home occupation shall cause or create any nuisance, or cause or
create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the
character of the area, or threaten the public health, safety, or general
welfare, or be noxious, offensive, or deleterious to health by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas, or noise.
      7.   Compliance with Applicable Laws. Every home occupation shall comply
with all applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations including,
without limitation, obtaining, maintaining, and complying with regulations
applicable to any required federal, State, or local license or permit.
5-104 OFF-STREET PARKING
   A.   Authorization. Subject to the limitations of this Section
5-104, off-street parking is permitted as an accessory use in all districts.
Off-street parking as a principal use is permitted only when expressly
authorized by the regulations applicable to the district in question. Nothing
in this Section shall be construed to limit the right of any person to provide
off-street parking in excess of the requirements herein established, but all
such parking shall comply with the standards of this Section.
   B.   General Requirements.
      1.   Applicability to Existing, New, and Expanded Uses.
         (a)   General Applicability. Except as provided otherwise in this
Paragraph B1, the provisions of this Section shall apply to, and off-street
parking spaces sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this Section shall be
provided for, all existing and new uses, in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI of this Code.
         (b)   Change in Existing Use. Whenever a use exist-ing on the
effective date of this Code is changed thereafter to a new use, parking
facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new use; provided,
however, that when any such existing use was deficient in required parking
spaces on such effective date, such new use may be established with a
deficiency in required parking spaces equal in number to not more than such
preexisting deficiency.
         (c)   Increase in Use Intensity. Whenever the intensity of use of any
structure or use is increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor
area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein for
required parking spaces, parking spaces as required herein shall be provided
for such increase in intensity of use.
         (d)   Exceptions. Nothing in this Paragraph B1 shall be construed to
prohibit the continued utili-zation of any parking space as an accessory use to
any structure or use for parking of a vehicle that may lawfully be parked in
such space solely because such space does not satisfy the locational or design
requirements of this Code, or any amendment to it, if such space was validly in
use as an accessory use to such structure or use on the effective date of this
Code or such amendment.
      2.   Location of Required Parking Spaces.
         (a)   General Rule. Except as provided in Subparagraphs (b) and (c) of
this Paragraph, parking spaces required by this Section shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the use to which they are accessory.
         (b)   Spaces Across Streets. Parking spaces for any place of public
worship, elementary or secondary school, college, or any use in the R-
D District or in a business district may be located on any lot where parking
lots are permitted that is across a street or alley from the zoning lot on
which the use to be served is located; provided, however, that such parking
spaces may only be allowed when such lot across a street or alley is covenanted
to remain as parking for so long as said parking spaces are required to meet
the standards of this Code.
         (c)   Deficiency Spaces. When proposed to eliminate a parking
deficiency, or when required because of a change in use or an increase in use
intensity pursuant to Subparagraphs B1(b) or (c) of this Section, parking
spaces may be located within any district (subject to the requirements of that
district) that is adjacent to the district in which the principal use in
question is a permitted use, or within the same zoning district as, and within
1,000 feet of, the zoning lot on which the use to be served is located;
provided, however, that such remote parking spaces may be allowed only when
such remote site is covenanted to remain as parking for so long as said parking
spaces are required to meet the standards of this Code.
   C.   Design and Maintenance. Every parking lot and garage shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and requirements
herein set forth:
      1.   Location on Lot. Off-street parking spaces may be provided on
surface lots, underground, under a building, or in parking structures. Parking
lots, areas, and garages shall comply with the yard requirements made
applicable to them by the regulations of the district in which they are
located. See Paragraph
5-101D4 for additional regulations concerning the off-street storage of
vehicles in residential districts.
      2.   Screening and Landscaping. All parking lots and garages shall comply
with the screening and landscaping requirements set forth in Section
5-106 of this Code.
      3.   Design.
         (a)   Access to Street.
            (i)   Least Interference. All parking lots, areas, and garages
shall be so located and designed as to provide access to adjacent streets with
the least interference with pedestrian and through traffic movements.
            (ii)   Driveways. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code,
driveways serving single family dwellings and driveways providing direct access
from a parking lot to a street (and not serving as a circulation aisle), may
traverse any required yard.
            (iii)   Curb Cut Width and Driveway Width. No curb cut across
public property shall exceed 26 feet in width without the written approval of
the Village Manager. In addition, no driveway shall exceed 16 feet in width at
the right-of-way line.
            (iv)   Access Across Separate Zoning Lot. No such access to an
adjacent street shall be provided through a zoning lot other than the zoning
lot on which the parking lot is located except across a permanent, recorded
access easement in form and sub-stance satisfactory to the Village Attorney.
            (v)   Business Districts. No parking space required for a building
in the B-1 or B-2 District shall hereafter be constructed unless the means of
access to and from such space is through an alley or street other than Vernon,
Park, or Glencoe Road, or is otherwise approved by the Village Manager.
         (b)   Turn-Around Area. Every parking lot or garage, other than a
parking lot or garage accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be provided
with a turn-around area or other means to permit cars to exit the parking lot
or garage without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
         (c)   Surface; Drainage; Markings. Every off-street parking lot and
garage shall be surfaced with a bituminous or Portland cement concrete
pavement, cement paver bricks, or a similar hard surface approved by the
Village Manager, providing an all-weather, durable, and dustless surface.
All parking surfaces shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water
accumula-tion by means of a positive storm water drain-age system connected to
a public storm sewer system. Except for single family dwellings, individual
stalls shall be clearly identified by painted markings six inches in width.
         (d)   Lighting. Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Board of
Trustees, fixed lighting shall be provided for all parking lots and garages
accommodating more than 10 vehicles. Such lighting shall be so arranged as to
prevent direct glare of beams onto any adjacent public or private property or
streets by the use of luminare cutoffs. All lighting shall be reduced to
security levels at all times of non-use.
         (e)   Tree Planting Areas. Trees located within planting islands in
paved areas shall have a minimum landscaped area of at least 36 square feet of
surface area and be designed to permit adequate drainage.
         (f)   Car Stops. Every parking lot and garage, except parking lots and
garages accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be provided with curbs,
car wheel stops, guard rails, barrier fences, or other suitable devices
designed and located to protect required screening devices, landscaping, and
structures from damage by vehicles using such lot or garage. This pro-vision
shall not be construed to require car wheel stops for every parking space, but
only in those cases where the Village Manager determines that such stops are
necessary or desir-able to achieve the purposes of this Subparagraph.
         (g)   Circulation Aisles. Each parking space in a parking lot, except
spaces accessory to a single family dwelling, shall be accessed by a
circulation aisle of a width, in feet and inches, as specified below:
            Parking        One-Way      Two-Way
             Angle             Aisle Width      Aisle Width
            Parallel      12'0"         24'0"
            40°         12'6"         24'0"
            60°         14'6"         24'0"
            90°         22'6"         24'0"
The above-stated aisle widths may be reduced if the Village Engineer determines
that such reduction will not adversely affect the safe and efficient use of
such parking spaces and such parking lot.
         (h)   Tandem Spaces. Unless otherwise expressly approved by the Board
of Trustees, no parking spaces shall be designed in "tandem" so that ingress to
or egress from one space is blocked by a second space, except for spaces
accessory to single family or multiple family dwellings.
         (i)   Back-up Area. Each parking space, except spaces accessory to a
single family dwelling, shall be provided with a sufficient back-up area to
permit egress in one maneuver, consist-ing of one backward and one forward
movement, and shall be designed so that no vehicle is required to back up onto
any street.
         (j)   Space Dimensions. Each off-street parking space, excluding its
associated circulation aisle, shall have the following minimum dimensions, in
feet and inches:
      Parking   Stall       Stall       Stall
      Angle      Width       Length      Height
      Parallel   8'0"      20'0"      6'8"
      45°      9'0"      17'6"      6'8"
      60°      9'0"      19'0"      6'8"
      90°      9'0"      18'0"      6'8"
The above-stated stall width dimensions shall be increased to 16 feet for
required handicapped parking spaces or to the width required under applicable
State law, whichever is greater.
The above-stated stall dimensions may be reduced if the Village Engineer
determines that such reduction will not adversely affect the safe and efficient
use of such parking spaces.
         (k)   Maintenance. All tree planting areas, parking lots, garages, and
parking areas shall be properly maintained at all times so as to be free of pot
holes, broken curbs, and other damaged or neglected features.
         (l)   Board Approval. The arrangements, surfacing, screening, and
illumination of any open parking lot shall be subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees.
   D.   Use. Except as otherwise set forth in this Code, no off-street parking
lot or garage shall be used for any purpose other than the temporary storage of
motor vehicles related to the premises. The storage of merchandise and the sale
or commercial repair of vehi-cles are prohibited.
   E.   Required Spaces.
      1.   Specified Uses. For the following uses, the fol-lowing minimum
number of off-street parking spaces or stacking spaces shall be provided:
USE                                                                        REQUIRED
                                                                           SPACES
                                                                           2 for each
                                                                           dwelling
                                                                           unit in
                                                                           the R-
                                                                           A and R-
   (a)   Single Family Dwellings                                     B
                                                                           Districts;
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           dwelling
                                                                           unit in
                                                                           the R-
                                                                           C District
   (b)   Multiple Family Dwellings and Dwellings Located in Business  
Districts
                                                                           1.5 spaces
                                                                           for each
      (i)   Multiple Family Dwellings in Business Districts Distriapartment
                                                                           in the B-
                                                                           1, and B-2
      (ii)   Multiple Family Dwellings in R-D District             
                                                                           1.5
                                                                           enclosed
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
         (A)   One Bedroom Unit                                unit, plus
                                                                           0.5
                                                                           additional
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
                                                                           unit.
                                                                           2 enclosed
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
                                                                           unit, plus
                                                                           0.5
         (B)   Two and Three Bedroom Unit                      additional
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
                                                                           unit
                                                                           (Amended
                                                                           6/2003)
                                                                           2.75
                                                                           enclosed
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
                                                                           unit, plus
                                                                           0.5
         (C)   Four or More Bedroom Unit                       additional
                                                                           parking
                                                                           spaces per
                                                                           unit
                                                                           (Amended
                                                                           Feb 6,
                                                                           2003 and
                                                                           6/2003)
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           3 staff
                                                                           members
   (c)   Pre-kindergarten and Elementary Schools                     and
                                                                           employees
                                                                           PLUS 1 for
                                                                           each 16
                                                                           pupils
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           3 staff
                                                                           members
   (d)   Secondary Schools and Colleges                              and
                                                                           employees
                                                                           PLUS 1 for
                                                                           each 8
                                                                           pupils
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           2 persons
                                                                           employed
                                                                           on the
                                                                           premises
                                                                           plus 1 for
                                                                           every 8
   (e)   Places of Public Worship                                    seats but
                                                                           not
                                                                           including
                                                                           seats in a
                                                                           Sunday or
                                                                           religious
                                                                           school
                                                                           room
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           5 seats
   (f)   Theaters                                                    provided
                                                                           in the
                                                                           theater
                                                                           The number
                                                                           of parking
                                                                           spaces
                                                                           provided
                                                                           by any
                                                                           private
                                                                           golf club
                                                                           on the
                                                                           effective
   (g)   Private Golf Clubs                                          date of
                                                                           this  Code
                                                                           shall not
                                                                           be reduced
                                                                           without
                                                                           the
                                                                           express
                                                                           approval
                                                                           of the
                                                                           Board of
                                                                           Trustees
   (h)   Business District Buildings                                  
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           500 square
                                                                           feet of
                                                                           gross
      (i)   New Buildings                                         floor area
                                                                           not used
                                                                           for
                                                                           dwelling
                                                                           units
                                                                           1 for each
                                                                           500 square
                                                                           feet of
                                                                           gross
                                                                           floor area
                                                                           not used
                                                                           for
      (ii)   Existing Buildings                                   dwelling
                                                                           units
                                                                           added
                                                                           after the
                                                                           effective
                                                                           date of
                                                                           this Code.
                                                                           (Adopted
                                                                           Jan 1991)
 
      2.   Unspecified Uses. When the ultimate use of a structure is not known,
the maximum number of spaces that might be required for any use to which the
structure might reasonably be devoted shall be provided.
      3.   Computation of Required Spaces.
         (a)   Fractional Spaces. When determination of the number of required
parking spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
shall require one additional parking space.
         (b)   Capacity Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the
basis of capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy
standards estab-lished by the Building Code.
         (c)   Bench Seating. In stadia, auditoria, places of public worship,
and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches,
pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of such seating
facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of deter-mining the
requirement for off-street parking facilities under this Code.
         (d)   Population Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the
basis of the number of customers, students, or similar measure, the maximum
number for which the structure is designed shall govern, except that when the
structure has no design capacity the maximum number present at any one time
shall govern. When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of
employees, the maximum number of employees working during the largest work
shift shall govern.
         (e)   Single Family Residence Districts. On lots with single family
dwellings in the R-A, R-B, and R-C Districts, automobile access and maneuvering
areas may be included in the required parking space.
      4.   Special Regulations for Restaurants in Business Districts. Anything
else contained in this Code to the contrary notwithstanding, no off-street
parking spaces, except such spaces as may be provided to accommodate the
reasonable needs of employees, shall be required, allowed, or provided in
connection with any eating place permitted in the B-1 or B-2 Districts unless
such eating place is located in a shopping center providing off-street parking
spaces in a parking lot designed and intended for the joint and common use of
all establishments in such shopping center and the parking spaces used or
provided for such eating place are located in such parking lot.
      5.    Spaces Reserved for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Any space
meeting the requirements of this section reserved or designated for electric
vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum off-street
parking space requirements.
(Amd. Ord. 2023-19-3564, passed 9-21-2023)
5-105 SIGNS
   A.   Purposes. The regulation of signs by this Code is intended to promote
and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by reducing the depreciation
of property values caused by signs that are incompatible with surrounding land
uses; by creating a more attractive economic and business climate within the
business districts of the Village; by enhancing and protecting the physical
appearance of all areas of the Village; by protecting signs from obstruction by
other signs; and by reducing the distractions, obstructions, and hazards to
pedestrian and auto traffic caused by the indiscriminate placement and use of
signs; and to be content-neutral.
   B.   Scope. The regulations of this Section shall govern and control the
erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation, maintenance,
relocation, and removal of all signs within the Village visible from any
street, sidewalk, or public or private common open space. Any sign not
expressly permitted by these regulations shall be prohibited. The regulations
of this Section relate to the location of signs, by function and type, within
zoning districts and shall be in addition to provisions of the Building Code
applicable to the construction and maintenance of signs. If any part, section,
subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word in
this code is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining portions of the code. Regulations concerning
the use and termination of nonconforming signs appear in Section
6-105 of this Code.
   C.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance Required. Except as expressly provided
in this Section, no sign shall be erected, enlarged, expanded, altered,
relocated, or maintained unless a certificate of zoning compliance shall have
first been issued in accordance with the provisions of Section
7-301 of this Code.
      1.    No certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for any
permanent sign in the R-D, B-1, or B-2 District unless appearance review
approval is first obtained in accordance with Section
7-503 of this Code.
      2.    No certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for the
repair or maintenance of a sign, provided that such repair or maintenance does
not alter the size, height, location, illumination, or appearance.
      3.     Any other permits required under any applicable federal, state, or
local law, ordinance, or regulation shall be obtained prior to the erection,
enlargement, alteration, or relocation of any such sign.
   D.   Classification of Signs
      1.   A-Frame Sign. A portable and temporary sign that is designed to be
self-supporting by nature, not permanently attached to the ground, which is
made of two boards that are hinged together on the top of the sign and separate
at the bottom of the sign, forming a two-sided "A" shape, which may have a
total of two sign faces.
      2.   Abandoned or Dilapidated Sign. A sign that has ceased to be in use
by either the owner of the sign or the occupant of the property on which the
sign is placed, or through the removal or relocation of the previous occupant
of the property, or a sign that has ceased to be used through the removal of
its copy, or the deterioration of its copy through lack of maintenance, but
excluding temporary or short-term periods of remodeling, refurbishment or
maintenance of the sign.
      3.   Access Safety Sign. A sign that marks a method of ingress, egress,
direction, or circulation for the safety of a parking lot or drive.
      4.   Accessory Wall Sign. A secondary wall sign installed on a storefront
that has a primary wall or awning sign. An accessory wall or awning sign is
smaller than and accessory to a primary wall sign. For the purposes of this
definition, a primary wall or awning sign shall mean such sign permitted under
the requirements of a Wall Sign or Awning Sign as defined in this code.
      5.   Address Identification. Numbers identifying the address of a
property. Address Identifications are not considered signs under this Code.
      6.   Animated or Moving Sign. A sign or part of a sign that changes
physical position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual
impression of such movement or rotation.
      7.   Awning Sign. A sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an
awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this Code.
      8.   Attention-Getting Device. A sign designed to attract attention by
means of flashing or moving parts, bright color or light, or movement of any
kind. Examples of such signs include pennants, banners, streamers, ribbons,
audio, balloons, propellers, whirligigs, search lights, and flashing lights.
      9.   Changeable Sign. A sign that changes by means of a digital screen,
light banks, video display, removable  letters, or any other device.
      10.   Banner sign. A sign made of flexible fabric that is attached to
poles, a structure, or a building
      11.   Ground Sign. Any sign, other than a pole or A-Frame sign, placed
upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure. Ground
signs may include signs which are not defined elsewhere in this Code, that may
be mounted on a freestanding pole or other supports so that the bottom edge of
the sign face is less than six feet above grade.
      12.   Governmental Sign. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in
discharge of any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance, or
governmental regulation
      13.   Holiday Decorations. Decorations that are clearly incidental to and
customarily and commonly associated with any national, local, or religious
holiday. Holiday Decorations are not considered signs under this Code.
      14.   Joint-Identification Sign. A ground or pole sign which is located
in common open space in a shopping center.
      15.   Kiosk Sign. A sign on a freestanding accessory structure such as an
ATM, gas station pump, or electric vehicle charging station.
      16.   Official Flag or Emblem. A flag or emblem adopted by a federal,
state, or local government. Official Flags and Emblems are not considered signs
under this Code.
      17.   Permanent sign. A sign attached to a structure or the ground that
is made of materials for long-term use.
      18.   Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
supports so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above
grade in the Business Districts, or eight feet or more above grade in the
Highway Frontage District.
      19.   Portable Sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, a structure, or the ground.
      20.   Projecting Sign. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support, and that projects more than 12 inches from such building.
      21.   Roof Sign. A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building, or
which is wholly dependent upon a building for support, and that projects more
than six inches above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the
eave line of a building with a gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a
building with a gambrel or mansard roof.
      22.   Standard Informational Sign. A sign made from rigid materials for
short-term use, containing no reflecting elements, or banners, and which is
mounted on a post, stake or metal frame, or for business use, mounted directly
on the façade or window of a tenant space.
      23.   Storefront. The part of an exterior wall or walls of a building
along a street or right-of-way abutting interior space occupied by a business
establishment, religious congregation, or public use.
      24.   Temporary Sign. A sign or display constructed of cloth, canvas,
fabric, paper, or other light material, including standard informational signs.
      25.   Temporary Use Sign: A temporary sign allowed according to the
requirements of Section
5-102 of the Zoning Code.
      26.   Window area. An entire assembly comprised of the sash, glazing, and
frame or uninterrupted system of windows. On a storefront, window areas shall
be considered to be separate when separated by a door. A door shall be
considered its own window area and shall include any windows or portions
therefore directly above the door.
      27.   Wall Sign. A sign attached to the wall of a building or structure
in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms
the background surface of, the sign, excluding signs defined elsewhere in this
code, and that does not project more than 12 inches from such building or
structure nor more than six inches above the highest point of a building with a
flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gable or hip roof, or the deck
line of a building with a gambrel or mansard roof.
      28.   Window Sign. A sign that is applied or attached to the exterior or
interior of a window or located within three feet of a window in the interior
of a structure and that is plainly visible from the exterior of the structure.
      E.   Prohibited signs. The following signs, as well as all other signs
not expressly permitted by this Article, are prohibited in all districts and
shall not be erected, maintained, or, except as provided in Section
6-105 of this Code, permitted to continue in any district:
      1.   Attention-getting devices
      2.   Changeable Signs except when accessory to a theater.
      3.   Animated or moving signs
      4.   Abandoned or dilapidated signs
      5.   Roof signs
      6.   Portable signs, except A-Frame signs and signs approved in
connection with temporary uses pursuant to this code.
      7.   Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, curbs, utility
poles, rocks, or other natural features
      8.   Signs that are painted on a wall, fence or building in any zoning
district or on a window in a residential zoning district
      9.   Signs with obscene, fraudulent, libelous, defamatory, or slanderous
language, or with threats or incitements of violence
      10.   Signs on public property, except those placed and approved by
government agencies having control of such property
      11.   Search lights and similar devices
      12.   Signs maintained at any location whereby reason of its position,
size, shape, color, or illumination it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere
with the view of, or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal, or
device or where it may interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
      13.   Signs utilizing fluorescent, radiating, iridescent, holographic, or
glowing paint, ink, or material in its construction.
      14.   Signs constructed or maintained in any area or in any manner so as
to create a nuisance or a threat to the public safety or welfare.
      15.   Banner signs
   F.   Signs Permitted Without a Certificate of Zoning Compliance or Fee.
Except as regulated by Subsection E of this Section and as expressly prohibited
in Subsection G of this Section, and notwithstanding any other contrary
provisions of this Code, the following signs may be erected and maintained
without obtaining a certificate of zoning compliance or paying the fee required
for such certificate, subject to the following limitations, the following signs
shall not require the issuance of a sign permit to be installed, provided that
such signs conform to all other applicable provisions of this Code.
      1.   Governmental Signs
      2.   Temporary Use Signs with an approved Temporary Use
      3.   Window Signs
      4.   A-Frame Signs
      5.   Standard Informational Signs
   G.   Regulations Applying to All Zoning Districts 
      a.   Sign area:
         i.   Area to be Included. The supporting structure or bracing of a
sign shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such structure
or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign. When a sign has
more than one display face, all faces shall be included in determining the area
of the sign except that for signs attached to the ground that have two
parallel, back-to-back sign faces of equal size that are separated by not more
than three feet of sign structure depth, only one sign face shall be included
in determining the area of the sign.
         ii.   Area of Signs With Backing. The area of all signs with backing
shall be measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
         iii.   Area of Signs Without Backing. The area of all signs without
backing shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest regular
geometric figures that can separately encompass all words, letters, figures,
emblems, and other elements of the sign message.
         iv.   Area of Signs With and Without Backing. The area of all signs
formed by a combination of elements with and without backing shall be measured
by combining the area of such elements measured in accordance with the
foregoing subparagraphs.
         v.   Sign spacing. Signs located within two feet of each other may be
considered a single sign for the purposes of area calculation and the area
between such signs may be included in sign area calculations.
      b.   Location. Except as otherwise expressly authorized in this Section,
no sign shall be located on any lot other than the same zoning lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
      c.   Signs on Lots With Multiple Users. When more than one user occupies
a zoning lot, the owner of the lot shall be responsible for allocating
permitted signage among such users.
      d.   Cease of Business. Any sign pertaining to a business which has
ceased doing business shall be removed (along with all of its structural
elements) by the owner of the property upon which the sign is located within 60
days after the cessation of such business.
      e.   Obstruction of Access Ways. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct
free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door, window, or other required
access way.
      f.   Obstruction of Window Surface. No sign shall project over, occupy,
or obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation by any
applicable provision of the Building Code.
      g.   Illumination.
         a.   Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external
artificial light source is used for a sign, such source shall be located,
shielded, and directed so as not to be directly visible from any dwelling or
public street. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source for a
sign shall protrude more than 12 inches from the face of the sign or building
to which it is attached.
         b.   Level of Illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any
sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed
75 foot-candles when measured with a standard light meter held perpendicular to
the sign face at a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of such sign face.
All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded, and
directed as to illuminate only the sign face or faces and to prevent the
casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent property or streets.
         c.   Signs Adjacent to Residential Areas. Any illuminated sign located
within 120 feet of a residential district shall not be illuminated between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except that such sign may remain illuminated
during such time as the activity to which the sign pertains is open for
business so long as such sign is not a public or private nuisance.
         d.   Floodlights or Spotlights. No sign in the B-1 or B-2 Districts
shall be illuminated by a floodlight or spotlight.
      8.   Special Illumination standards in the HF zoning district. Signs
permitted pursuant to this Subsection
5-105(G)(5) may be illuminated only in compliance with Paragraph
5-105(G)(7) of this Code, except that 175 foot-candles shall be the maximum
intensity of illumination in lieu of 75 foot-candles. Neon or other gas tube
illumination is permitted only for window signs.
      9.   Electrical Elements. No metal sign illuminated by any means
requiring internal wiring and no electrical fixtures attached to any sign shall
be lower than nine feet above grade unless it is grounded by the use of a
grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and is also grounded by
being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site.
      10.   Structural Elements. The construction and structural components of
all signs shall be in accordance with the standards and regulations of the
Glencoe Village Code. All permanent signs shall be constructed of fire-
resistant materials and shall be capable of withstanding wind pressures of at
least 30 pounds per square foot of surface area and of receiving dead loads
based on the actual weight of the structure.
(Amd. Ord. 2022-18-3538, passed 11-17-2022)
   H.   Signs Allowed by Zoning District
      1.   Residential zoning districts. Only the following types of signs are
allowed in the residential zoning districts in the Village (R-A, R-B, R-C, and
R-D). All such signs are allowed in required yards and may be securely attached
to windows in accordance with the requirements of this Code, but are not
allowed on public property.
         a.   Standard Informational Signs
            i.   No standard informational sign shall exceed six square feet in
area or four feet in height.
            ii.   The total area of standard informational signs on a property
shall not exceed 10 square feet.
            iii.   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
            iv.   Changeable copy is not allowed on standard informational
signs.
            v.   In the R-D zoning district, when a zoning lot has an active
building permit, one additional standard informational sign per lot frontage of
no more than 12 square feet in size is permitted. No additional signage during
construction is permitted in the R-A, R-B, or R-C zoning districts.
            vi.   During the time a property is actively for sale or for rent,
one additional standard informational sign per lot frontage is permitted.
               a.   In the R-A, R-B, and R-C zoning districts, such signs shall
not exceed six feet in height or 6.5 square feet in size.
               b.   In the R-D district, such signs shall not exceed six feet
in height or twelve square feet in size.
               c.   Such additional standard informational signage shall be
removed promptly, but in no event later than seven days following the closing
on the sale of the property or the execution of a rental lease for the property
or, for multi-unit developments or structures in residential districts, within
14 days following the date upon which such development or structure is 90
percent sold or leased.
            vii.   From the date a ballot for any particular national, state,
or local election has been certified, until seven days after such election
occurs, standard informational signs up to six square feet in size and four
feet in height are permitted, with no limitations on total square feet per
zoning lot.
            viii.   The Village Manager may approve one additional standard
informational sign per lot frontage of no more than five feet in height or six
square feet in size after the owner of the lot on which the sign is located has
informed the Village of a civic event, use, or purpose.
         b.   Temporary Use Signs in compliance with Paragraph 5-102 of this
Code when approved per Subsection
5-102(C) of this Code.
         c.   Access Safety Signs. Such signs may be approved by Village staff
for the safe and convenient use of the lot in question, provided that no access
safety sign shall exceed four feet in height or five square feet in area, and
provided that no such sign shall be permitted in connection with a single-
family dwelling.
         d.    Kiosk Sign
            i.   No more than one such sign may be installed on each face of or
directly above a freestanding electric vehicle charging station, and no more
than two such signs may be installed on any such freestanding structure.
            ii.   Such signs shall not include attention-getting devices or
changeable-message signs.
            iii.   Such signs shall not exceed one square foot in area may and
not extend more than one foot above any supporting kiosk structure.
            iv.   Such signs shall not be permitted on lots with a single-
family dwelling.
            v.   Such signs shall not be illuminated in the R-A, R-B, or R-
C zoning districts.
         e.   Wall Sign
            i.   Wall signs shall only be permitted in the R-A, R-B, R-C, or R-
D on properties with non-residential principal uses.
            ii.   No more than one such sign shall be permitted on any
street­facing building facade, except that on facades with more than one
entrance to a building, a second wall sign may be permitted within 10 feet of
an entrance.
            iii.   No such sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area.
            iv.   The top of any such sign may not be more than 20 feet above
the ground.
            v.   Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. External
illumination shall not shine directly into other properties and shall not
exceed one foot-candle in intensity at any property line.
         f.   Ground Sign
            i.   Ground signs shall only be permitted in the R-A, R-B, R-C, or
R­D on properties with non-residential principal uses.
            ii.   One such sign shall be allowed on each street line of a
zoning lot, with no more than two such signs allowed on any zoning lot.
            iii.   If more than one ground sign is located on a zoning lot,
such signs must be at least 30 feet apart.
            iv.   Such signs shall be limited to six feet in height and 32
square feet in area.
            v.   Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. External
illumination shall not shine directly into other properties and shall not
exceed one foot-candle in intensity at any property line.
         g.   Accessory Wall Sign
            i.   No more than two Accessory Wall Signs shall be installed on
any storefront.
            ii.   No such sign shall exceed two square feet in area.
            iii.   Nosuch sign shall be placed higher than the second-floor
windowsill of a building.
            iv.   The area of permanent Accessory Wall Signs shall count toward
the allowable square footage of temporary Standard Informational Signs.
      2.   Business zoning districts. Only the following types of signs are
allowed in the business zoning districts in the Village (B-1 and B-2):
         a.   Standard Informational Signs
            i.   No standard informational sign shall exceed six square feet in
area or four feet in height.
            ii.   The total area of standard informational signs on a property
shall not exceed 10 square feet.
            iii.   Such signs shall not be illuminated
            iv.   Changeable copy is not allowed on standard informational
signs
            v.   When there is an active building permit on a zoning lot, one
additional standard informational sign per lot frontage of no more than 12
square feet in area is permitted. Such signage shall be removed within seven
days of the completion of construction.
            vi.   During the time that a lot or tenant space is actively for
sale or for lease, additional standard informational signage is allowed, per
the following restrictions:
               a.   Such signs shall be limited to one additional standard
informational sign, wall sign or ground sign per building face.
               b.   The total area of signs for each building shall not exceed
24 square feet, and no individual sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area.
               c.   No sign shall exceed six feet in height.
               d.   Additional signs attached to a wall under this provision
may be located no higher than the top of the wall of a one-story building or
the bottom of the windows in the second story of a multi-story building.
            vii.   The Village Manager may approve one additional standard
informational sign per lot frontage of no more than five feet in height or six
square feet in size after the owner of the lot on which the sign is located has
informed the Village of a civic event, use, or purpose.
         b.   Temporary Use Signs in compliance with Paragraph
5-102 of this Code when approved per Subsection
5-102(C) of this Code.
         c.   Governmental Signs : The size of any such sign shall not exceed
the requirements of the law, ordinance, or regulation pursuant to which such
sign is erected.
         d.   Awning Signs
            i.   One awning sign per storefront is permitted. Storefronts with
multiple frontages may have one awning sign per frontage.
            ii.   When a storefront on the first floor of a building has no
wall sign, an awning sign shall not exceed 1.5 square feet of area per 1 foot
of lineal width of the storefront.
            iii.   Awning signs shall not exceed six inches in height.
            iv.   Awning signs shall not be illuminated.
            v.   No such sign shall project above, below, or beyond the
physical dimensions of such awning, canopy, or marquee.
            vi   The bottom of the structural elements of every awning sign
(other than ground supports) shall be elevated at least seven feet above grade,
and all other elements of awning signs shall extend at least six and one-half
feet above grade.
         e.   Ground or Pole Signs
            i.   In no case shall the structural elements of a pole sign extend
above the top of the sign face.
            ii.   If the business establishment is located in a shopping
center:
               a.   One joint-identification sign not to exceed 18 feet in
height or 100 square feet in area counting all faces may be permitted for each
shopping center, so long as the business establishment does not have an
existing ground or pole sign.
            iii.   If the business establishment is not located in a shopping
center:
               a.   One pole or ground sign per business establishment shall be
permitted under the following conditions: When the storefront is set back at
least 15 feet from the street line, or when the entrance to the business
establishment is on the side or rear of the building, and no wall sign
advertises the business.
               b.   The maximum height of any such pole or ground sign shall be
12 feet, and the maximum area, counting all faces, shall be 30 square feet.
            iv.   If the sign is located in an off-premise parking lot of a
business establishment:
               a.   One pole or ground sign not exceeding eight feet in height
and one and one-half square feet in area on any face, and having not more than
two sign faces may be permitted, subject to an Exterior Appearance Review.
         f.   Wall Signs
            i.   One wall sign per storefront on the first floor of a building
shall be permitted.
            ii.   No wall sign will be allowed for a storefront that has a
projecting sign.
            iii.   No wall sign shall exceed 1.5 square feet of area per 1 foot
of lineal width of its storefront.
            iv.    No wall sign shall be placed higher than the second-floor
windowsill of a building; provided, however, that if the wall area to be
covered has no windows or openings, the sign may extend to the full height
otherwise permitted for wall signs.
         g.   Window signs
            i.   Window signs may not obstruct 15 percent of a window area. For
storefronts with multiple frontages, each frontage shall be considered
separately when calculating the 15 percent obstruction limit.
            ii.   Window signs may not be illuminated.
            iii.   Window signs may not be handwritten.
            iv.   Signs in windows higher than the first story of a building
shall not have backing.
         h.   Projecting signs
            i.   Projecting signs are prohibited in the B-2 zoning district.
            ii.   In the B-1 District only, one projecting sign will be
permitted for each storefront on the first floor of a building. Projecting
signs will be subject to the following limitations:
               a.   No projecting sign will be allowed for a storefront that
also has a wall sign.
               b.   No projecting sign may exceed 36 inches in height, 42
inches in width, or 2 inches in depth.
               c.   No projecting sign may project more than 48 inches from the
wall to which it is attached.
               d.   No projecting sign may be placed higher than the second
floor window sill of a building, and the bottom of every projecting sign must
be elevated at least eight feet above grade.
               e.   Wherever possible, projecting signs on the same facade must
maintain the same top and bottom elevations above grade and, if illuminated,
must maintain the same type and intensity of illumination.
               f.   Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in Paragraph
5-105E1 of this Code, a projecting sign may be illuminated by gooseneck lamps
on each of its sides, having a halogen or incandescent bulb, so long as the
light source is no more than 12 inches from the face of the sign. The lighting
element for a projecting sign must not be visible from the street.
               g.   Projecting signs may not be internally illuminated.
         i.   A-Frame Signs
            i.   One A-Frame sign per storefront is permitted.
            ii.   A-Frame Signs shall be located on the sidewalk directly in
front of the storefront, or, if the storefront does not face the sidewalk, on
the sidewalk directly in front of the public entrance to the storefront,
provided that the sign must be located in a manner that maintains a straight
unobstructed pathway of at least sixty inches on the sidewalk and may not be
placed in a parking lot or in the public street.
            iii.   A-Frame Signs must be constructed of a sturdy frame capable
of withstanding typical winds and may not be used when wind speeds may cause
them to become a hazard.
            iv.   A-Frame signs must measure no larger than two feet wide and
three feet tall per sign face.
            v.   A-Frame Signs may not be located in front of a storefront
during hours the business occupying the tenant space is not open. 
            vi.   The Village reserves the right to require the temporary or
permanent relocation or removal of any A-Frame Sign if the Village determines
in its sole discretion that the sign poses a safety hazard for pedestrian or
vehicle traffic.
         j.   Access Safety Signs . Such signs may be approved by the Plan
Commission through an Exterior Appearance Review for the safe and convenient
use of the lot in question, provided that no access safety sign shall exceed
four feet in height or five square feet in area.
         k.   Accessory Wall Signs.
            i.   No more than one Accessory Wall Sign shall be installed on a
storefront.
            ii.   No such sign shall exceed two square feet in area.
            iii.   No such sign shall be placed higher than the second-floor
windowsill of a building.
            iv.   The area of permanent Accessory Wall Signs shall count toward
the allowable square footage of temporary Standard Informational Signs
         l.   Kiosk Signs.
            i.   No more than one such sign may be installed on each face of or
directly above a freestanding structure such as an ATM, gas station pump, or
electric vehicle charging station, and no more than two such signs mav be
installed on any such freestanding structure.
            ii.   Such signs shall not include attention-getting devices or
changeable signs.
            iii.   Such signs shall not exceed one square foot in area and may
not extend more than one foot above any supporting kiosk structure.
            iv.   Such signs shall not be permitted on lots with a single-
family dwelling principal use.
      3.   Highway Frontage zoning district. Only the following types of signs
are allowed in the Highway Frontage zoning district (HF) in the Village:
         a.   Overall Sign Area Limit. The total area of all signs on a zoning
lot shall not exceed one square foot per foot of zoning lot frontage; provided
however, that joint-identification signs, and signs allowed without a sign
permit shall not be counted toward the total allowance gross sign surface area
permitted on a zoning lot.
         b.   Standard Informational Signs
            i.   No standard informational sign shall exceed six square feet in
area or four feet in height, except as expressly allowed in this section.
            ii.   The total area of standard informational signs on a property
shall not exceed 10 square feet.
            iii.   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
            iv.   Changeable copy is not allowed on standard informational
signs
            v.   When there is an active building permit on a zoning lot, one
additional standard informational sign per lot frontage of no more than 12
square feet in area is permitted. Such signage shall be removed within seven
days of the completion of construction.
            vi.   During the time that a lot or tenant space is actively for
sale or for lease, additional standard informational signage is allowed, per
the following restrictions:
               a.   Such signs shall be limited to one additional wall or
ground sign per lot frontage.
               b.   No individual sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area.
               c.   No sign shall exceed 8 feet in height.
               d.   Additional signs attached to a wall under this provision
may be located no higher than the top of the wall of a one-story building or
the bottom of the windows in the second story of a multi-story building.
            vii.   The Village Manager may approve one additional standard
informational sign per lot frontage of no more than five feet in height or six
square feet in size after the owner of the lot on which the sign is located has
informed the Village of a civic event, use, or purpose.
         c.   Governmental Signs : The size of any such sign shall not exceed
the requirements of the law, ordinance, or regulation pursuant to which such
sign is erected.
         d.   Ground or Pole Signs.
            i.   One joint-identification sign is permitted per shopping
center. If a joint-identification sign is installed, it shall be counted as a
ground or pole sign per Subsection 2 below for determining the number of ground
or pole signs allowed on a zoning lot.
            ii.   One ground or pole sign is permitted per 300 feet of zoning
lot frontage, or major faction thereof, to be located within that portion of
zoning lot frontage, and not less than 300 feet from any other ground or pole
sign on the same zoning lot, but joint-identifications signs otherwise
permitted by Subsection (i) above may be located within 300 feet of ground or
pole signs on the same zoning lot
            iii.   Ground or pole signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in
area per sign face, nor more than 200 square feet total per zoning lot.
            iv.   Ground signs may not exceed 8 feet in height.
            v.   Pole signs may not exceed 20 feet in height, provided that the
bottom edge of the sign face shall not be less than eight feet above grade.
            vi.   Ground signs shall have a minimum front setback of 15 feet
and a minimum setback of six feet from all other lot lines.
            vii.   Pole signs shall have a minimum setback of six feet from all
lot lines.
            viii.   In no case shall the structural elements of a pole sign
extend above the top of the sign face.
         e.   Access Safety Signs . Such signs may be approved by the Plan
Commission as part of Exterior Appearance Review for the safe and convenient
use of the lot in question, provided that no access safety sign  shall exceed
four feet in height or five square feet in area.
         f.   Awning Signs .
            i.   Such signs may not exceed 100 square feet.
            ii.   No such sign for an individual storefront in of a multi-
tenant building shall cover more than 5% of the wall to which it is affixed.
            iii.   Awning signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
            iv.   No such sign shall project above, below, or beyond the
physical dimensions of such awning, canopy, or marquee.
         g.   Wall signs .
            i.   Walls signs shall not exceed 100 square feet per sign face,
nor more than 200 square feet in total per zoning lot.
            ii.   Wall signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
         h.   Window Signs .
            i.   Window signs may not obstruct 15 percent of a window area. For
storefronts with multiple frontages, each frontage shall be considered
separately when calculating the 15 percent obstruction limit.
            ii.   Window signs may not be illuminated.
            iii.   Window signs may not be handwritten.
            iv.   Window signs shall not be located higher than in a window on
the first-floor level.
         i.   Kiosk Signs
            i.   No more than one such sign may be installed on each face of or
directly above a freestanding structure such as an ATM, gas station pump, or
electric vehicle charging station, and no more than two such signs may be
installed on any such freestanding structure.
            ii.   Such signs shall not include attention-getting devices or
changeable-message signs.
            iii.   Such signs shall not exceed one square foot in area and may
not extend more than one foot above any supporting kiosk structure.
            iv.   Such signs shall not be permitted on lots with a single-
family dwelling principal use.
         j.   Accessory Wall Signs.
            i.   No more than one Accessory Wall Sign shall be installed on a
storefront.
            ii.   No such sign shall exceed two square feet in area.
            iii.   No such sign shall be placed higher than the second-floor
windowsill of a building.
            iv.   The area of permanent Accessory Wall Signs shall count toward
the allowable square footage of temporary Standard Informational Signs
(Amd. Ord. 2023-19-3564, passed 9-21-2023; Amd. Ord. 2024-07-3584, passed 3-21-
2024)
5-106 BUFFERS AND LANDSCAPING
   A.   Parking Lots and Garages.
      1.   Parking Lot Screening. Unless the Board of Trustees approves a
reduced screening and buffering requirement pursuant to Subparagraph
5-104C3(l) of this Code, every parking lot shall be buffered and screened by a
perimeter landscape open space having a width of at least 10 feet and
consisting of an opaque fence, wall, or densely planted evergreen hedge. Such
screening shall have a minimum height of at least three feet.
      2.   Parking Lot Interior Landscaping. In addition to the requirements
set forth in Paragraph A1 above, every parking lot shall contain at least one
tree of three inches or greater in diameter for each 30 parking spaces
constructed after the effective date of this Code. Such trees may be provided
by the preservation of existing trees or the planting of new trees. Each tree
shall be surrounded by a landscaped area of at least 36 square feet. No
existing or new tree located more than five feet outside the perimeter of the
parking lot pavement shall be counted in meeting the requirements of this
Paragraph A2. All islands in excess of 50 square feet created by curbs or other
traffic flow regu-lators shall be landscaped.
Planting islands located within the interior of a parking lot shall be at least
six feet in width.
      3.   Parking Garage Design. Every parking garage con-structed after the
effective date of this Code, other than garages accessory to single family
dwellings, shall comply with the following design standards unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Trustees:
         (a)   The exterior walls of the garage shall be such as to shield all
parked vehicles from view from the exterior of the garage; and
         (b)   The exterior surface of the garage shall be constructed of the
same materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthetically compatible
with, the principal building to which it is accessory.
   B.   Refuse Containers; Outdoor Storage.
      1.   Screening. All refuse containers and all areas of permitted outdoor
storage shall be fully enclosed by an opaque fence, wall, or densely planted
evergreen hedge of a height sufficient to screen such containers or storage
areas from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.
      2.   Location. No refuse containers or storage areas shall be located in
any required front or corner side yard.
      3.   Sanitation. All refuse containers and areas of permitted outdoor
storage shall be kept in a clean and neat condition, and no containers or
materials shall be maintained or stored in any manner that creates or emits
noxious fumes, odors, or other emissions.
      4.   Exemptions. The requirements of the preceding Paragraph B1 shall not
apply to standard refuse receptacles, stacked firewood, and composting piles
permitted for use by single family dwellings nor to refuse receptacles
accessory to schools or Village uses. None of the requirements of this
Subsection B shall apply to refuse receptacles placed and maintained for use by
the general public to avoid littering.
   C.   Storage of Class II Vehicles in Residential Districts. All Class II
vehicles stored in parking areas in residential districts shall be screened on
all sides visible from any neighboring public or private property by an opaque
fence, wall, or densely planted hedge, except as necessary for access. See
Paragraph
5-101D4 of this Code for additional requirements applicable to such vehicles.
   D.   Residential Recreational Facilities. Outdoor tennis courts and above-
ground swimming pools accessory to any dwelling located in any single family
residential district shall be buffered and screened by a perimeter
landscaped open space equal in width to the applicable required yard, setback,
or 10 feet, whichever is greater, and consisting of an opaque fence, wall, or
densely planted evergreen hedge, in combination with other landscaping
materials. Such screening shall be provided on all sides of such facility
visible from any adjacent property or any public or private street. See
Paragraph
5-101D1 of this Code for additional requirements applicable to such facilities.
   E.   Antennas and Antenna Support Structures. Ground-mounted antennas and
antenna support structures, except such antennas and antenna support structures
as are permitted pursuant to Paragraph
5-101D9 of this Code, shall be buffered and screened by a perimeter landscaped
open space equal in width to the applicable required yard or 10 feet, whichever
is more, and consisting of an opaque fence, wall, or densely planted evergreen
hedge, in combination with other landscaping materials. Such screening shall be
provided between any such ground-mounted antenna or antenna support structure
and each lot line of the property on which such antenna or antenna support
structure is located so as to provide the maximum reasonably achievable
screening, as determined by the Village Manager, of such antenna or antenna
support structure from ground level view from adjacent properties and public or
private streets. See Paragraphs
5-101D8 and
5-101D9 of this Code for additional requirements applicable to antennas and
antenna support structures.
   F.   Roof Top Mechanical Equipment. Except for antennas mounted on roofs
pursuant to the provisions of this Code, all mechanical equipment located on
the roof of any building (other than single family dwellings and their
accessory structures) constructed after the effective date of this Code shall
be screened by a parapet wall or other screening structure constructed of the
same materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthet-ically compatible
with, the principal building facade to the height of such equipment.
   G.   Fences and Walls. Fences and walls erected as permitted obstructions in
any required yard shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 9, Article XI
of the Village Code of Glencoe.
   H.   Screening and Landscaping Within Sight Triangles. Not-withstanding any
other provision of this Section, no landscaping, fencing, or other screening
shall be erected or maintained at a height in excess of two and one-half feet
within the areas described in Paragraph
3-111G3 and
4-110C2 of this Code.
   I.   Perimeter Landscaped Open Space. Except as expressly provided otherwise
in the regulations requiring a perimeter landscaped open space, such open space
shall extend along the entire length of the lot line in question and shall have
width equal to 10 feet or the depth of the yard required along the lot line in
question, whichever is greater. Perimeter landscaped open space shall be broken
only by permitted access drives. Such perimeter landscape open space shall be
suitably surfaced with grass, ground cover, or decorative paving material, or a
combination thereof; and shall contain landscaping such as ornamental trees and
shrubs or appropriate screening devices such as decorative walls, fences, or
berms, or a combination thereof. The landscaping and screening treatment of
such space shall be so designed and maintained as to preserve unobstructed
vision of the street and sidewalk at points of access and as not to interfere
with, or be damaged by, work within any public or utility easement unless the
Village Manager shall determine that no other location is reasonably feasible.
ARTICLE VI
NON-CONFORMITIES
6-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS
   A.   Purposes. This Article regulates and limits the continued existence of
uses, structures, lots, and signs established prior to the effective date of
this Code that do not conform to the applicable regulations of this Code. Any
legal nonconforming use, structure, lot, or sign existing at the time of the
passage of this Code may be maintained, repaired, restored, remodeled, or
altered, subject to the regulations in this Article.
   B.   General Scope and Scheme of Regulation. Separate restrictions are
established for nonconforming uses of land and nonconforming uses of
structures, nonconforming structures, nonconforming lots of record, and
nonconforming signs. The degree of restriction made applicable to each category
of noncon-formity is generally related to the degree of incompatibility with
permitted uses and the amount of investment typically associated with non-
conformities of that type.
   C.   Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order. Nothing in this Article
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition
of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged
with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe
and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided such restoration is
not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Article
prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed
structures or signs.
   D.   Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures. No use or structure that
is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after
such principal use or structure shall have been terminated, unless it shall
thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
   E.   Railroad or Railway Purposes. Any right-of-way, station grounds, or
other premises located in any district and now used for railroad or railway
purposes shall be considered a nonconforming use until such time as such
premises shall cease to be used for railroad or railway purposes, after which
the use of such premises shall, except as provided in Subsection
6-102G, conform with the provisions of this Code.
6-102 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND NONCONFORMING USES IN STRUCTURES
   A.   Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection I of this
Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use, whether or not it involves
the use of a  principal or accessory structure, may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained in Subsections B
through H of this Section and in Subsection D of Section
6-101 of this  Code.
   For purposes of this Section, any structure that is used in connection with
a nonconforming use of land and that has an assessed value of less than $5,000
on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto creating such
nonconformity shall be considered to be a structure accessory to a noncon-
forming use of land.
   B.   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of non-bearing walls,
non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be performed on any
structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use; provided, however, that this
Subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of Subsections C
through I of this Section.
   C.   Structural Alteration. A structure that is accessory to a nonconforming
use of land or that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use may
be structurally altered; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be
deemed to authorize any violation of Subsection D through I of this Section;
and provided further that no such alteration shall create a new parking, bulk,
yard,  or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking,
bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a
parking nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of
Paragraph 5-104B1 of this Code shall control.
   D.   Enlargement of Structure. No structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land or that is devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner, including the
interior addition of floor area, unless the use of such  structure shall
thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located. No such  enlargement shall create any new parking, bulk, yard, or
space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, bulk, yard,
or space nonconformity of such structure. In determining whether a parking
nonconformity has been created or increased, the provisions of Paragraph 5-
104B1 of this Code shall control.
   E.   Extension of Use. A nonconforming use of land or of a structure that is
accessory to a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use in any other
structure shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity.
Such prohibited activity shall include, without limitation:
      1.   An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any
structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on
the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to
become nonconforming; and
      2.   An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a
building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not
occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code or any
amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; and
      3.   An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal
hours of operation on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto
that causes such use to become nonconforming.
   F.   Moving. No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land
or that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be moved in
whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the
same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall
thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located after being so moved. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in
whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the
same or any other lot, unless such use shall thereafter conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
   G.   Change in Use. A nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or
involving only a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or
a nonconforming use in a structure shall not be changed to any  use other than
a use permitted in the zoning district in which the use or structure is
located; provided, however, that the Board of Trustees may, after public notice
and hearing, authorize in any location an existing nonconforming use to be
replaced by another, different nonconforming use when such replacement use is
either by a public service corporation or for a public utility, civic, or
municipal purpose and is found by the  Board of Trustees to be reasonably
necessary for the public convenience and welfare. When such a nonconforming use
has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to
any non-permitted  use. For purposes of this Subsection, a use shall be deemed
to have been so changed when an existing nonconforming use shall have been
terminated and a permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a period
of five days. Any change of use in violation of this Subsection shall be deemed
to be an abandonment of the lawfully existing nonconforming use.
   H.   Damage or Destruction. Any structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land or that is devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use and that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent
of more than 50 percent of the cost of replacement of such  structure new shall
not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to
the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and unless
such restoration is accomplished without creating any new parking, bulk, yard,
or space nonconformity or increasing the degree of any parking, bulk, yard, or
space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction; provided,
however, that such  structure may be restored if the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall grant a variation pursuant to Section
7-403 of this Code to permit such restoration and continued  nonconforming use.
In determining whether a parking non-conformity has been created or increased,
the provisions of Paragraph 5-104B1 of this Code shall control.
   When any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent
of 50 percent or less of the cost of replacement of the structure new, repair
or restoration of such structure may be made and the nonconforming use may
continue subject to the regulations of this Section; provided, however, that no
repairs or restorations shall be made that would create any new parking, bulk,
yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any  parking, bulk,
yard, or space nonconformity existing prior to such damage or destruction, nor
shall any repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable
zoning district regulations be made unless a building permit is obtained and
restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial
damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
   I.   Termination by Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of land not
involving a structure or involving only a structure that is accessory to the
nonconforming use of land or when a nonconforming use of part or all of a
principal structure is discontinued for a period of one year, regardless of any
intent to resume or not to terminate such use, such use shall be deemed
abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Any subsequent
use or occupancy of such land or  structure shall comply with the use
regulations of the  zoning district in which such land or structure is located.
   Any period of such discontinuance caused by government action, strikes,
material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the
non-conforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of
discontinuance for purposes of this Subsection.
6-103 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
   A.   Authority to Continue. Any nonconforming structure that is devoted to a
use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be
maintained and replaced so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
restrictions in Subsections B through D of this Section and Subsection E of
Section
6-101 of this Code.
   B.   Repair, Maintenance, Alterations, Enlargement, and Replacement. Any
nonconforming structure may be repaired, maintained, altered, enlarged, or
rebuilt or replaced following demolition, damage, or destruction; provided,
however, that no such repair, maintenance,  alteration, enlargement, or
rebuilding or replacement shall either create any new parking, bulk, yard, or
space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing parking, bulk, yard,
or space nonconformity of all or any part of such structure as it existed on
the effective date of this Code, unless the Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant
a variation pursuant to Section
7-403 of this Code.
   In addition, no repair, rebuilding, or replacement following demolition,
damage, or destruction, shall be made except in conformity with the applicable
district regulations unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and
such repair, rebuilding, or replacement is actually begun within one year after
the date of such damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
   For purposes of this Subsection B and without limitation, the vertical
extension of a nonconforming structure shall be construed to increase the
degree of the existing nonconformity of the structure unless such vertical
extension conforms to all applicable parking, bulk, yard, and space regulations
of this Code, or unless such vertical extension consists solely of a chimney or
a modification to an existing roof line that does not result in any increase in
gross floor area having a clear ceiling height of seven feet or more. (See
January 2007 interpretation memo at end of Zoning Code.)
   C.   Authority to Continue Following Change in Use. Within the R-A, R-B, R-
C, and R-D Zoning Districts, the authority to replace a demolished, damaged, or
destroyed nonconforming structure set forth in this Section
6-103 above shall not apply when a nonconforming structure devoted to a use
other than single-family residential is willfully demolished, in whole or in
part, and is replaced with a structure devoted to a different use. When such a
nonconforming structure is willfully demolished in whole or in part, any
rebuilt or new structure or portion thereof may not continue any previously
exising non-conformities and must meet all current requirements of this Code,
unless a variation allowing the restoration of the nonconforming structure is
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section
7-403 of this Code.
   D.   Moving. No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part,
for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot
unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located after being so moved. (See January 2007
interpretation memo at end of Zoning Code.)
   E.   Damage or Destruction of Accessory Structure. Any nonconforming
accessory  structure that is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent
of more than 50 percent of the cost of replacement of such structure new shall
not be restored unless the use of such structure shall thereafter conform to
the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and unless
such restoration is accomplished in complete conformity with the parking, bulk,
yard, and space regulations of such existing district; provided, however, that
such  structure may be restored to its prior nonconforming condition if the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant a variation pursuant to Section
7-403 of this Code to permit such restoration.
(Am. Ord. 2025-11-3615, passed 4-17-2025)
6-104 LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
   In any zoning district in which single family dwellings are a permitted use,
notwith-standing the regulations imposed by any other provisions of this
Article, a single family dwelling may be erected, and thereafter maintained,
repaired, restored, replaced, altered, and enlarged, on a  legal nonconforming
lot of record that has a width and area each equal to at least 80 percent of
the lot width and area required in the district in which such lot is located,
provided that such construction shall comply with all the regulations (except
lot area, shape, width, and depth) applicable to single family dwellings in
such zoning district.
6-105 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
   A.   Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection F of this
Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming sign may be continued so long as
it otherwise remains lawful, subject to the regulations contained in
Subsections B through E of this Section and in Subsection D of Section
6-101 of this Code. The burden of establishing a sign to be a legal
nonconforming sign under this Section shall rest on the person asserting the
legal nonconforming status of such sign.
   B.   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement of non-bearing sign elements and electrical wiring and
fixtures may be performed on any sign; provided, however, that any repair or
replacement shall, whenever possible, eliminate or reduce any nonconformity in
the element being repaired or replaced, and provided further that this
Subsection B shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of Subsections C
through F of this Section.
   C.   Alteration; Enlargement; Moving. No nonconforming sign shall be changed
or altered in any manner that would increase the degree of its nonconformity,
be enlarged or expanded, be structurally altered to prolong its useful life, or
be moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would remain
nonconforming. A change in sign message which does not otherwise violate the
provisions of this Code shall not be deemed to be prohibited by this
Subsection.
   D.   Change of Sign. A nonconforming sign that has been changed to eliminate
its nonconformity or any element of its nonconformity shall not thereafter be
changed to restore such nonconformity or nonconforming element.
   E.   Damage or Destruction. Any nonconforming sign, or any nonconforming
element of a sign capable of change or discontinuance separate from other
elements of the sign, damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 35
percent or more of its replacement cost new shall not be restored but shall be
removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this Code.
   F.   Termination of Certain Signs.
      1.   Immediate Termination. The following nonconforming signs or sign
features shall be terminated within 30 days after the effective date of this
Code by removal of the sign or by alteration of the sign to eliminate the
specified feature:
         (a)   Attention-getting devices.
         (b)   Moving or animated signs, except public service signs when
expressly permitted by this Code.
         (c)   Temporary signs, except as expressly permitted by Section
5-105 of this Code.
         (d)   Any sign on a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private
property, except governmental signs authorized in Section
5-105 of this Code.
         (e)   Any sign on public property, except governmental signs and civic
event signs authorized in Section
5-105 of this Code.
         (f)   Any sign that violates any provision or requirement of
Paragraphs 5-105E1 through 5-105E3 or 5-105E5 through 5-105E10 or Paragraph 5-
105E15 of this Code.
         (g)   Any sign constructed or erected without a valid permit.
         (h)   Any sign that should have been removed pursuant to Subsection 9-
49.3(c) of the Glencoe Village Code as in force immediately prior to the
effective date of this Code.
      2.   Termination by Abandonment. Any nonconforming sign the use of which
is discontinued for a period of 60 consecutive days, regardless of any intent
to resume or not to abandon such use, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Every such sign, including all of
its structural elements, shall be immediately removed or brought into
conformity with the provisions of this Code. Any period of such discontinuance
caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages, or acts of God, and
without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user, shall not be
considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this
paragraph.
      3.   Termination by Change of Business. Any nonconforming sign
advertising, identifying, or pertaining to a business on the premises on which
it is located shall be terminated upon any change in the use of the property on
which the sign is located. Every such sign, including all of its structural
elements, shall be immediately removed or brought into con-formity with the
provisions of this Code.
ARTICLE VII
ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND BODIES
7-101 VILLAGE MANAGER
   A.   General Powers. The Village Manager shall be charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Code. In addition to the jurisdiction,
authority, and duties conferred on the Manager by other provisions of State
statutes and Village codes and ordinances, the Manager shall have all powers
necessary to such administration and enforcement and shall, in particular, have
the jurisdiction, authority, and duties hereinafter set forth.
   B.   Rules; Regulations; Application Forms. The Village Manager, consistent
with the express standards, purposes, and intent of this Code, shall
promulgate, adopt, and issue such procedural rules, regulations, and forms as
are in the Manager's opinion necessary to the effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Staff Assistance to the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission.
The Village Manager, within budgets available for that purpose, shall make
staff and consulting assistance available to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
the Plan Commission, and the Manager or his or her delegatee shall in that
capacity:
      1.   Attend the meetings of each such body;
      2.   Inform each such body of all facts and information at the Manager's
disposal with respect to any matter brought before each such body;
      3.   Assist each such body by performing research and making
recommendations on matters brought before each such body; and
      4.   Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Manager by this
Code and by the rules of such bodies.
   D.   Records. The Village Manager shall maintain:
      1.   Permanent and current records of this Code, including all maps,
amendments, special use permits, interpretations, and decisions rendered by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the Plan Commission, the Village Attorney, and the
Manager, together with relevant background files and materials;
      2.   In the central address file, copies of all certificates of zoning
compliance, certificates of occupancy, and all notices of violations,
discontinuances, terminations, or removals, issued by or entrusted to the
Manager's office for such time as necessary to ensure continuous compliance
with the provisions of this Code; and
      3.   In the central address file, information on all known nonconforming
uses, structures, lots, and  signs in the Village.
   E.   Zoning Text; Zoning Map. The Village Manager shall prepare and have
available for public sale:
      1.   The compiled text of this Code in book or pamphlet form, including
all amendments thereto through the preceding December 31; and
      2.   The official Zoning Map, showing the zoning districts, divisions,
and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31.
   The Manager, at all other times, shall maintain and have available for
reproduction at least one up-to-date copy of both the Zoning Code text and the
Zoning Map, showing all amendments through the most recent meeting of the Board
of Trustees for which official minutes have been approved.
   F.   Applications: Receipt, Processing, Referral to Interested Parties and
Agencies. The Village Manager shall receive all applications required to be
filed pursuant to this Code. Upon receipt of any such application, the Manager
shall see to its expeditious processing, including its prompt referral to and
retrieval from each official, department, board, or commission of the Village,
or other government, with any interest or duty with respect to such
application.
   G.   Investigation of Applications. Whenever the Plan Commission, the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the Zoning Commission, or the Board of Trustees shall so
request, by general rule or specific direction, the Village Manager shall,
within the limits of staff and budgeted funds available for such purposes,
conduct or cause to be conducted such surveys, investigations, and field
studies and shall prepare or cause to be prepared such reports, maps,
photographs, charts and exhibits as shall be necessary and appropriate to the
processing of any application filed pursuant to this Code.
   H.   Zoning Certificates. Pursuant to the provisions of Sections
7-301 and
7-302 of this Code, the Village Manager shall review all applications for
Certificates of Zoning Compliance and Certificates of Occupancy and shall
approve or disapprove such applications and issue or refuse to issue such
certificates based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this
Code.
   I.   Interpretations. Pursuant to the provisions of Section
7-401 of this Code, the Village Manager shall issue a written interpretation of
the meaning and applicability of specific provisions of this Code. Any
interpretation of this Code that may be rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals
or the Manager shall be kept on file with the Manager and shall be a public
record of the  Village open to inspection by interested parties at reasonable
times and upon reasonable notice.
   J.   Exterior Appearance Review. Pursuant to the provisions of Section
7-503 of this Code, the Village Manager shall undertake exterior appearance
review and either approve, disapprove, or approve subject to modifications any
applications for building permit that the Plan Commission has specifically
delegated to the Manager for exterior appearance review.
   K.   Extensions of Time. The Village Manager, upon written request, may for
good cause shown and without any notice or hearing grant extensions of any time
limit imposed on an applicant or permittee by this Code, except for time limits
applying to variations or special use permits or unless expressly provided
otherwise by an ordinance or resolution of any body acting pursuant to this
Code. The total period of time granted by such extension or extensions shall
not exceed the length of the original period.
   L.   Inspection and Enforcement. In furtherance of the enforcement of this
Code, the Village Manager shall undertake such regular and continuing programs
of inspection of work approved and under way and of existing structures and
uses as may be feasible and proper within the limits of staff and budgeted
funds; shall undertake such additional inspections as may be necessary to the
performance of his or her duties hereunder; shall receive from any person
complaints alleging with particularity a violation of this Code; and when
appropriate shall cause such investigations and inspections as may be warranted
by such complaints to be made. Upon finding the existence of any violation of
this Code, the Manager shall take or direct all actions necessary and
appropriate to abate and redress such violation.
7-102 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
   A.   Creation; Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Village President and confirmed by the Board of
Trustees. All members shall be residents of the Village. The members now
serving shall continue to exercise all the powers and be subject to all the
duties of members during the balance of their respective terms of office and
until their successors are appointed and qualified. The Village President shall
have the power to remove any member for cause and after a public hearing. A
vacancy that may occur shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by
appoint-ment of the Village President and confirmation by the Board of
Trustees. All appointments of successors upon the expiration of any term of any
member shall be for a period of five years and until a successor has been
appointed and has qualified for office. All members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Chairperson and Acting Chairperson. The Village President shall name
one member of the Zoning Board of Appeals as Chairperson, who shall preside at
all public meetings and hearings and fulfill the customary functions of that
office. In the absence of the Chairperson, an Acting Chairperson designated by
the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as chairperson and shall
have all the powers of the chairperson. The Chairperson shall have the power to
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   C.   Staff Secretary; Minutes; Public Records. The Village Manager shall
designate a Staff Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals, who shall attend
all of its proceedings. The Staff Secretary shall provide for the keeping of
minutes of the proceedings of the Board of Appeals, showing the vote of each
member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall maintain permanent records of all Board of Appeals meetings,
hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of the Board of Appeals. The
Village Clerk shall provide for keeping a file of all records of the Board of
Appeals, and such records shall, except to the extent provided by the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act, be public records open to inspection.
   D.   Quorum and Necessary Vote. No business shall be transacted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals without a quorum, consisting of four members, being
present. The concurring vote of at least four members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary on any motion to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed to it; to decide in favor of the applicant
on any application made; or to effect any variation from the provisions of this
Code. Any lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting,
shall be considered a final decision denying the appeal, application, or
variation. If less than a quorum is present, the public hearing or meeting may
be adjourned from time to time as provided in the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
The Staff Secretary shall in writing notify all members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals of the date of the adjourned public hearing or meeting and shall also
notify such other interested parties as may be designated in the vote of
adjournment.
   E.   Absent Members. No member absent from any portion of a proceeding shall
be qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first
certify on the record that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such
portion of the proceeding during which he or she was absent and has fully
informed himself or herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter
being heard so as to be able to cast an informed and independent vote.
   F.   Meetings; Hearings; Procedures. Regular meetings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be held in accordance with the annual schedule posted in the
Manager's office and at such other times as the members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may determine.
   All meetings, hearings, and deliberations of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public except when closed pursuant to the provisions of
the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   All testimony at any hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be given
under oath.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the
conduct of its business not inconsistent with this Code and the statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   G.   Record. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes; all
applications, requests, and papers filed in any proceeding before the Zoning
Board of Appeals; and the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
constitute the record.
   H.   Decisions. Every decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
memorialized in a written resolution which shall include findings of fact;
shall refer to all pertinent evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans
or specifications upon which such decision is based; shall specify the reason
or reasons for such decision; shall contain a conclusion or statement separate
from the findings of fact setting forth the specific relief granted or denying
relief; and shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions imposed on
any relief granted or work or use authorized. Such resolution may be
incorporated into the minutes of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals may take final action on any decision pertaining
to an application pending before it prior to the preparation of a written
resolution, but in such event it shall, before taking such action, first state
its findings and conclusions as above required at a meeting open to the public.
The Zoning Board of Appeals' decision shall be deemed made as of the date of
the taking of such final action. The written resolution incorporating such
findings and conclusions shall be presented and approved at the next regular
public meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   In any case where this Code provides that the failure of the Zoning Board of
Appeals to act within a fixed period shall be deemed to be a denial of an
application, such failure shall, notwithstanding the absence of required
findings and conclusions, be considered to be a decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
   The decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall in all instances be
considered final administrative determinations and shall be subject to appeal
in accordance with the administrative review procedures established by State
statute.
   I.   Conflicts. No member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall participate
in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member has an
interest. Any conflict of interest prohibited by the Glencoe Village Code or
State law shall disqualify a member.
   J.   Appeals. An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may be taken in the manner provided in Article III of the Illinois Code
of Civil Procedure pertaining to administrative review.
   K.   Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of Section
7-402 of this Code, to hear and decide appeals from, and to review orders,
decisions, or determinations made by the Village Manager and to that end have
the powers of the Village Manager with respect to such order, decision, or
determination.
      2.   Subject to the provisions and standards of Section
7-403 of this Code, to grant or deny variations from the requirements of this
Code.
      3.   Upon reasonable written request, to make its special knowledge and
expertise available to any official, department, board, or commission of the
Village, County, State, or Federal governments to aid them in the performance
of their respective duties relating to zoning and its admin-istration in the
Village.
      4.   In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, to make such
investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations in connection therewith,
relating to zoning and its administration in the Village as seem desirable to
it; provided, however, that the expenditures of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall not exceed the amount appropriated therefor.
7-103 ZONING COMMISSION
   A.   Creation; Membership. The Zoning Commission shall consist of those
persons who are from time to time the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
All members of the Zoning Commission shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Chairperson and Acting Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall serve as the Chairperson of the Zoning Commission. In the
absence of the Chairperson, an Acting Chairperson designated by the members of
the Zoning Commission shall act as chairperson and shall have all the powers of
the chairperson. The Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
   C.   Staff Secretary; Minutes; Public Records. The Village Manager shall
designate a Staff Secretary of the Zoning Commission, who shall attend all of
its proceedings. The Staff Secretary shall provide for the keeping of minutes
of the proceedings of the Commission, showing the vote of each member upon
every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall maintain permanent records of all Commission meetings, hearings, and
proceedings and all correspondence of the Commission. The Staff Secretary shall
provide for keeping a file of all records of the Commission, and such records
shall, except to the extent provided by the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act, be public records open to inspection.
   D.   Quorum and Necessary Vote. No business shall be transacted by the
Zoning Commission without a quorum, consisting of four members, being present.
The concurring vote of a majority of the Zoning Commission members present,
consisting of at least three members, shall be necessary on any motion to
recommend approval on any matter or application. Any lesser vote on any such
motion, even if a majority of those voting, shall be considered a final
decision to recommend denial of such matter or application. If less than a
quorum is present, the public hearing or meeting may be adjourned from time to
time as provided in the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The Staff Secretary shall
in writing notify all members of the date of the adjourned public hearing or
meeting and shall also notify such other interested parties as may be
designated in the vote of adjournment.
   E.   Absent Members. No member absent from any portion of a proceeding shall
be qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first
certify on the record that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such
portion of the proceeding during which he or she was absent and has fully
informed himself or herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter
being heard so as to be able to cast an informed and independent vote.
   F.   Meetings; Hearings; Procedures. Meetings of the Zoning Commission shall
be held at the call of the Board of Trustees and at such other times as the
Zoning Commission members may determine to complete an assigned task.
   All meetings, hearings, and deliberations of the Zoning Commission shall be
open to the public except when closed pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   All testimony at any hearing of the Zoning Commission shall be given under
oath.
   The Zoning Commission may adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct
of its business not inconsistent with this Code and the statutes of the State
of Illinois.
   G.   Record. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes; all
applications, requests, exhibits, and papers filed in any proceeding before the
Zoning Commission; and the decision of the Zoning Commission shall constitute
the record.
   H.   Decisions. Every recommendation of the Zoning Commission shall be made
by motion or resolution which shall be memorialized in writing. For amendments,
such motion or resolution may refer to any pertinent facts, conditions, or
considerations supporting the recommendation. For special use permits, such
motion or resolution shall refer to all pertinent evidence in the record and to
the exhibits, plans, or specifications upon which such recommendation is based,
and shall expressly set forth any limitations or conditions imposed on any
relief granted or work or use authorized. Such motions or resolutions may be
incorporated into the minutes of the  Zoning Commission.
   I.   Conflicts. No member of the Zoning Commission shall participate in the
hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member has an interest. Any
conflict of interest prohibited by the Glencoe Village Code or State law shall
disqualify a member.
   J.   Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Commission shall have the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   Subject to the provisions and standards of Ill. Rev.  Stat. ch. 24 ¶
11-13-14 (1989), as may be amended from time to time, and Section
7-501 of this Code, to conduct hearings and to make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees with respect to any proposed amendments to the regulations
imposed and the districts created under this Code as the Board of Trustees may
refer to the Zoning Commission from time to time.
      2.   Subject to the provisions and standards of Section
7-502 of this Code, to conduct hearings and to make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees with respect to the granting or denial of any special use
permit under this Code.
      3.   Subject to the provisions and standards of Section
7-503 of this Code, to review and make determinations with respect to certain
plans for development for appearance review.
7-104 CONTEXTUAL DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION
   A.   Creation; Membership. The Contextual Design Review Commission shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Village President and confirmed by
the Board of Trustees. All members shall be residents of the Village. The
members of the Commission should have significant background in residential
design and construction, land planning, or other related disciplines in order
to facilitate the enhancement of single family dwelling developments seeking
approvals pursuant to Section
7-505 of this Code. The Village President shall have the power to remove any
member for cause and after a public hearing. A vacancy that may occur shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term by appointment of the Village
President and confirmation by the Board of Trustees. Initial appointments to
the Commission shall be as follows: one member for a one-year term; two members
for a two-year term; two members for a three-year term; and two members for a
four-year term. All re-appointments and appointments of successors upon the
expiration of any term of any member shall be for a period of four years and
until a successor has been appointed and has qualified for office. All members
of the Contextual Design Review Commission shall serve without compensation.
   B.   Chairperson and Acting Chairperson. The Village President shall name
one member of he Contextual Design Review Commission as Chairperson, who shall
preside at all public meetings and hearings and fulfill the customary functions
of that office. In the absence of the Chairperson, an Acting Chairperson
designated by the members of the Contextual Design Review Commission shall act
as chairperson and shall have all the powers of the chairperson. The
Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths.
   C.   Staff Secretary; Minutes; Public Records. The Village Manager shall
designate a Staff Secretary of the Contextual Design Review Commission, who
shall attend all of its proceedings. The Staff Secretary shall provide for the
keeping of minutes of the proceedings of the Commission, showing the vote of
each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall maintain permanent records of all Commission meetings,
hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of the Commission. The Village
Clerk shall provide for keeping a file of all records of the Commission, and
such records shall, except to the extent provided by the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, be public records open to inspection.
   D.   Quorum and Necessary Vote. No business shall be transacted by the
Contextual Design Review Commission without a quorum, consisting of four
members, being present. The concurring vote of at least four members of the
Contextual Design Review Commission shall be necessary on any motion to decide
in favor of the applicant on any application made pursuant to Section
7-505 of this Code. If less than a quorum is present, the public hearing or
meeting may be adjourned from time to time as provided in the Illinois Open
Meetings Act. The Staff Secretary shall in writing notify all members of the
Contextual Design Review Commission of the date of the adjourned public hearing
or meeting and shall also notify such other interested parties as may be
designated in the vote of adjournment.
   E.   Absent Members. No member absent from any portion of a proceeding shall
be qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first
certify on the record that he or she has reviewed the entire record of any such
portion of the proceeding during which he or she was absent and has fully
informed himself or herself of the essential facts and issues of the matter
being heard so as to be able to cast an informed and independent vote.
   F.   Meetings; Hearings; Procedures. Regular meetings of the Contextual
Design Review Commission shall be held in accordance with the annual schedule
posted in the Manager's office and at such other times as the members of the
Contextual Design Review Commission may determine. All meetings, hearings, and
deliberations of the Contextual Design Review Commission shall be open to the
public except when closed pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act. The Contextual Design Review Commission shall adopt its own rules
of procedure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent with this Code
and the statutes of the State of Illinois.
   G.   Record. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes; all
applications, requests, and papers filed in any proceeding before the
Contextual Design Review Commission; and the decision of the Contextual Design
Review Commission shall constitute the record.
   H.   Decisions. Every decision of the Contextual Design Review Commission
shall be memorialized in a written resolution which shall include findings of
fact; shall refer to all pertinent evidence in the record and to the exhibits,
plans, or specifications upon which such decision is based; shall specify the
reason or reasons for such decision; shall contain a conclusion or statement
separate from the findings of fact setting forth the specific relief granted or
declining to grant relief; and shall expressly set forth any limitations or
conditions imposed on any relief granted or work or use authorized. Such
resolution may be incorporated into the minutes of the Contextual Design Review
Commission. The Contextual Design Review Commission may take final action on
any decision pertaining to an application pending before it prior to the
preparation of a written resolution, but in such event it shall, before taking
such action, first state its findings and conclusions as above required at a
meeting open to the public. The Contextual Design Review Commission's decision
shall be deemed made as of the date of the taking of such final action. The
written resolution incorporating such findings and conclusions shall be
presented and approved at the next regular public meeting of the Contextual
Design Review Commission.
   I.   Conflicts. No member of the Contextual Design Review Commission shall
appear before the Contextual Design Review Commission on, or participate in the
hearing or disposition of, any matter or application in which that member has
an interest (including interests as a consultant, representative, or other
person receiving, or who may be receiving, remuneration), either directly,
indirectly, or through one's business or employment activities or immediate
family. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a member of the Contextual Design Review
Commission may appear before the Commission with respect to that member’s
personal residence, provided that such member shall disclose on the record his
or her interest in the application and thereafter not participate in the
Commission’s consideration or disposition of such matter. Any conflict of
interest prohibited by the Glencoe Village Code or State law shall disqualify a
member.
   J.   Appeals. The Contextual Design Review Commission shall only make final
decisions regarding voluntary petitions for contextual design review pursuant
to Section
7-505 of this Code, and any determination of the Commission declining to grant
relief under Section
7-505 shall not deprive an applicant of its rights otherwise available under
this Code; accordingly, no appeals may be taken from a final decision of the
Commission pursuant to Section
7-505.
   K.   Jurisdiction and Authority. The Contextual Design Review Commission
shall have the following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of Section
7-505 of this Code, to consider applications for contextual design review
approval and grant or decline to grant relief pursuant to Section
7-505.
      2.   Upon reasonable written request of the Board of Trustees, to make
its special knowledge and expertise available to any official, department,
board, or commission of the Village, County, State, or Federal governments to
aid them in the performance of their respective duties relating to contextual
design or zoning and its administration in the Village.
      3.   In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, to make such
investigations, maps, reports, and recommendations in connection therewith,
relating to contextual design or zoning and its administration in the Village
as requested by the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that the expenditures
of the Contextual Design Review Commission shall not exceed the amount
appropriated therefor.
PART II: ZONING APPLICATIONS AND HEARINGS
7-201 APPLICATIONS
   A.   Place of Filing. All applications filed pursuant to this Code shall be
filed with the Office of the Village Manager or with such other Village
official or body as the Village Manager may by administrative order designate.
   B.   Form; Number; Scale. All applications filed pursuant to this Code shall
be on forms supplied by the Village and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the Village Manager may designate by administrative order.
All plans filed as part of any application shall be at a scale sufficient to
permit a clear and precise understanding of the contents of said plans and the
proposal being made and shall be folded to a size of 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches.
   C.   Filing Deadlines.
      1.   Applications Requiring Hearings. An application requiring a public
hearing will not be scheduled for such hearing unless filed, in proper form and
number and containing all required information, in accordance with the schedule
posted in the Village Manager's Office. An application so filed will be
scheduled for hearing on the requested hearing date, or on the first available
date thereafter open on the relevant hearing agenda, on a first-filed-first-
scheduled basis.
      2.   Applications Not Requiring Hearing. An application that does not
require a public hearing shall be filed, in proper form and number and
containing all required information, in accordance with the schedule posted in
the Village Manager's Office. An application so filed will be processed on a
first-filed-first-processed basis.
      3.   Supplemental Data. Whenever supplemental data in connection with a
previously filed application is required by the Village, it shall be submitted
by the application deadline for the meeting on which it is to be considered at
or acted upon in connection with such application. The failure to file such
data in a timely manner shall, in the discretion of the Village Manager and of
the body hearing the application, be cause to delay a requested or scheduled
hearing date.
   D.   Fees.
      1.   Fee Established; Lien. Every application filed pursuant to this Code
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and filing fee in
accordance with the fee schedule established by the  Village Manager. For
special use permit and zoning amendment applications, such fee may include
reimbursement of any recoverable costs incurred by the  Village. The owner of
the property subject of the application and, if different, the applicant shall
be jointly and severally liable for the payment of said fee. By signing the
application (either directly or through an agent), the owner shall be deemed to
have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a
lien on the subject property to ensure collection of any such fee, plus the
costs of collection, in the event such fee has not been properly paid as
required with the filing of the application. Any lien filed pursuant to this
Subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or
mechanics' liens.
      2.   Recoverable Costs. The costs incurred by the Village in processing
an application shall be deemed to consist at least of the following items of
direct and indirect expense:
         (a)   Legal Publication (direct cost);
         (b)   Recording Secretarial Services (direct cost);
         (c)   Court Reporter (direct cost);
         (d)   Document Preparation and Review (hourly staff salary times a
multiplier to be established from time to time by administrative order of the
Village Manager at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and
indirect cost of such service);
         (e)   Consultant Fees and Expenses (engineering, legal, planning,
etc.) (direct cost);
         (f)   Copy Reproduction (direct cost)
         (g)   Document Recordation (direct cost); and
         (h)   Inspection Fees (direct cost).
      3.   Fee Payment and Escrow.
         (a)   Initial Payment and Escrow. Every application for a special use
permit or a zoning amendment that is filed pursuant to this Code shall be
accompanied by the required fee plus an additional amount for recoverable costs
as provided in Paragraph D2 above, as fixed from time to time by administrative
order of the Village Manager, to be deposited in an application fee escrow. No
interest shall be payable on any such escrow.
         (b)   Charges Against Escrow. From the date of filing of any
application pursuant to this  Code, the Village shall maintain an accurate
record of the recoverable costs as herein above defined, incurred in the
processing such application. The Village Manager shall, from time to time, draw
funds from the escrow account established for such application to pay such
costs and shall transfer such funds to the appropriate Village accounts. The
Manager shall maintain an accurate record of all such drawings.
         (c)   Additional Escrow Deposits. Should the Village Manager at any
time determine that the escrow account established in connection with any
application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of
processing such application, the Manager shall inform the applicant of that
fact and demand an additional deposit in an amount deemed by him to be
sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until such
additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the Village Manager may direct
that processing of the application shall be suspended or terminated.
         (d)   Final Settlement. As soon as reasonably feasible following final
action on an application, the Village Manager shall cause a final accounting to
be made of the escrow deposits made in connection with such application and the
actual cost of processing such application and shall make final charge of such
costs against such escrow deposits. A copy of the accounting shall be provided
to the owner and the applicant.
   If the amount in the escrow account is insufficient to pay the total actual
costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall be mailed to the
owner and the applicant. If unused balance remains in the escrow account after
paying the total actual costs, it shall be returned to the applicant.
      4.   Condition of All Applications, Approvals, and Permits; Time Periods.
No application filed pursuant to this Code shall be considered complete unless
and until all fees due pursuant to this Subsection have been paid. Every
approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this Code, whether or not
expressly so conditioned, shall be deemed to be conditioned upon payment of
fees as required by this Subsection.
   When this Code provides that the passage of time without decision or action
shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval, all time periods
shall be tolled during any period of non-payment, but shall otherwise continue
to run.
   The failure to pay fully any such fee when due shall be grounds for refusing
to process an application and shall be deemed a withdrawal or forfeiture of any
permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to
which the unpaid fee relates.
   E.   Minimum Data Requirements. Every application submitted pursuant to this
Code shall contain such information as is required by the Village from time to
time. Application requirements shall be established by administrative order and
shall be made available to all applicants in the office of the Village Manager.
   F.   Special Data Requests. In addition to the data and information required
pursuant to Subsection E of this Section, every applicant shall submit such
other and additional data, information, or documentation as the Village Manager
or any board or commission before which its application is pending may deem
necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of
the particular application.
   G.   Waiver of Application Requirements. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this Section, the Village Manager shall have the authority to waive any
requirement set forth in Subsection A, B, C, or E of this Section when, in his
or her judgment, such waiver is appropriate in light of the nature and extent
of the relief being sought or in light of special circumstances making
compliance with those provisions either unnecessary or unduly burdensome;
provided, however, that any board or commission before which such application
may come shall continue to have the right to request additional information
pursuant to Subsection F of this Section and to delay processing of such
application until such information is provided and available in accordance with
the deadlines established in Subsection C of this Section. The Village Manager
shall provide his or her reasons why any such requirements have been waived,
and shall refer such reasons to the appropriate boards and commissions.
   H.   Concurrent Applications. When a proposed use or development requires
more than one approval pursuant to this  Code, applications for all such
approvals may be filed concurrently notwithstanding the fact that approval of
one application may be a pre-condition to approval of other applications. Such
applications may in the discretion of the official, officials, body, or bodies
charged with review of such applications be processed together; provided,
however, that no application shall be approved unless all applications that are
a pre-condition to its approval have first been approved.
   I.   Withdrawal of Application. An applicant may withdraw an application at
any time prior to a final decision having been rendered with respect thereto,
provided that the applicant shall have paid all applicable fees pursuant to
Subsection
7-201D of this Code. Such withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the
applicant's right to refile such application, but any such refiling shall be
treated as an entirely new filing and shall be subject to the procedures and
fees of this Code in the same manner as any other new application.
7-202 SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS
   A.   Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred. Whenever any
application filed pursuant to this Code has been finally denied on its merits,
a second application seeking essentially the same relief, whether or not in the
same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless in the opinion of
the officer, board, or commission before which it is brought  a mistake of law
or fact significantly affected the prior denial or there is substantial new
evidence available.
   B.   New Grounds to Be Stated. Any such second application shall include a
detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of such application.
   C.   Summary Denial With or Without Hearing. Any such second application may
be denied by the Village Manager summarily, and without hearing, on a finding
that no grounds appear that warrant a new hearing. In any case where such
application is set for public hearing, the applicant shall be required to
establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits of its application
prior to being allowed to offer any evidence on the merits. Unless such grounds
are established, the application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.
   D.   Exception. Whether or not new grounds are stated, any such second
application filed more than one year after the final denial of a prior
application shall be heard on the merits as though no prior application had
been filed. The applicant shall, however, be required to place in the record
all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts that have
developed since the denial of the first application. In the absence of such
evidence, it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to support the new
petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the first application.
7-203 PUBLIC HEARINGS AND MEETINGS
   A.   Setting Hearing or Meeting; Time Limitation. When the provisions of
this Code require a public hearing or meeting in connection with any
application filed pursuant to this Code, the body charged with conducting the
hearing or meeting shall, upon receipt of a properly completed application, fix
a reasonable time and place for such hearing or meeting; provided, however,
that such hearing or meeting shall be commenced no later than 60 days, and
shall be concluded no later than 120 days, following the submission of the
subject application unless the applicant shall agree to an extension or unless
the hearing or meeting agendas of the regularly scheduled meetings of the body
are completely committed during that time.
   B.   Notice.
      1.   Giving Notice. The Village Manager shall cause notice to be given of
public hearings set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section in the form and
manner and to the persons herein specified.
      2.   Content of Notice. All notices shall include the date, time, and
place of such public hearing or meeting, a description of the matter to be
heard or considered, a legal description of the subject property, and the
address or particular location of the subject property.
      3.   Persons Entitled to Notice.
         (a)   All Hearings and Meetings. Notice of every  public hearing or
meeting set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section shall be given:
            (i)   By mail or personal delivery to the applicant and, if a
specified parcel is the subject of the application, to the owner of the subject
property.
            (ii)   By mail to any newspaper or other new medium that shall have
filed a written request, accompanied by an annual fee as established from time
to time by the Village Manager to cover postage and handling, for notice of all
public hearings or meetings held pursuant to this  Code. Such written request
shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year in which it is made
unless a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual fee, is
submitted prior to such date.
            (iii)   By mail, personal delivery, or interdepartmental delivery
to affected Village boards, commissions, departments, officials, and
consultants.
   Notice by mail as herein required shall be mailed no fewer than seven days
in advance of the public hearing or meeting date by regular United States mail.
         (b)   Hearings on Amendments, Special Use Permits and Variations. In
addition to the notice required by Subparagraph B3(a) of this Section, notice
of every public hearing set pursuant to Subsection A of this Section in
connection with any application for an amendment to this Code or the Zoning
Map, a special use permit, or a  variation shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least once no less than 15
days nor more than 30 days in advance of the hearing date.
   C.   Referral to Village Commissions and Departments.
   The Village Manager, not later than the time set pursuant to Subsection B of
this Section for giving notice, shall refer every application for which this
Code requires a public hearing or meeting before either the  Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Zoning Commission, or the  Plan Commission to all appropriate
Village commissions and departments for review and comment.
   D.   Conduct of Hearings
      1.   Rights of All Persons. Any person may appear and testify at a public
hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney, and may
submit documentary evidence; provided, however, that the hearing body may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
      2.   Rights of Parties and Proximate Owners. Subject to the discretion of
the hearing body, the applicant, any board, commission, department, or official
of the Village, and any interested property owner may be allowed, in addition
to the rights granted by Paragraph D1 of this Section, any or all of the
following rights:
         (a)   To present witnesses on their behalf.
         (b)   To cross-examine all witnesses testifying in opposition to their
position.
         (c)   To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the public
hearing.
         (d)   To have subpoenas issued by the body in charge of the public
hearing as may be provided by State law for persons to appear at the hearings
and for examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena either
before or during the hearing, where such persons or documents are shown to have
a substantial evidentiary connection with:
            (i)   the property to which the request applies; or
            (ii)   facts that would support or negate the legal standards for
granting the request.
         (e)   To a continuance, upon request, for the purpose of presenting
evidence to rebut evidence introduced by any other person.
   In determining whether to grant or withhold such rights, the discretion of
the hearing body shall be governed by the goal of securing all information and
opinion relevant and material to its deliberations. Such rights shall not be
granted, however, when undue and unwarranted delay would result, or when to do
so would tend to produce no new evidence to aid the hearing body in reaching
its decision.
      3.   Adjournment of Hearing. The body conducting the  public hearing may
at any time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the
hearing for a reasonable time and to a fixed date, time, and place, for the
purpose of giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering further
information, deliberating further, or for such other reason as the hearing body
may find to be sufficient. The Staff Secretary of the hearing body shall notify
in writing all members of the hearing body, all parties to the hearing, and any
other person designated on the vote of adjournment of the date, time, and place
of the adjourned hearing.
      4.   Testimony to be Sworn. All testimony at any public hearing held
pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be given under oath.
      5.   Right to Submit Written Statements. Any person may at any time prior
to the commencement of a public hearing hereunder, or during such hearing, or
within such time as may be allowed by the hearing body following such hearing,
submit written statements in support of or in opposition to the application
being heard.
      6.   Board or Commission Rules to Govern. All other matters pertaining to
the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of this Code
pertaining to, and the rules promulgated by, the body conducting the hearing.
   E.   Pre-Hearing and Pre-Meeting Examination and Copying of Application and
Other Documents. At any time following the giving of notice as required in
Subsection B of this Section, and upon reasonable request, any person may
examine the application and, subject to the exceptions set forth in the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act, all other documents on file with the
Office of the Village Manager pertaining to the matter subject to such notice.
In addition, any person shall be entitled to copies of such application and
documents upon reasonable request and payment of a fee as established from time
to time by the Village Manager to cover the cost of such copies.
PART III: ZONING CERTIFICATES
7-301 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
   A.   Authority. The Village Manager shall have authority to issues
certificates of zoning compliance, but only in accordance with the provisions
of this Section.
   B.   Purpose. The certificate of zoning compliance is intended to serve two
general purposes. First, it provides a procedure for reviewing plans for
conformance with the Code and a means for evidencing such conformance. Second,
it serves as an adjunct to, and thus must be filed prior to or with, all other
applications filed pursuant to this Code with respect to a specific use or
development proposal. When so filed, it serves as a vehicle for routine plan
review by the Village Manager prior to consideration of special requests by
other officials, boards, and commissions, thus avoiding needless special
reviews of defective plans.
   C.   Certificate Required. Except where expressly waived by another
provision of this Code, unless a certificate of zoning compliance shall have
first been obtained from the Village Manager:
      1.   The construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, or moving
of any structure shall not be commenced; and
      2.   No land vacant on the effective date of this Code shall be used or
occupied for any purpose, except open space; and
      3.   The grading, excavation, or improvement of land preliminary to any
construction or use of such land shall not be commenced; and
      4.   Building or other permits pertaining to the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, or moving of any structure or the use
of any land or structure shall not be issued by the Village; and
      5.   No temporary use shall be established or maintained except as
provided on Paragraph 5-102C1 of this Code; and
      6.   No land shall be annexed to the Village.
   In any case where a certificate of zoning compliance is not required under
this Code, the Manager shall, on written request, issue a certificate of such
fact.
   D.   Relation to Other Applications. No application filed pursuant to Part
II of this Article VII with respect to a specific use or development proposal
shall be processed unless an application for a certificate of zoning compliance
shall first have been received, processed, and approved, or denied solely on
one or more grounds that form the basis for the application filed pursuant to
said Part II. It is the intent of this Section that no application filed
pursuant to Part II of this Article VII with respect to a specific use or
development proposal shall be processed until the Village Manager is satisfied
that the proposed use or development complies with the provisions of this Code
in all respects except those within the scope of such application. Any
application for a building permit shall also be deemed an application for a
certificate of zoning compliance.
   E.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for certificate of zoning compliance shall
be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code.
      2.   Action on Application. Within 10 days following receipt of a
completed application for a certificate of zoning compliance, the Village
Manager shall cause the application and related submissions to be reviewed for
compliance with this Code and shall inform the applicant whether the
application has been granted or denied. In any case where an application is
granted, the Manager shall issue a separate certificate of zoning compliance,
which shall state on its face, in bold type, that:
   THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT SIGNIFY BUILDING CODE REVIEW OR APPROVAL AND IS
NOT AUTHORIZATION TO UNDERTAKE ANY WORK WITHOUT SUCH REVIEW AND APPROVAL WHERE
EITHER IS    REQUIRED.   SEE THE GLENCOE BUILDING CODE FOR DETAILS.
   BEFORE ANY STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE IS APPLICABLE MAY BE OCCUPIED
OR USED FOR ANY PURPOSE, A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY MUST BE OBTAINED. SEE
SECTION
7-302 OF THE GLENCOE ZONING CODE AND THE GLENCOE BUILDING CODE FOR DETAILS.
   Alternatively, the certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by means
of a stamp on any other permit issued by the Village, which stamp shall state
   CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE -- SEE ZONING CODE § 7-301 FOR CONDITIONS
AND LIMITATIONS.
   In any case where an application is denied, the Manager shall state the
specific reasons therefor and shall cite the specific provisions of this Code
upon which such denial is based. If relief from such demand would be available
pursuant to a companion application filed in connection with the application
for a certificate of zoning compliance the Manager shall so inform the
applicant and shall promptly process such companion application. If such
application is approved, the Manager shall issue the requested certificate of
zoning compliance in accordance with the terms and conditions of such approval.
   If relief from the Manager's denial of a certificate of zoning compliance
would be available by variation or special use permit, but no application
therefor has been filed, the Manager shall so state and shall refer the
applicant to the appropriate provisions of this Code.
      3.   Contents of Certificate. Each certificate of zoning compliance (or
accompanying building permit, as the case may be) issued pursuant to this
Section shall state the specific use of the subject property for which it is
issued, shall identify the specific plans, if any, pursuant to which it is
issued, and shall set forth any conditions imposed in connection with any
approval granted pursuant to this Code.
      4.   File of Certificates. Every certificate issued pursuant to this
Section shall be kept on file in the central address files and shall be a
public record open to inspection in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   F.   Effect of Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Compliance. The issuance of
a certificate of zoning compliance shall not authorize the establishment,
expansion, or extension of any use nor the development, construction,
relocation, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for
any additional permits and approvals that may be required by the codes and
ordinances of the Village, including but not limited to a building permit, a
certificate of occupancy, and subdivision approval.
   G.   Limitations on Certificates. Subject to an extension of time granted by
the Village Manager pursuant to Subsection
7-101K of this Code, a certificate of zoning compliance shall become null and
void six months after the date on which it was issued unless within such period
construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration, or moving of a structure
is commenced or a use is commenced.
   H.   Void Certificates. Any certificate of zoning compliance issued in
violation of the provisions of this Code, whether intentionally, negligently,
or innocently, shall be void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights
whatsoever.
7-302 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
   A.   Authority. The Village Manager shall have authority to issue
certificates of occupancy; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be
issued except in accordance with the provisions of this Section and the
provisions of the Village Code governing development, building, and related
matters.
   B.   Purpose. For the purposes of this Code, the certificate of occupancy
provides a procedure for the inspection of completed premises to ensure their
compliance with this Code and approved plans prior to commencement of the use
or occupancy of such premises. The certificate may also evidence compliance
with other provisions of the Village Code as set forth in those provisions.
   C.   Certificate Required. Unless a certificate of occupancy shall have
first been obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this Code:
      1.   No structure, or addition thereto, constructed, reconstructed,
remodeled, altered, or moved after the effective date of this Code shall be
occupied or used for any purpose; and
      2.   No land vacant as of the effective date of this Code shall be used
or occupied for any purpose, except open space; and
      3.   Except for changes involving only substitution of occupants in
existing dwelling units, no use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be
changed to any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction, remodeling,
alteration, or moving is involved.
   This Subsection shall not apply to signs regulated by Section
5-105 of this Code.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. When no certificate of zoning compliance is required,
applications for certificate of occupancy shall be filed in accordance with the
requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code. When a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued,
the application for that certificate shall also be treated as the application
for a certificate of occupancy and shall be processed as such at such time as
the applicant notifies the Village Manager in writing that the subject
structure or use is ready for a certificate of occupancy in accordance with the
certificate of zoning compliance.
      2.   Action on Application. Within 10 days following the receipt of a
completed application or a written notice from the applicant in accordance with
Paragraph D1 of this Section, the Village Manager shall cause the subject
structure or premises to be inspected and shall take one of the following
actions based on such inspection:
         (a)   If all work has been completed and the structure and use thereof
are in full and complete compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the Village, the applicant's plans
as approved, and any conditions attached to any approval issued pursuant to
this Code, the Village Manager shall issue a certificate of occupancy.
         (b)   If, however, all work is not complete or is in any manner not in
full compliance with all applicable requirements, the Village Manager shall
deny the application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the specific
deficiencies on which such denial is based, citing the particular provisions of
the codes and ordinances of Village, the particular items in the applicant's
plan or the applicable special approval conditions with respect to which
compliance is lacking.
      3.   Content of Certificate. In addition to the matters required to be
contained in a certificate of occupancy pursuant to other applicable provisions
of the Village Code, each certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this
Section shall state the specific use of the subject property for which it is
issued and shall set forth any conditions imposed in connection with any
approval granted pursuant to this Code.
      4.   Filing of Certificates. Every certificate of occupancy issued
pursuant to this Section shall be kept on file in the central address files and
shall be a public record open to inspection pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   E.   Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Paragraph D2 of this Section, when construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or
alteration of a structure does not require the vacating of the structure, or
when parts of the structure are finished and ready for occupancy before the
completion of such construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or alteration and
are certified upon inspection to be safe for use or occupancy and to be in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, other relevant codes
and ordinances of the Village, the applicant's plans as approved and any
conditions attached to any approvals issued pursuant to this Code with respect
to such structure or its premises, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued for a period not to exceed six months from its date, which temporary
certificate shall bear on its face a statement of its temporary nature;
provided, however, that no such temporary certificate shall be issued pursuant
to this Code unless said structure also qualifies for a temporary certificate
of occupancy issued pursuant to the Building Code. Temporary certificates of
occupancy pursuant to this Section and the Building Code may be jointly issued.
   F.   Certificate of Occupancy for Existing Uses. The Village Manager may
issue a certificate of occupancy certifying the lawful existence and use of any
existing structure or use in the same manner, and subject to the same standards
and limitations, as authorized by this Section with respect to new structures
and uses. Such certificate of occupancy shall be prima facie evidence of the
facts contained in it with respect to any structure or use as of the date of
its issuance and shall remain effective for that purpose for so long as neither
the use or structure nor the applicable provisions of this Code are changed.
   G.   Void Certificates. Any certificate of occupancy issued in violation of
the provisions of this Code, whether intentionally, negligently, or innocently,
shall be void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights whatsoever.
PART IV: INTERPRETATIONS, APPEALS, AND VARIATIONS
7-401 INTERPRETATIONS
   A.   Authority. The Village Manager, subject to the procedures, standards,
and limitations of this Section, may render interpretations, including use
interpretations, of the provisions of this Code and of any rule or regulation
issued pursuant to it.
   B.   Purpose. The interpretation authority established by this Section is
intended to recognize that the provisions of this Code, though detailed and
lengthy, cannot possibly address every specific situation to which they may
have to be applied. Many such situations, however, can be readily addressed by
an interpretation of the specific provisions of this Code in light of the
general and specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted.
Because the interpretation authority herein established is an administrative
rather than a legislative authority, it is not intended to add to or change the
essential content of this Code but rather is intended only to allow
authoritative application of that content to specific cases.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Seek Interpretations. Applications for
interpretations may be filed by any person having an interest in the
circumstances giving rise to the need for an interpretation; provided, however,
that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely on
hypothetical facts or where the interpretation would have no effect other than
as an advisory opinion.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for interpretations of this Code shall be
filed in accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code.
      2.   Action on Application. Within 30 days following the receipt of a
properly completed application for interpretation, the Village Manager shall
inform the applicant in writing of his or her interpretation, stating the
specific precedent, reasons, and analysis upon which the determination based.
The failure of the Manager to act within 30 days, or such further time to which
the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a contrary interpretation
rendered on the day following such 30-day period thereby allowing the applicant
to pursue an appeal pursuant to Section
7-402 of this Code.
      3.   Appeal. Appeals from interpretations rendered by the Village Manager
may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in Section
7-402 of this Code.
   E.   Standards for Use Interpretations. The following standards shall govern
the Village Manager, and the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals from the
Manager, in issuing use interpretations:
      1.   Any use defined in Section
8-302 of this Code shall be interpreted as therein defined.
      2.   No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted use
or a special permit use in a district to be established in any district in
which such use is not so listed.
      3.   No use interpretation shall permit any use in any district unless
evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will comply with each use
limitation established for that particular district.
      4.   No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district
unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in such
district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses permitted or
specially permitted in a less restrictive district.
      5.   If the proposed use is most similar to a use permitted only as a
special use in the district in which it is proposed to be located, then any use
interpretation permitting such use shall be conditioned on the issuance of a
special use permit for such use pursuant to Section
7-502 of this Code.
      6.   No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use that
would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of the district in
question.
      7.   Subject to the foregoing conditions and limitations, in rendering
use interpretations the Village Manager shall be guided by the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual and the use classification method-ology used
therein.
   F.   Effect of Favorable Use Interpretation. No use interpretation finding a
particular use to be permitted or specially permitted in a particular district
shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing
of applications for any permits and approvals that  may be required by the
codes and ordinances of the Village including, but not limited to, a special
use permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, a building permit, a
certificate of occupancy, and subdivision approval.
   G.   Limitations on Favorable Use Interpretations. Subject to an extension
of time granted by the Village Manager pursuant to Subsection
7-101K of this Code, no use interpretation finding a particular use to be
permitted or specially permitted in a particular district shall be valid for a
period longer than six months from the date of issue unless a building permit
is issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion, or a certificate of occupancy is
obtained and a use commenced within that period.
   A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or specially
permitted in a particular district shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall not be deemed to
authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use interpretation has
not been issued. Such permit shall automatically expire and cease to be of any
force or effect if the particular use for which it was issued shall, for any
reason, be discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or more.
7-402 APPEALS
   A.   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from, and review orders, decisions, determinations, or the failure to act, of
the Village Manager acting pursuant to his or her authority and duties under
this Code, and to that end the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the same
powers and be subject to the same standards and limitations as the Village
Manager with respect to any order, decision, or determination being appealed.
   B.   Purpose. The appeal procedure is intended to avoid the need for resort
to legal action by establishing local procedures to review and correct
administrative errors. It is not, however, intended as a means to subvert the
clear purposes, meanings, or intents of this Code or the rightful authority of
the Village Manager to enforce the requirements of this Code. To these ends,
the reviewing body should give all proper deference to the spirit and intent
embodied in the language of this Code and to the reasonable interpretations of
that language by those charged with the administration of this Code.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Appeal. An appeal may be taken by any officer,
department, board, commission, or bureau of the Village, or by any person
aggrieved or adversely affected by an order, decision, determination, or
failure to act of the Village  Manager acting pursuant to his or her authority
and duties under this Code.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. An application for appeal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be filed not later than 45 days after the action being appealed
and in accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code.
      2.   Action by Village Manager. Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for an appeal, the Village Manager shall forthwith transmit to the
Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
      3.   Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and
conducted in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code.
      4.   Action by Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 45 days following the
close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a
decision on the appeal in the manner and form specified in Subsection
7-102H of this Code. Such decision may reverse, affirm, or modify, in whole or
in part, the action appealed from and may include such order or determination
as, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals, is proper to be made in the
premises. The failure of the Board of Appeals to act within such 45 days, or
such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision denying the appeal.
   E.   Stay of Proceedings. An application for appeal properly filed pursuant
to Subsection D of this Section shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the Village Manager certifies to the Zoning
Board of Appeals after the application for appeal has been filed with the
Manager that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
the Manager's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by the Illinois Circuit Court on
application, upon reasonable written notice to the Manager and on due cause
shown.
   F.   Right to Grant Variation in Deciding Appeals. In any case where the
application for appeal is accompanied by an application for variation in
accordance with Section
7-403 of this Code, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to
grant, as part of the relief, a variation, but only in strict compliance with
each provision of Section
7-403 of this Code.
   G.   Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by Appeal. In any case
where this Code imposes conditions and limitations upon any right, any such
right granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeal shall be subject to such
conditions and limitations in the same manner and to the same extent as if
secured without the necessity of an appeal.
7-403 VARIATIONS
   A.   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority to
grant variations from the provisions of this Code, but only in compliance with
the provisions of this Section.
   B.   Purpose. The variation procedure is intended to provide a narrowly
circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from particular applications
of this Code that create practical difficulties or particular hardships for
which no other remedy is available.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Seek Variations. Applications for variations may be
filed by the owner of the subject property.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for variations shall be filed in
accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code. In addition, every application for variation shall include
a landscaping plan or other evidence of landscaping for the lot or lots for
which the variation is sought.
      2.   Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and
conducted in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code.
         (a)   Action by Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 45 days following the
close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render its
decision granting or denying the variation, in the manner and form specified by
Subsection
7-102H of this Code. The failure of the Board of Appeals to act within 45 days,
or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision denying the variation.
   E.   Authorized Variations
      1.   Permitted Variations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary the
provisions of this Code only as provided in this Paragraph E1. The authority of
the Zoning Board of Appeals to vary the provisions of this Code are subject to
the prohibitions set forth in Paragraph E2 of this Section and proof by the
applicant of each of the standards set forth in Subsection F of this Section.
   Under no circumstances shall the list of permitted variations in this
Paragraph E1 be construed as an entitlement, right, or claim for any applicant.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary the provisions of this Code in harmony
with its authority and purposes and so that the spirit of this Code shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done in
the following cases and in no others:
         (a)   To reduce by not more than 20 percent the dimension of any
required front, side, or rear yard, or setback; provided, however, that where
the maximum front yard variation provided by this Subparagraph requires a front
yard greater than 25 percent of the depth of the lot, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may make a further variation which shall in no case establish a front
yard line at a distance less than 25 percent of the lot depth; provided further
that where the rear lot line in a residential district abuts the rear or side
lot line of a lot zoned B-1 or B-2, the Zoning Board of Appeals may further
reduce the dimension of any required rear yard to allow for the construction,
reconstruction, or expansion of any accessory structure on the residential
property (Amended Oct 1994); provided further that on corner or through lots,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce the required front setback for accessory
structures, including residential recreational facilities, to no less than 12
feet; provided further, however, that no variation shall be granted from Green
Bay Road yard requirements for lots in the B-2 District. (Am. Ord. 2022-08-
3528, passed 3-17-2022)
         (b)   To increase by not more than five percent the maximum allowable
height of a structure.
         (c)   To reduce by not more than 10 percent the required lot area of
any lot.
         (d)   To reduce by not more than 15 percent the required average lot
width of any lot.
         (e)   To increase by not more than 15 percent the maximum total ground
coverage of a lot or the maximum building coverage allowed for accessory
buildings.
         (f)   To allow, notwithstanding the limitations contained in
Subparagraphs (a), (c), (d), and (e) of this Paragraph, the restoration of a
structure occupied by a nonconforming use or a nonconforming accessory
structure, when such structure has been damaged or destroyed to the extent of
more than 50 percent of the cost of replacing such structure new, without
elimination of such nonconformity, and without requiring any special use permit
that might otherwise be required pursuant to Section
7-502 of this Code.
         (g)   (deleted - Feb 19, 2004
         (h)   (reserved)
         (i)   To increase by not more than 15 percent the maximum gross floor
area of the structures on a lot.
         (j)   For a vertical extension of a nonconforming structure only, to
reduce by any amount the dimensions of the required front, side, or rear yard
or setback, provided that no point on such vertical extension is closer to the
front, side, or rear lot line than the portion of the  nonconforming structure
over which the vertical extension is added.
         (k)   To permit any of the foregoing variations in excess of the
stated limits when necessary for the restoration of an historically or
aesthetically important feature of a structure that has been certified either
as a landmark or as part of any historic district in the Village.
         (l)   To allow the erection, maintenance, or moving of a sign
otherwise prohibited under Section
5-105 of this Code, provided that no variation shall allow a sign to exceed by
more than 15 percent the maximum height or signage area permitted in Section
5-105.
         (m)   Subject to the limitations in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c)
above, to vary the location, lighting, or use requirements for tennis courts.
         (n)   To allow portions of buildings to intercept the setback plane to
an extent greater than permitted under Paragraph 3-111G14 of this Code.
         (o)   To allow the construction of garages with vehicular doors
extending more than 18 feet, or a single door more than 9 feet, but not in
excess of 27 feet, along with the building front or corner building front,
notwithstanding the limitations based on frontage in Subsection
3-108C of this Code.
         (p)   To exercise such other powers of variation as are or may be
vested in the Zoning Board of Appeals by law.
      2.   Prohibited Variations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Section, no variation shall be granted that is intended as a temporary measure
only.
   F.   Standards for Variations.
      1.   General Standard. No variation shall be granted pursuant to this
Section unless the applicant shall establish that carrying out the strict
letter of the provisions of this Code would create a particular hardship or a
practical difficulty. Such a showing shall require proof that the variation
being sought satisfies each of the standards set forth in this Subsection F.
      2.   Unique Physical Condition. The subject property is exceptional as
compared to other lots subject to the same provision by reason of a unique
physical condition, including presence of an existing use, structure, or sign,
whether conforming or nonconforming; irregular or substandard shape or size;
exceptional topographical features; or other extraordinary physical conditions
peculiar to and inherent in the subject property that amount to more than a
mere inconvenience to the owner and that relate to or arise out of the lot
rather than the personal situation of the current owner of the lot.
   Alternatively, a lot may qualify for a variation where there exists on or in
connection with such lot physical, historical, or architectural features that
have exceptional relevance to the surrounding properties or the community as a
whole, if the strict application of the regulation in question would affect
such features in a way that would cause detriment to the interests of
surrounding properties or the community as a whole; provided, however, that the
foregoing shall only apply to lots having a physical, historical, or
architectural feature that either: (a) is certified as a landmark pursuant to
Chapter 26A of the Glencoe Village Code, or (b) has received honorary status as
set forth in
chapter 26B of the Village Code, or (c) the Glencoe Historic Preservation
Commission has concluded that the lot satisfies the criteria for certification
as a landmark as set forth in
Chapter 26A of the Glencoe Village Code or honorary status as set forth in
chapter 26B of the Village Code.(Paragraph added and adopted December, 2002;
Amended Ord. 2013-10-3340, passed March 21, 2013)
      3.   Not Self-Created. The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the
result of any action or inaction of the owner, or of the owner's predecessors
in title and known to the owner prior to acquisition of the subject property,
and existed at the time of the enactment of the provisions from which a
variation is sought or was created by natural forces or was the result of
governmental action, other than the adoption of this Code, for which no
compensation was paid.
      4.   Not Merely Special Privilege. The alleged hardship or difficulty is
not merely the inability of the owner or occupant to enjoy some special
privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other
lots subject to the same provision, nor merely an inability to make more money
from the  use of the subject property; provided, however, that where the
standards herein set out exist, the existence of an economic hardship shall not
be a prerequisite to the grant of an authorized variation.
      5.   Code and Plan Purposes. The variation would not result in a use or
development of the subject property that would be not in harmony with the
general and specific purposes for which this Code and the provision from which
a variation is sought were enacted.
      6.   Essential Character of the Area. The variation would not result in a
use or development on the subject property that:
         (a)   Would be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
materially injurious to the enjoyment, use, development, or value of property
or improvements permitted in the vicinity; or
         (b)   Would materially impair an adequate supply of light and air to
the properties and improvements in the vicinity; or
         (c)   Would substantially increase congestion in the public streets
due to traffic or parking; or
         (d)   Would unduly increase the danger of flood or fire; or
         (e)   Would unduly tax public utilities and facilities in the area; or
         (f)   Would endanger the public health or safety.
   G.   Variation Less Than Requested. A variation less than or different from
that requested may be granted when the record supports the applicant's right to
some relief but not to the relief requested.
   H.   Conditions on Variations. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such
specific conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character,
location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes
and objectives of this Code upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may
be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other
property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon
public facilities and services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in
the resolution granting the variation and in any zoning or building permit
based thereon. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a
violation of this Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the
variation.
   I.   Parking Space Variation. In addition to the conditions set forth in
Subsection H of this Section, any variation in the number of parking spaces
required by Subparagraphs 5-104E1(h)(i) and 5-104E1(h)(ii) of this Code shall
be conditioned upon approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals of, and in strict
compliance with, a detailed parking plan setting forth the exact number of
parking spaces to be provided and showing all provisions for (1) wheel stops,
(2) markings, (3) surfacing, (4) screening and landscaping, (5) lighting, and
(6) access. Further, such variation may also be conditioned upon specific
limitations of the use of the premises, which limitations shall be
unconditionally agreed to by the owner of the premises and entered upon the
records of the Recorder of Deeds in the county where such premises are located.
Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the resolution granting the
variation and in any zoning or building permit based thereon.
   J.   Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions. Whenever any variation
authorized pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions and
limitations to be met by the applicant, the Village Manager may require the
applicant, upon satisfying such conditions, to file with the  Village an
affidavit certifying such satisfaction.
   K.   Effect of Grant of Variation. The grant of a variation shall not
authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing
of applications for any permits and approval that may be required by the codes
and ordinances of the Village including, but not limited to, a building permit,
a certificate of zoning compliance, and subdivision approval.
   L.   Limitations on Variations.
      1.   Time Period. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals as authorized by Paragraph 2 of this Subsection
7-403L, no variation from the provisions of this Code shall be valid for a
period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and construction
is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
      2.   Time Extension. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon written
request of the owner of the subject property, extend the time limit imposed by
Paragraph L1 of this Section for a period not exceeding 12 months if it deems
such an extension appropriate and necessary to avoid undue hardship to such
owner. Such written request must be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals
prior to the expiration of the time limit for which an extension is sought. Any
such extension shall be made by written resolution.
      3.   Removal. A variation shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular construction or development for which it was issued and shall
automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such
construction or development shall be removed and not replaced within twelve
months following such removal.
      4.   Expiration. In the event that any variation granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals becomes invalid by virtue of the passage of time pursuant to
Paragraphs L1 or L3 of this Section, the owner of the subject property may
reapply for such variation, but such re-application shall be treated as a new
application and shall be granted or denied based solely on the facts and
circumstances shown to exist at the time of such new application.
PART V: AMENDMENTS, SPECIAL APPROVALS, AND OTHER PERMITS
7-501 AMENDMENTS
   A.   Authority. This Code and the Zoning Map may be amended from time to
time by ordinance duly enacted by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Section.
   B.   Purpose. The amendment process established by this Section is intended
to provide a means for making changes in the text of this Code and in the
Zoning Map that have more or less general significance or application. It is
not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges
or rights. Rather, it is intended as a tool to adjust the provisions of this
Code and the Zoning Map in light of changing, newly discovered, or newly
important conditions, situations, or knowledge.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Seek Amendment. An application for an amendment may
be filed by the Board of Trustees, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Plan
Commission, the owner of any property to be affected by a proposed amendment to
the Zoning Map, or any person interested in a proposed amendment to the text of
this Code.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Application for amendments shall be filed in accordance
with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code; provided, however, that amendments proposed by the Board of
Trustees, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Plan Commission, shall not be
subject to said Section but shall be transmitted to the Village Manager in such
form as may seem appropriate to the initiating body.
      2.   Preliminary Consideration by Board of Trustees.
         (a)   Referral to Board. Every properly filed and completed
application or proposal for an  amendment to this Code, before being processed
in any other manner, shall be referred to the  Board of Trustees for a
determination as to whether the application merits a hearing and consideration
by the Zoning Commission or should be summarily denied.
         (b)   Notice of Applicant; Right to be Heard. Notice of the meeting at
which the issue will be considered shall be given to the applicant at least 48
hours before such meeting and the applicant or his representative shall,
subject to the rules of the Board of Trustees, have the right to be heard on
the issue.
         (c)   Action by Board. The Board of Trustees, not later than the first
meeting after the meeting at which the issue first appears on its agenda, shall
either summarily deny the application or refer it to the Zoning Commission for
public hearing. The affirmative vote of at least four members of the Board of
Trustees shall be necessary to summarily deny an application; any other vote
shall be sufficient to refer the application for a hearing. In the case of any
such referral, the date of such referral shall be deemed to be the date of
filing for computation of all time periods under this Code. A summary denial
shall have the same legal effect as a denial after a full hearing.
         (d)   Standard. In considering the issue of whether to summarily deny
or refer an application for hearing, the Board of Trustees shall be guided by
the legislative standard that applies to granting an application for an
amendment as set forth in Subsection E of this Section. The Board of Trustees
should summarily deny an application in any case where its legislative judgment
is that that standard cannot be met with regard to the proposed amendment.
      3.   Public Hearing. In any case where an application for amendment is
referred to the Zoning Commission for a hearing, a public hearing shall be set,
noticed, and conducted by the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code.
      4.   Action by Zoning Commission. Within 45 days after the conclusion of
the public hearing, the Zoning Commission shall transmit to the Board of
Trustees its recommendation in the form specified by Subsection
7-103H of this Code. The failure of the Zoning Commission to act within 45
days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed a
recommendation for the approval of the proposed amendment as submitted.
      5.   Action by Board of Trustees; Protest. Within 60 days after the
receipt of the recommendation of the  Zoning Commission, or its failure to act
as above provided, the Board of Trustees either shall deny the application or,
by ordinance duly adopted, shall adopt the proposed amendment, with or without
modifications; provided, however, that in the event a duly signed and
acknowledged protest against a proposed amendment is filed with the Village
Clerk before the adoption of such amendment by the owners of record of 20
percent or more of the frontage to be affected by the proposed amendment, or by
the owners of record of 20 percent or more of the  frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of record of 20
percent or more of the frontage directly opposite the  frontage to be affected,
such amendment shall not be passed except by a two-thirds vote of all the
Trustees then holding office.
   The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within 60 days, or such further
time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying
the application.
   E.   Standard for Amendments. The wisdom of amending the Zoning Map or the
text of this Code is a matter committed to the sound legislative discretion of
the Board of Trustees and is not dictated by any set standard. However, in
determining whether a proposed amendment should be granted or denied, the Board
of Trustees should be guided by the principle that its power to amend this Code
is not an arbitrary one but one that may be exercised only when the public good
demands or requires the amendment to be made. In considering whether that
principle is satisfied in any particular case, the Board of Trustees should
weigh, among other factors, the following factors:
      1.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the purposes of this
Code.
      2.   The existing uses and zoning classifications for properties in the
vicinity of the subject property.
      3.   The trend of development in the vicinity of the subject property,
including changes, if any, in such trend since the subject property was placed
in its present zoning classification.
      4.   The extent, if any, to which the value of the subject property is
diminished by the existing zoning classification applicable to it.
      5.   The extent, if any, to which any such diminution in value is offset
by an increase in the public health, safety, and welfare.
      6.   The extent, if any, to which the use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
      7.   The extent, if any, to which the value of adjacent properties would
be affected by the proposed amendment.
      8.   The extent, if any, to which the future orderly development of
adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment.
      9.   The suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or
permissible under its present zoning classification.
      10.   The availability, where relevant, of adequate ingress to and egress
from the subject property and the extent to which traffic conditions in the
immediate vicinity of the subject property would be affected by the proposed
amendment.
      11.   The availability, where relevant, of adequate utilities and
essential public services to the subject property to accommodate the uses
permitted or permissible under its present zoning classification.
      12.   The length of time, if any, that the subject property has been
vacant, considered in the context of the pace of development in the vicinity of
the subject property.
      13.   The community need for the proposed amendment and for the uses and
development it would allow.
      14.   The reasons, where relevant, why the subject property should be
established as part of an overlay district and the positive and negative
effects such establishment could be expected to have on persons residing in the
area.
7-502 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
   A.   Authority. The Board of Trustees, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set forth in this Section and by ordinance duly adopted, may grant
special use permits authorizing the development of uses listed as special uses
in the regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is
located.
   B.   Purpose. Special uses are those uses having some special impact or
uniqueness that requires a careful review of their location, design,
configuration, and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the
desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses
that may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on a
weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local impact
and effect.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Seek Special Use Permits. An application for a
special use permit may be filed by the owner of the subject property.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for special use permits shall be filed in
accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code.
      2.   Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and
conducted by the Zoning Commission in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code.
      3.   Action by Zoning Commission. Within 45 days after the conclusion of
the public hearing, the Zoning Commission shall transmit to the Board of
Trustees its recommendation in the form specified by Subsection
7-103H of this Code, recommending either granting the application for a special
use permit; granting the application subject to conditions, as specified in
Subsection F of this Section; or denying the application. The failure of the
Zoning Commission to act within 45 days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the
proposed special use permit.
      4.   Action by Board of Trustees. Within 60 days after the receipt of the
recommendation of the Zoning Commission, or its failure to act as above
provided, the Board of Trustees either shall deny the application or, by
ordinance duly adopted, shall grant the special use permit, with or without
modifications or conditions. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within
60 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed
to be a decision denying the special use permit.
   E.   Standards for Special Use Permits.
      1.   General Standards. No special use permit shall be recommended or
granted pursuant to this Section unless the applicant shall establish that:
         (a)   Code and Plan Purposes. The proposed use and development will be
in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Code was
enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were
established and with the general purpose and intent of the Official
Comprehensive Plan.
         (b)   No Undue Adverse Impact. The proposed use and development will
not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the
character of the area, parking, utility facilities, and other matters affecting
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
         (c)   No Interference with Surrounding Development. The proposed use
and development will be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
         (d)   Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed use and development
will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as
streets, public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection,
refuse disposal, water and sewers, parks, libraries, and schools, or the
applicant will provide adequately for such services.
         (e)   No Traffic Congestion. The proposed use and development will not
cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through
residential streets.
         (f)   No Destruction of Significant Features. The proposed use and
development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any natural,
scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.
         (g)   Compliance with Standards. The proposed use and development
complies with all additional standards imposed on it by the particular
provision of this Code authorizing such use.
      2.   Special Standards for Specified Special Uses. When the district
regulations authorizing any special use in a particular district impose special
standards to be met by such use in such district, a permit for such use in such
district shall not be recommended or granted unless the applicant shall
establish compliance with such special standards.
      3.   Considerations. In determining whether the applicant's evidence
establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the Zoning Commission
and the Board of Trustees shall consider:
         (a)   Public Benefit. Whether and to what extent the proposed use and
development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to
provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of the public
convenience or that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood
or community.
         (b)   Alternative Locations. Whether and to what extent such public
goals can be met by the location of the proposed use and development at some
other site or in some other area that may be more appropriate than the proposed
site.
         (c)   Mitigation of Adverse Impacts. Whether and to what extent all
steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed
use and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site
design, landscaping, and screening.
   F.   Conditions on Special Use Permits. The Zoning Commission may recommend
and the Board of Trustees may impose such conditions and limitations concerning
use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other
matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Code upon the premises
benefitted by a special use permit as may be necessary or appropriate to
prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in the
vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services and to
insure compliance with the standards in this Section. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the special use. Violation of any
such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Code and shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
   G.   Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions. Whenever any special use
permit granted pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions or
limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such
conditions, file an affidavit with the Village Manager so stating.
   H.   Effect of Issuance of a Special Use Permit. The grant of a special use
permit shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building, or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any other permits or approvals that may be
required by the codes and ordinances of the Village, including but not limited
to a building permit, a certificate of zoning compliance, a certificate of
occupancy, and subdivision approval.
   I.   Limitations on Special Use Permits.
      1.   Time Period. Subject to an extension of time granted by the Board of
Trustees as authorized by Paragraph 2 of this Subsection
7-502I, no special use permit shall be valid for a period longer than one year
unless a building permit is issued and construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a
certificate of zoning compliance is issued and a use commenced within that
period.
      2.   Time Extension. The Board of Trustees may, upon request of the owner
of the subject property, extend the time limit imposed by Paragraph 12 of this
Section for a period not exceeding 12 months if it deems such an extension
appropriate. Such written request must be submitted to the Board of Trustees
prior to the expiration of the time limit for which an extension is sought. Any
such extension shall be made by written resolution or ordinance.
      3.   Termination. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only
the particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any
reason, be discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or more.
      4.   Site Specific. Except when otherwise provided in the ordinance
granting a special use permit, a  special use permit shall be deemed to relate
to, and be for the benefit of, the use and lot in question rather than the
owner or operator of such use or  lot.
   J.   Amendments to Special Use Permits. Except for time extensions pursuant
to Paragraph 7-502I2, a special use permit may be amended, varied, or altered
only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards and limitations
provided in this Section for its original approval.
7-503 EXTERIOR APPEARANCE REVIEW
   A.   Authority. The Village Manager, Plan Commission, and Board of*new 1997
Trustees, in accordance with the procedures and standards set out in this
Section, may grant approval of building permit applications requiring exterior
appearance review and approval pursuant to Subsections 3-108B and 4-107A of
this Code.
   B.   Purpose. The appearance review process is intended to protect,
preserve, and enhance the character and architectural heritage and quality of
the Village, to pro-tect, preserve, and enhance property values, and to promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the Village and its residents.
   C.   Parties Entitled to Seek Exterior Appearance Review. Applications for
building permits requiring appearance review and approval pursuant to this Code
may be filed by the owner of the subject property.
   D.   Procedure. *new 1997
      1.   Application. Applications for building permits requiring exterior
appearance review and approval pursuant to this Code shall be filed in
accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code. In addition to information otherwise provided with a
building permit application, an application for appearance review and approval
shall also include the following information:
         (a)   Detailed plans depicting all work proposed to be done, including
detail renderings of any exterior alterations and of the exterior of any
proposed new building. Such rendering shall show proposed exterior colors and
textures.
         (b)   A statement of how the work proposed to be done satisfies the
objectives and criteria of the appearance guide.
         (c)   Such other and additional data, information, or documentation as
the Village Manager or any board or commission before which its application is
pending may deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration
and disposition of the particular application.
      2.   Action by Village Manager.
         (a)   Referral to Plan Commission. Except as provided in Subparagraph
2(b) of this Subsection, the Village Manager shall deliver each application for
a building permit for which appearance review and approval is required to the
Plan Commission within 28 days after the filing of said application.
         (b)   Specified Categories of Applications. Whenever the Plan
Commission shall specify categories of building permit applications, if any,
for which the Village Manager is to undertake appearance review and approval,
the Manager shall, within 28 days after the filing of such applications, review
each such application in accordance with the criteria set forth in Subsection E
of this Section. The Village Manager shall mail or personally deliver to the
applicant a written decision within said 28 day period either approving,
denying, or approving subject to modifications to the application. If the
Manager approves such application for exterior appearance review and approval,
or approves said application subject to modifications to which the applicant
agrees in writing to accept, or if the Manager fails to mail or personally
deliver to the applicant a written decision within said 28 day period, the
application for appearance review shall be deemed final and approved and shall
not be subject to further review by, or appeal to, any Village board or
commission; otherwise a public meeting before the Plan Commission shall be
conducted as provided for in Paragraph D3 of this Section.
      3.   Action by Plan Commission. Within 45 days after the Village Manager
delivers to the Plan Commission a building permit application for which
exterior appearance review and approval is required as provided for in
Subparagraph D2(a) of this Section, or within 45 days after the Village Manager
delivers a written decision on an application as provided for in Subparagraph
D2(b) of this Section, the Plan Commission shall set, notice and hold a public
meeting in accordance with the requirements of Section
7-203 of this Code and shall review said application in accordance with the
criteria set forth in Subsection E of this Section. Within 35 days after the
conclusion of the public meeting, the Plan Commission shall, by resolution
adopted in accordance with Subsection
7-104H of this Code, either:
         (a)   Approve the application as submitted; or
         (b)   On the basis of written findings in accordance with Paragraph E2
of this Section, approve it subject to specific modifications; or
         (c)   On the basis of such findings, deny approval of such
application.
   If the Plan Commission approves the application for appearance review and
approval or approves the application subject to modifications to which the
applicant agrees in writing to accept, or if the Plan Commission fails to act
within 35 days after the conclusion of the public meeting (or such further time
to which the applicant may agree), the application shall be deemed final and
approved and shall not be subject to further review by, or appeal to, any
Village board or commission. If the Plan Commission denies the application or
approves it subject to modifications that the applicant refuses to accept, then
the applicant may file an appeal to the Board of Trustees in accordance with
Paragraph D4 of this Section. If no such appeal is filed, the applicant shall
be deemed to have abandoned and withdrawn the application for a building permit
and appearance review and approval.
      4.   Appeal to Board of Trustees.
         (a)   Application for Appeal. An applicant may appeal a decision of
the Plan Commission either denying an application for appearance review and
approval or approving such application subject to modifications by filing with
the Village Manager an application for appeal to the Board of Trustees within
21 days after the decision of the Plan Commission. Such application for appeal
shall include the following information:
            (i)   A copy of the original application for appearance review and
approval.
            (ii)   A statement of the applicant’s position as to the alleged
errors in the Plan Commission’s actions on the application and as to why
approval of the application is justified and proper.
   The Village Manager shall promptly forward such application as well as the
decision of the Plan Commission to the Board of Trustees.
         (b)   Board Action. The Board of Trustees shall consider each
application for appeal at its first regular meeting scheduled not less than 21
days after the filing of such application for appeal, unless otherwise agreed
to by the Village and the applicant. Upon review of the application for appeal
and the decision of the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees shall, by
resolution duly adopted, either approve the application for appearance review
and approval as submitted, or shall make modifications acceptable to the
applicant and approve such modified application, or shall disapprove it in
accordance with Subsection E of this Section either with or without a remand to
the Plan Commission for further consideration. The failure of the Board of
Trustees to act within 60 days after receipt of the application for appeal, or
such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed an
affirmance of the decision of the Plan Commission.
   E.   Design Guidelines and Criteria.
      1.   Design Guidelines. For purposes of this Section
7-503, the provisions of the design guidelines and criteria for the Village of
Glencoe, which may be adopted or amended from time-to-time pursuant to
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees (the “design guidelines”), shall
apply. To the extent any provision of the design guidelines is in conflict with
State law or with any ordinance of the Village, then such State law or Village
ordinance shall prevail. (Section E adopted Sept 11, 2003)
      2.   Criteria. No application for appearance review and approval shall be
disapproved or denied except on the basis of specific written findings directed
to objectives and standards in the appearance guide. In addition, no
application for appearance review and approval for a multiple family dwelling
in the RD District shall be approved if there is a finding that such
application has any of the following negative impacts:
         a)   Disproportionality. The proposed building is disproportionate in
size to surrounding development.
         b)   Misfit/Mismatch of Building and Lot. The proposed building is
disproportionate in size to the lot.
         c)   Intrusion. The proximity of the proposed building or unit to
another building or unit causes an unreasonable intrusion into the privacy of
another. (#2 added June 3, 2004)
   F.   Limitation. Approval of an application pursuant to this Section is not
a permit or an authorization for development but merely a mandatory criterion
for the issuance of a building permit. This Section shall not be construed to
limit the application or effect of the Village's building codes and ordinances
or to relieve the applicant from the responsibility of complying with all such
codes and ordinances. Appearance review and approval shall relate solely to the
work shown on the approved plans (subject to any required modifications) and it
shall be unlawful for any person to deviate from such plans without obtaining
an amendment to said plans in the same manner as herein provided for obtaining
the original exterior appearance review approval.
7-504 SITE PLAN REVIEW (Adopted 7-2000)
   A.   Authority. The Board of Trustees, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set out in this Section and by Ordinance duly adopted, may grant site
plan approval to uses and developments requiring such approval pursuant to
Subsection
7-504C of this Code.
   B.   Purpose. The site plan review process recognizes that even those uses
and developments that have been determined to be generally suitable for
location in a particular district are capable of adversely affecting the
purposes for which this Code was enacted unless careful consideration is given
to critical design elements. It is the purpose of this Section to provide a
procedure for the review of the developer’s attention to such elements.
   C.   Site Plan Approval Required. Site plan approval shall be required in
connection with any development or use specifically requiring site plan review
and approval pursuant to this Code.
   D.   Parties Entitled to Seek Site Plan Approval. Applications for site plan
review may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual
interest in, the subject property.
   E.   Procedure.   
      1.   Application. Applications for site plan approval shall be filed in
accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code.
      2.   Public Meeting. A public meeting shall be set, noticed, and
conducted by the Plan Commission in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code. Such public meeting may be continued from time-to-time.
      3.   Action by Plan Commission. Within 35 days following the conclusion
of the public meeting, the Plan Commission shall transmit to the Board of
Trustees its recommendation, recommending either approval of the site plan or
disapproval based on one or more of the standards set forth in Paragraph 7-
504F1 of this Code. In the case of any recommendation for disapproval,
suggestions as required by Paragraph 7-504F2 of this Code shall be provided.
The failure of the Plan Commission to act within 35 days, or such further time
to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a recommendation for
approval of the site plan as submitted.
      4.   Action by Board of Trustees. Within 60 days following receipt of the
recommendation of the Plan Commission, or its failure to act as provided, the
Board of Trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, shall approve the site plan as
submitted, or shall make modifications acceptable to the applicant and approve
such modified site plan, or shall disapprove it in the manner hereinafter
specified either with or without a remand to the Plan Commission for further
consideration. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within 60 days, or
such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision denying site plan approval.
   F.   Standards for Site Plan Disapproval.
      1.   Standards. Except as otherwise provided in Paragraph 7-504E4, the
Board of Trustees shall not disapprove, and the Plan Commission shall not
recommend disapproval of, a site plan submitted pursuant to this Section except
on the basis of specific written findings directed to one or more of the
following standards:
         (a)   The application is incomplete in specified particulars.
         (a)   The application is submitted in connection with another
application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to the necessity
for site plan review, and the applicant has failed to secure approval of that
application.
         (b)   The site plan fails to adequately meet specified standards
required by this Code with respect to the proposed use or development,
including special use standards where applicable, or contains or reveals
violations of this Code or other applicable regulations that the applicant,
after written request, has failed or refused to supply or correct.
         (c)   The proposed site plan interferes with easements or rights-of-
way.
         (d)   The proposed site plan unreasonably destroys, damages,
detrimentally modifies, or interferes with the enjoyment of significant
natural, topographical, or physical features of the site.
         (e)   The proposed site plan is unreasonably injurious or detrimental
to the use and enjoyment of surrounding property.
         (f)   The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or
hazards in the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed site
plan unreasonably create hazards to safety on or off site or disjointed,
inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation paths on or off site.
         (g)   The screening of the site does not provide adequate shielding
from or for nearby uses.
         (h)   The proposed structures or landscaping are unreasonably lacking
amenity in relation to, or are incompatible with, nearby structures and uses.
         (i)   In the case of site plans submitted in connection with an
application for a special use permit, the proposed site plan makes inadequate
provision for the creation or preservation of open space or for its continued
maintenance.
         (j)   The proposed site plan creates unreasonable drainage or erosion
problems or fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the site into the
overall existing and planned drainage system serving the Village.
         (k)   The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable
burdens on specified utility systems serving the site or area or fails to fully
and satisfactorily integrate the site’s utilities into the overall existing and
planned utility systems serving the Village.
         (l)   The proposed site plan does not provide for required public
uses.
         (m)   The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
      2.   Alternative Approaches. In citing any of the foregoing standards,
other than those of Subparagraph 7-504F1(a) and 7-504F1(b), as the basis for
disapproving a site plan, the Plan Commission or the Board of Trustees shall
suggest alternative site plan approaches that could be developed to avoid the
specified deficiency or shall state the reasons why such deficiency cannot be
avoided consistent with the applicant’s objectives.
      3.   Effect of Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan shall not
authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filling, and processing
of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the codes
and ordinances of the Village including, but not limited to, a certificate of
zoning compliance, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, and
subdivision approval. A copy of every approved site plan shall be filed with
the Village Manager and the development of the site shall be in substantial
conformity with such approved and filed plan.
      4.   Limitations on Site Plan Approval. Subject to an extension of time
granted by the Village Manager, no site plan approval shall be valid for a
period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and construction
is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion or unless a certificate of occupancy is issued and a use commenced
within that period.
   G.   Adjustments to Site Plan During Development.
      2.   Minor Adjustments. During the development of the site, the Village
Manager may authorize minor adjustments to a site plan when such adjustments
appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations first
discovered during actual development. Such minor adjustments shall be limited
to the following:
         (a)   Altering the location of any one structure or group of
structures by not more than 20 feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the
approved site plan between such structure or structures and any other structure
or any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the site plan,
whichever is less.
         (b)   Altering the location of any circulation element by not more
than 20 feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved site plan
between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is less.
         (c)   Altering the location of any open space by not more than 50
feet.
         (d)   Altering any final grade by not more than 10 percent of the
originally planned grade.
         (e)   Altering the location or type of landscaping elements.
   Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent and purpose of
this Code and the site plan as approved, shall be the minimum necessary to
overcome the particular difficulty, and shall not be approved if they would
result in a violation of any standard or requirement of this Code.
      2.   Major Adjustments. Any adjustment to a site plan that is not
authorized by the preceding Paragraph 7-504I1 shall be considered to be a major
adjustment and shall be granted only upon application to and approval by the
Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees, by ordinance duly adopted, may grant
approval for a major adjustment without referral to the Plan Commission upon
finding that any change in the site plan as approved will be in substantial
conformity with said site plan. If the Board of Trustees determines that a
major adjustment is not in substantial conformity with the site plan as
approved, then the Board of Trustees shall refer the request to the Plan
Commission for further consideration and review as provided in Subsection
7-504E of this Code.
   H.   Amendments to Site Plan Following Completion of Development. After a
site is developed in accordance with an approved site plan, the approved site
plan may be amended, varied, or altered in the same manner and subject of the
same limitations, as provided for original approval of site plans.
7-505 CONTEXTUAL DESIGN REVIEW (Adopted 4/2005)
   A.   Authority. This Section establishes special regulations that apply
notwithstanding other general regulations in this Code, but only pursuant to
and subject to the purposes and procedures hereinafter set forth in this
Section. The Contextual Design Review Commission, in accordance with the
procedures, limitations, and standards set out in this Section or otherwise
duly adopted by the Contextual Design Review Commission, may grant contextual
design review approval for single family dwellings seeking such approval, which
approval may contain adjustments to the generally applicable zoning regulations
to the extent permitted in this Section and expressly authorized as part of any
contextual design review approval.
   B.   Purpose. The Board of Trustees recognizes that zoning regulations are,
by nature and necessity, to be applied generally to many different settings and
circumstances. Although such general applicability fosters consistency and
stability, particularly in residential areas, it does not always provide
sufficient flexibility to encourage excellence and innovation in design. In
addition, the strict standards for securing variations from the zoning
regulations in this Code may not accommodate the types of modest adjustments
needed for residential designs to reduce the appearance of excessive bulk while
enhancing the dwellings themselves, adjacent properties, and the neighborhoods
in which they are located. In order to address opportunities for enhanced
residential designs that reduce the appearance of excessive bulk and contribute
to and maintain the character of a neighborhood without adversely impacting
adjacent properties, this Section authorizes and encourages owners to submit
their proposed designs to the Contextual Design Review Commission. Minor
adjustments to the generally applicable regulations of this Code are available
to promote better residential design in the context of the Village's
neighborhoods. Contextual design review shall be entirely voluntary, and no
person shall be entitled to any adjustments from the regulations of this Code
under the Contextual Design Review procedures except with respect to a specific
design and overall plan expressly approved by the Contextual Design Review
Commission.
   C.   Applicability of Contextual Design Review. Contextual design review is
available for any new construction of, addition to, or alteration of a single
family dwelling. Contextual design review shall not be required for any single
family dwelling development, but no single family dwelling development shall be
entitled to seek or obtain any adjustments as authorized pursuant to Subsection
7-505G of this Code unless the Contextual Design Review Commission grants
contextual design review approval for a specific plan, and such adjustments
shall only be available for development conforming to such specific plan, as
well as any conditions of contextual design review approval. 
   D.   Parties Entitled to Seek Contextual Design Review Approval.
Applications for contextual design review may be filed by the owner of, or any
person having a contractual interest in, the subject property.
   E.   Procedure.
      1.   Pre-Application. Prior to filing an application for contextual
design review, a prospective applicant shall contact the Staff Secretary to the
Contextual Design Review Commission to schedule a pre-application meeting. The
Staff Secretary, or not more than two members of the Commission, or both shall
meet with the prospective applicant to review the process and to preliminarily
assess the single family dwelling development that is contemplated to be the
subject of an application for contextual design review. Following such meeting,
a prospective applicant shall have the right, but not the obligation, to file
an application for contextual design review.
      2.   Application; Fee. Applications for contextual design review approval
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section
7-201 of this Code, and such applications shall also include at least the
following information and materials:
         a.   Existing and proposed site plan of the subject property;
         b.   Elevations of the proposed development on the subject property;
         c.   Photographic composite of existing structures in its environs (as
determined in the pre-application meeting);
         d.   Photographic composite of the proposed development in its
environs (as determined in the pre-application meeting);
         e.   Landscaping plans, showing existing and proposed landscaping on
the subject property;
         f.   Photographs of the subject property;
         g.   Architectural plans for the proposed development; and
         h.   Samples of materials for the proposed development on the subject
property.
   Notwithstanding anything in Section
7-201 to the contrary, no fee shall be required in connection with an
application for contextual design review, nor shall there be any limitation on
successive applications for contextual design review. Any person who files an
application for contextual design review shall be deemed to acknowledge and
agree that: (i) the contextual design review process is entirely voluntary;
(ii) the determination of the Commission to decline the granting of adjustments
pursuant to contextual design review approval does not constitute any
deprivation of rights; and (iii) the applicant shall have no right to appeal or
otherwise challenge a determination of the Commission with respect to an
application other than to withdraw from the contextual design review process.
      3.   Public Meeting; Notices. A public meeting shall be set, noticed, and
conducted by the Commission in accordance with Section
7-203 of this Code. In addition, notice shall be provided by regular or
certified mail to each dwelling unit located within 250 feet of the subject
property. Prior to any meeting relating to an application for contextual design
review, the Village Manager shall cause a staff report to be prepared and
delivered to the members of the Commission relating to such application. Such
public meeting may be continued from time-to-time, and the Commission may
decline to act on any application for which the applicant or the applicant's
representative is not present. At public meetings, the Commission shall provide
the applicant and any other person the opportunity to comment on the
application.
      4.   Action by the Commission. Within 35 days following the conclusion of
the public meeting, the Commission shall either approve an application for
adjustments pursuant to this Section, approve such application with conditions,
or decline to grant any adjustments for a proposed single family dwelling
development. The Commission may provisionally approve any application for
contextual design review and delegate the final terms of approval (including
any conditions thereon) to one or more members, the Village staff, or some
combination thereof. In addition, an applicant seeking adjustments pursuant to
contextual design review may withdraw from the process at any time without
limitation or consequence, and upon such withdrawal such applicant shall have
the right to develop the subject property in any manner otherwise authorized
under the Code exclusive of the provisions of this Section. No approval or
conditional approval for contextual design review shall be binding upon an
applicant unless and until such applicant seeks, obtains, and begins to
prosecute development on the subject property pursuant to a building permit
based on plans that incorporate adjustments authorized as part of a contextual
design review approval. Upon such approval becoming binding, no person may
pursue the development except in strict conformity with the contextual design
review approval, including the approved plans and any conditions on such
approval, and the Commission may require appropriate documentation to
demonstrate the owner's consent to the contextual design review approval and
any conditions thereon. Whenever a contextual design review approval is either
(a) based upon the maintenance of a particular feature of the single family
dwelling or lot receiving such approval, or (b) authorizing an increase in the
otherwise allowable maximum gross floor area, the Commission shall require the
applicant to execute and record a declaration of covenants against the subject
property.
      5.   Honorary Landmarks. For any single family dwelling that has been
granted honorary landmark status or is included within a recognized historic
area pursuant to
chapter 26B of the Village Code, no contextual design review approval may be
sought or granted unless the Glencoe Historic Preservation Commission has first
granted favorable advisory review of the proposed development pursuant to
Section
26B-30 of the Village Code. Upon such favorable advisory review, an application
for contextual design review may be considered and adjustments may be approved,
provided that the plans approved pursuant to such contextual design review are
substantially the same as those for which favorable advisory review was granted
by the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Amended Ord. 2013-10-3340, passed March 21, 2013)
   F.   Standards for Contextual Design Review Approval. Because the contextual
design review process is entirely voluntary, applicants are deemed to
acknowledge and agree that: (i) they have no right or expectation that any
adjustments will be authorized for their proposed single family dwelling
development; and (ii) approval of any adjustments shall be granted only in the
sole discretion of the Commission. The Commission shall develop and recommend
guidelines for both alterations and new construction of single family dwellings
in connection with its contextual design review activities; provided, however,
that no guidelines shall be established unless first approved by a resolution
of the Board of Trustees; general satisfaction of such approved guidelines
shall be necessary, but not sufficient, for an application to receive
contextual design review approval.
   G.   Authorized Adjustments. When the Contextual Design Review Commission
determines that excellence and innovation will be enhanced in a manner that
contributes to and maintains the character of a neighborhood without adversely
affecting adjacent properties and otherwise advances the purposes of this
Section, the Commission may approve adjustments to the otherwise applicable
provisions of this Code in connection with the approval of any application for
contextual design review in the following respects and no others:
      1.   Chimney projections into side yard setback up to 6’-0” in width and
2’-0” in depth;
      2.   5% increase in the maximum gross floor area limits, but such
increase may only be applied to the principal single family dwelling on the
subject property;
      3.   For lots having a lot width of at least 80 feet, reductions in the
side yard setback for a detached garage to a minimum of five feet; provided
that such approval shall be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in
Subparagraph 3-111G20(b) and 3-111G20(c) of this Code;
      4.   In lieu of the exclusions authorized pursuant to Subparagraph 3-
111G12(a) or 3-111G12(b), exclusions from the calculation of maximum gross
floor area of either: (a) 400 square feet for an attached garage located in the
rear half of the lot, but not for any garage along a corner building front; or
(b) 600 square feet for a detached garage;
      5.   Bay projection into side yard setback up to 8’-0” in width and 2’-0”
in depth;
      6.   An exclusion from the calculation of maximum gross floor area of 400
square feet for attic space in the principal single family dwelling on the
subject property;
      7.   In lieu of the exclusions authorized pursuant to Subparagraph 3-
111G12(e), exclusions from the calculation of maximum gross floor area of
underbay or undereave areas when determined to be a defining element of the
architectural style (i.e. Prairie style);
      8.   An exclusion from the calculation of maximum gross floor area of a
basement when a raised first floor is determined appropriate for the
architectural style of the dwelling;
      9.   For pre-FAR single family dwellings only, reduced interior stair
width, reduced stair height clearance, and/or reduced handrail height for
porches, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this Code or the
Village Code.
   To the extent that the owner of a lot elects to accept adjustments approved
pursuant to contextual design review relating to the maximum gross floor area
under Paragraphs G2, G4, G6, G7, or G8 of this Section
7-505, no variations from the maximum gross floor area may be sought or
obtained for such lot pursuant to this Code. In addition, for any single family
dwelling utilizing adjustments approved pursuant to contextual design review,
the cumulative adjustment to gross floor area allowable pursuant to the
provisions of Paragraph 3-111G12 or Subsection
7-505G of this Code shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the maximum gross
floor area applicable to such lot as calculated pursuant to Subsection
3-111E of this Code.
   H.   Inspections; Plan Modifications; Enforcement and Penalties; Costs.
      1.   Any single family dwelling that incorporates adjustments approved
pursuant to this Section shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Village
Manager or the Manager's designee to ensure conformity with the terms of the
contextual design review approval, including the approved plans and any
conditions of such approval. No modifications to the approved plans, and no
deviations from the conditions of contextual design review approval, shall be
permitted without the approval of the Contextual Design Review Commission;
provided, however, that the Commission may approve minor modifications
recommended for approval by the Village staff as part of a consent agenda and
without a new application.
      2.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development of a
single family dwelling for which a building permit was issued that incorporated
any adjustments authorized pursuant to this Section unless such development has
been completed in strict compliance with the plans approved as part of the
contextual design review, as well as any conditions of such contextual design
review approval.
      3.   When adjustments authorized pursuant to this Section are
incorporated into a single family dwelling development, any deviation from the
plans approved as part of a contextual design review and any failure to comply
with the conditions of contextual design review approval shall be deemed a
violation of this Code, and shall subject the owner to fines in an amount not
to exceed $750 for each day the violation continues. In addition, the Village
may also exercise any other remedy available at law, including specific
performance and injunctive relief.
      4.   Because of the voluntary nature of the contextual design review
process, any applicant who receives contextual design review approval and
thereafter incorporates the adjustments authorized pursuant to this Section
into a single family dwelling development shall be deemed to agree to reimburse
the Village for any costs that the Village might incur (including reasonable
attorneys' fees) in connection with any enforcement action wherein a violation
is found.
PART VI: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
7-601 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND DUTY
   Upon finding the existence of any violation of this Code, the Village
Manager shall have the authority and duty to take or direct all actions
necessary or appropriate to abate and redress such violation.
7-602 CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
   A.   Stop and Cease-and-Desist Orders. Upon finding the existence of any
violation of this Code, the Village Manager shall notify, in writing, the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action necessary to correct it; specifically, the Manager
shall order the discontinuance of any illegal use of land or structures, the
removal of illegal structures, additions, or alterations, and the
discontinuance of illegal work being done.
   B.   Legal Actions. In the enforcement of this Code, the Village Manager
shall exercise all the powers authorized by the statutes of the State of
Illinois and Village codes and ordinances to ensure compliance with, or to
prevent or abate any violation of, the provisions of this Code, and in
particular shall, where necessary or appropriate, institute or cause to be
instituted by the Village Attorney in the name of the Village any and all
actions, legal or equitable, includ-ing appeals, that may be required for the
enforcement of this Code.
   C.   Abatement; Liens. Where authorized by State statute, the Village
Manager may order any work necessary to abate any violation of this Code and
shall assess the cost of such work, including attorneys fees, to the property
owner. Upon the failure of the owner to pay such cost, the Manager shall file a
lien for such costs and for all costs of collection against the property in
question.
   D.   Revocation of Rezonings, Permits, Variations, or Approvals. The
violation of any provision of this Code, or of any permit or approval granted
pursuant to this Code, or of any condition imposed pursuant to this Code shall
be grounds for the revocation of any rezoning, permit, variation, or approval
granted pursuant to this Code and affecting the property involved in the
violation. The Village Manager may recommend and the Board of Trustees may
order such revocation; provided, however, that where the original rezoning,
permit, variation, or approval was granted following a public hearing required
pursuant to this Code, the revocation shall be preceded by a similar public
hearing.
   E.   Fines. In the enforcement of this Code, the Village Manager shall,
where necessary and appropriate, order the issuance and enforcement of
citations to recover fines and penalties for the violation of this Code as
authorized by State law and this Code.
7-603 PENALTIES
   Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply
with, or who shall resist enforcement of, any provision of this Code shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense. Each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
7-604 PRIVATE REMEDIES PRESERVED
   Nothing in this Part VI shall be interpreted to prevent any person entitled
to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the provisions of this
Code from bringing an appropriate action to secure such relief.
ARTICLE VIII
APPLICABILITY, SCOPE, AND CONSTRUCTION
PART I: APPLICABILITY
8-101 GENERAL APPLICABILITY
   A.   Territorial Application. This Code shall apply to all land, structures,
and uses within the corporate limits of the Village.
   B.   General Application. All structures erected hereafter, all uses of land
or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations
of existing structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements and extensions
of, additions to, changes in, and relocations of existing uses occurring
hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Code applicable to the
zoning districts in which such land, structures, or uses are located. Existing
structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this Code shall
be subject to the provisions of Article VI of this Code relating to non-
conformities.
   C.   General Prohibition. No structure, no use of any structure or land, and
no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be
established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in any
manner, except as authorized by the provisions of this Code and except in
compliance with the regulations of this Code. Without limiting the foregoing,
any such activity that would cause any existing structure not to comply with
this Code or that would create any parcel of land that could not be developed
in compliance with this Code shall be prohibited.
   D.   Exempt Uses. The following utility uses are exempt from the provisions
of this Code: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains,
and valves and postal boxes or equipment cabinets not larger than 50 inches in
width, 26 inches in depth, or 63 inches in height (but not including
substations located on or above the surface of the ground), for the
distribution to consumers of telephone, cable television or other
communications, electricity, gas or water, or for the collection of sewage or
surface water. All such uses shall, however, comply with the subdivision and
other applicable ordinances of the Village. Any utility uses or facilities that
are not exempt under this provision or otherwise permitted under the applicable
Zoning District regulations of this Code may be authorized pursuant to a
special use permit. (July, 19, 2012)
   E.   Laws and Ordinances. This Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate,
annul, or otherwise impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or
ordinance or any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant thereto, relating to the use of buildings or premises, now in force
and effect in relation thereto; provided, however, that where the regulations
of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
than such existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules, regulations, or
permits, the regulations of this Code shall govern.
   F.   Easements and Agreements. This Code is not intended to abrogate, annul,
or otherwise interfere with any platted building lines, easements, covenants,
or other private agreements or legal relationships; provided, however, that
where the regulations of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements than such platted building lines, easements,
covenants, or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations
of this Code shall govern.
8-102 APPLICATION TO VARIATIONS AND SPECIAL USES
   A.   Existing Variations and Special Uses. Any variation or special use
permit approval lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this Code, or
any amendment to it, shall be deemed to be and continue valid after such
effective date subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time of
issuance. Any structure or use lawfully authorized by any such variation or
special use permit that could not be so issued after such effective date shall
be subject to the provisions of Article VI of this Code dealing with non-
conformities.
   B   Existing Uses and Structures Newly Requiring Special Use Permit. The
owners of any use or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this
Code, or any amendment to it, that did not, prior to such effective date,
require a special use permit but which, after such effective date, does require
a special use permit, may continue such use or maintain such structure by
securing therefore a certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to the standards
and procedures of 7-301 of this Code. Unless and until such a permit is so
secured, such use shall be subject to the provisions of Article VI of this Code
dealing with non-conformities.
8-103 BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE
   A.   New Code Shall Apply. All work, structures, and uses authorized by
building permits issued prior to the effective date of this Code or any
amendment to it shall not be affected by this Code. Except as provided in
Subsections B and C of this Section, no certificate of zoning compliance shall
be issued following the effective date of this Code or any amendment to this
Code unless the work, structure, or use for which the certificate is sought is
made to comply fully with the applicable provisions of this Code or any such
amendment.
   B   Right To Complete Construction Pursuant To Approved Plans. Nothing in
this Code, or any amendment to it, shall be deemed to require any change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any structure if:
   A building permit for such structure was lawfully and properly issued prior
to the effective date of this Code or any such amendment to it, such permit had
not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date, and construction
pursuant to such permit is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit; or
   A building permit application was on file with the Village Building
Department and complete in all material respects prior to the effective date of
this Code.
   C.   Right To Occupy As Nonconformity. Upon completion pursuant to
Subsection B of this Section, such structure may be occupied by, and a
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for, the use designated on such
permit, subject thereafter, to the extent applicable, to the provisions of
Article VI of this Code relating to non-conformities.
8-104 PENDING APPLICATIONS
   A.   New Code Shall Apply. This Code, and any amendment to it, shall apply
to all applications pending and not yet finally decided on the effective date
thereof to which it would apply if such applications were filed on or after
such effective date; provided, however, that nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to require any change in any proposed plat of subdivision that has been
granted preliminary plat approval by the Board of Trustees prior to such
effective date, and provided further, however, that this Code shall not apply
to any zoning variation application that was on file with the Village and
complete in all material respects prior to such effective date, which zoning
variation application shall be processed in accordance with the standards and
requirements that were in effect on the date such application was filed.
   B.   Duty Of Village Manager. Within 30 days following the effective date of
this Code, or any amendment to it, the Village Manager shall inform each
applicant to which this Code applies that said application is subject to the
provisions of this Code, as amended, and will be processed in accordance
therewith; that the applicant may within 30 days following the mailing of such
notice re-file, without additional fee, its application on the basis of this
Code, as amended; and that if the applicant does not so re-file, its
application may be denied for noncompliance with the provisions of this Code,
as amended.
   C.   Duty Of Applicant. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B of
this Section, it shall be the responsibility of each applicant having an
application pending on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it,
to modify such application in accordance with the terms and provisions of this
Code, as amended, and the failure to do so, whether or not the procedures of
Subsection B have been followed, may result in denial of such application for
failure to comply with this Code, as amended. Any modification or refiling of
an application pending on such effective date in order to comply with the
provisions of this Code, as amended, shall be permitted at any time prior to
the final disposition of such application and shall be permitted without
payment of any additional fee.
   D.   Processing of Pending Applications. Upon the re-filing of any pending
application as herein provided, or upon notification from the applicant that it
will not re-file or modify its application, or upon the expiration of 60 days
following the effective date of this Code or any amendment to it, whichever
occurs first, such pending application shall be processed in accordance with
the terms of this Code, as amended; provided, however, that the application
requirements, hearing requirements, and procedural requirements set forth in
Article VII of this Code shall not apply to any such pending application and
each such application shall be processed in accordance with the application,
hearing, and procedural requirements that were in effect on the date such
application was filed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subsection,
the Village Manager shall have the authority to request additional data,
information, or documentation for pending applications when, in his or her
judgment, such additional data, information, or documentation is necessary or
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of such pending
application.
8-105 REPEAL OF PRIOR PROVISIONS
   The Glencoe Zoning Ordinance, as adopted by ordinance dated May 9, 1921, and
as amended from time to time thereafter prior to the adoption of Ordinance No.
92-33-1899 providing for the comprehensive revision of said Zoning Ordinance by
the adoption of this Code shall be, and they are hereby, repealed in their
entirety. Except as expressly provided in this Code, such repeals shall not
affect or impair any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued,
or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment incurred prior to
the time such repeal takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed, asserted,
enforced, prosecuted, or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if such
repeal had not been effected.
8-106 SEVERABILITY
   A.   Intent as to Severability. The several provisions of this Code shall be
severable in accordance with the following rules:
      1.   Provisions Declared Invalid. If any court of competent jurisdiction
shall adjudge any provision of this Code to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect any other provisions of this Code.
      2.   Applications Declared Invalid. If any court of competent
jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this
Code to a particular parcel of land, a particular structure, or a particular
use, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any
other land, structure, or use.
      3.   Applicable Regulations following Declaration of Invalidity. Whenever
the provisions of this Code are declared invalid in their application to any
particular parcel of land, the Zoning Map provided for in Section
2-104 of this Code shall continue to show such parcel in the zoning district
applicable to it pursuant to this Code unless and until such district is
changed by an amendment adopted by the Board of Trustees pursuant to Section
7-501 of this Code; provided, however, that the parcel in question shall also
be marked with a star or other distinctive marking to direct attention to the
court decree affecting said parcel. The Village Manager shall maintain a file
of any such decrees. The provisions of any such decree shall be deemed to
modify the otherwise applicable provisions of this Code as they apply to said
parcel to the extent provided in said decree but said parcel shall otherwise
remain subject to the provisions of this Code.
8-107 EFFECTIVE DATE AND PUBLICATION
   This Code shall take effect immediately upon, and its effective date shall
be the date of, its passage by a vote of two-thirds of the corporate
authorities then holding office and its approval by the Village President, the
corporate authorities hereby finding that the immediate implementation of this
Code is a matter of urgency. The Village Manager is hereby authorized and
directed to post and publish this Code in pamphlet form and to publish an
appropriate notice of its adoption and availability in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village.
PART II: SCOPE
8-201 PROVISIONS ARE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare, as set forth in the provisions
hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this Code in general and its
various sections in particular. When the provisions of this Code impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or regulation, the
provisions of this Code shall be controlling. When the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
Code, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, or regulation shall be
controlling.
8-202 PROVISIONS ARE CUMULATIVE
   The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to
impose limitations in addition to, all other codes, laws, and ordinances in
existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this Code. The
several provisions of this Code shall also be interpreted to be cumulative of
each other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this Code shall
be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of
such other codes, laws, and ordinances, and with each other, to the end that
all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
8-203 PROVISIONS ARE NOT A CONSENT, LICENSE, OR PERMIT
   The provisions of this Code shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a
consent, license, or permit to use any property or to establish, locate,
construct, or maintain any structure or use, or to carry on any trade,
industry, occupation, or activity.
8-204 UNLAWFUL USES AND STRUCTURES ARE NOT VALIDATED
   This Code shall not be interpreted to validate or make lawful any unlawful
use or structure existing upon the effective date of this Code. Any such
unlawful use or structure shall remain unlawful to the extent that said use or
structure is in conflict with the provisions of this Code.
PART III: USAGE AND DEFINITIONS
8-301 WORD USAGE
Tense and Form. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses and derivative forms.
   A.   Number. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
   B.   Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall
include the masculine and feminine.
   C.   Shall and May. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
   D.   Time. The time within which any act required by this Code is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the
United States Congress or the Illinois General Assembly that is binding upon or
observed by the Village, in which event it shall also be excluded.
   E.   Person. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships,
joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations, and any
other similar entities.
   F.   Used For. The phrase "used for" shall include intended for, designed
for, occupied for, maintained for, and arranged to be used or occupied for
whenever that interpretation would result in the regulation being more
restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
   G.   Village. The word "Village" means the Village of Glencoe, Cook County,
Illinois.
   H.   County. The word "County" means the County of Cook, Illinois.
   I.   Undefined Terms. Any word or phrase not defined in Section 8-302 of
this Code shall have the meaning given in any applicable Village code or
ordinance or, if none, in Webster's New International Dictionary, Second
Edition 1975, except for words or phrases employed to refer to the permitted
uses and special uses of this Code, which shall be interpreted, insofar as
applicable, in accordance with the meaning established in the North American
Industry Classification System. For purposes of determining whether or not a
word or phrase is defined, the fact that such word or phrase is printed in
boldface type shall not be relevant, such typeface being used merely for ease
of reference.
   J.   Captions, Illustrations, and Tables. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption,
illustration, or table, the text shall control.
   K.   Article, Section, and Paragraph Headings. This Code is divided into
articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, and subparagraphs that shall be
numbered according to the following format:
1-101A1(a)(i)(A)(1)
and that shall be referred to in accordance with the following example:
II Article
2-401 Section
2-401B Subsection
2-401B3 Paragraph
2-401B3(a) Subparagraph
2-401B3(a)(ii) Subparagraph
2-401B3(a)(ii)(C) Subparagraph
2-401B3(a)(ii)(C)(2) Subparagraph
(Am. Ord. 2013-01-3331, passed 1-17-13)
8-302 DEFINITIONS
   A.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   ABUT. To touch, to lie immediately next to, to share a common wall or lot
line, or to be separated by only a  street, alley, or drainage course.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE, OR USE. See Section
5-101 of this Code. (Also see 3-111-D + F and 5-101-E, 5-101-F)
   ADJACENT. To lie near, close to, or in the vicinity.
   ADVERTISING SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
   ALTERATION. Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy, or use of a
structure.
   ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. See Subsection
8-302S, "Structural Alteration," of this Section.
   AMENDMENT. See Section
7-501 of this Code.
   ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   ANTENNA. Any structure designed for transmitting signals to a receiving
station or for receiving television, radio, data, or other signals from
satellites or other sources, or both.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any structure used for the principal purpose of
supporting an antenna.
   ANTENNA SURFACE AREA. See Subsection
8-302S, "Surface Area, Antenna," of this Section.
   APPEAL. See Section
7-402 of this Code.
   ARBOR. A structure used as a decorative element or for the display or
support of climbing vines, flowers or other plants as a complementary use to a
residential structure. (Adopted December 15, 2011)
   ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   AWNING. A roof-like covering, temporary in nature, that projects from the
wall of a building.
   AWNING SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   B.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   BASEMENT. A portion of a structure located partly underground having an
average ceiling height above grade of more than 3.5 feet. (See February 25,
1997 ceiling interpretation at end of definition section.)
   BAY OVERHANG. Any bay projecting from the exterior wall of a room.
   BEDROOM. A room used or designed, intended, or furnished to be used for
sleeping.
   BERM. A hill or contour of land that acts as a visual barrier between a lot
and adjacent properties, alleys, or streets.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public lands, railroad rights-of-way, waterways boundary lines of the Village,
or a driveway serving at least three dwelling units having residential uses
below the second floor in the B-1 District pursuant to a special use permit
authorized by Subsection
4-103F of this Code. (4/1995)
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village. See Section
7-102 of this Code.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Glencoe.
   BUFFER; BUFFERING. Any means of protecting a parcel from the visual or
auditory effects of an adjacent use. Buffering may include, but is not limited
to, berming, fencing, landscaping, setbacks, or open spaces.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the
shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels. See Subsection
8-302S, "Structure," of this Code. References to "building" shall in all cases
be deemed to refer to both buildings and structures.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. See Section
5-101 of this Code. (Also see 3-111-D + F and 5-101-E) 
   BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its
accessory buildings, excluding permitted obstructions in required yards.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code of the Village of Glencoe.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. The percentage of a lot's area covered by any building or
structure. See also Subsection
8-302G, "Ground Coverage, Total," of this Section.
   BUILDING, EXISTING. For purposes of calculating the parking requirements in
the business districts, any structure that was erected or for which a building
permit had been properly issued on or before the effective date of this Code. 
   BUILDING OR STRUCTURE FRONT. That exterior wall of a building most nearly
parallel with and adjacent to the front lot line.
   BUILDING OR STRUCTURE FRONT, CORNER. The exterior wall of a building on a
corner lot most nearly parallel with and adjacent to the corner side lot line.
   BUILDING OR STRUCTURE, SIDE. For purposes of applying the setback plane
height restrictions in Paragraph 3-111G14 of this Code, the exterior wall of a
building most nearly parallel with and adjacent to an interior side lot line on
a lot.   
   BUILDING HEIGHT. See Subsection
8-302H, "Height," of this Section.
   BUILDING LINE. A line between which line and any street line of a district,
lot, tract, or parcel of land, no buildings or parts of buildings may be
erected, altered, or maintained.
   BUILDING, NEW. For purposes of calculating the parking requirements in the
business districts, any structure erected after the effective date of this Code
or any structure that is reconstructed after being damaged or destroyed by any
means to the extent of more than 50 percent of the cost of replacement of such
structure new.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use or
uses of the lot on which said building is situated.
   BULK AND SPACE REQUIREMENTS. The regulations of this Code pertaining to the
permissible or required height, area, floor area, minimum lot area and
dimensions, building coverage, ground coverage, and usable open space
applicable to uses and structures.
   BULLETIN BOARD SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any district whose designation begins with the letter
"B," as set forth in Section
2-101 of this Code.
   BUSINESS SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   BUSINESS USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a business district.
   C.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the
wall of a building.
   CELLAR. A portion of a structure located partly underground having an
average ceiling height above grade of not more than 3.5 feet.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. See Section
7-302 of this Code.
   CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. See Section
7-301 of this Code.
   CIRCULATION AISLE. The means of access to a parking space for a motor
vehicle.
   CIVIC OR CIVIC USE OR PURPOSE. An undertaking in which the citizens of a
community, by their cooperative action and as their central goal, seek to
promote the general welfare and common good of the community; in other words, a
community movement to accomplish community goals.
   CIVIC EVENT SIGN. See Subsection
5-105D of this Code.
   CLASSIFICATION OR ZONING CLASSIFICATION. The district into which a parcel of
land is placed and the body of regulations to which it is subjected by this
Code and the Zoning Map.
   CODE. See Subsection
8-302Z, "Zoning Code," of this Section.
   COLLEGE. A post-secondary school furnishing academic courses and granting
academic degrees, with the requirement for admission being a high school
diploma or equivalent academic training, but having no rooms for housing or
sleeping purposes and not including any business, professional, vocational,
correspondence, dancing, or art school.
   CO-LOCATION. The use of a single antenna support structure and/or site by
more than one provider of personal wireless services. (3/1999)
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building the principal use of which is a commercial
use.
   COMMERCIAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a business district.
   COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING. A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open area, or from other buildings or structures, by a permanent roof
and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows or doors normally
provided for the accommodation of persons, goods or vehicles. However, a
parking structure that has less than 50 percent of its outer wall space open
and that does not allow any parked vehicle within said structure to be seen
from the exterior thereof shall be considered a completely enclosed building.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. See Paragraph 7-105D1 of this Code.
   CORNER BUILDING FRONT. See Subsection
8-302B, "Building or Structure Front, Corner," of this Section.
   CORNER LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Corner," of this Section.
   COURT, INNER. An open unoccupied space surrounded on all sides by walls or
by walls and a lot line or lines.
   COURT, LENGTH OF OUTER. The mean horizontal distance between the open and
closed ends of the outer court.
   COURT, OUTER. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
extending to and opening upon a street, alley, or yard.
   COURT YARD. An open unoccupied space the perimeter of which is surrounded on
85 percent or more of its perimeter by the walls of a dwelling on the same lot.
   COVERED ENTRY. (See 3-111-G-20)
   CURB LEVEL. The sidewalk height at the mid-point of a front lot line. Where
no sidewalk exists, the elevation of the crown of the street at the midpoint of
the front lot line shall be deemed to be the curb level.
   D.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   DECK. A structure attached to or adjacent to any dwelling unit exceeding
eight inches above grade that is designed and intended for the support of
persons; and that has no part constructed above any story of such dwelling,
excluding any cellar or basement.
   DEDICATION. The designation of land for a public use by the owner thereof.
   DEPTH OF LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Depth," of this Section.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change, other than maintenance of existing
structures, paved areas, or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate,
including without limitation the construction or installation of new, or
enlargement of existing, structures, streets, or utilities; dredging, filling,
drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations; and open storage
of materials.
   DISPLAY OR SURFACE FACE. The area made available by a sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the sign's message.
   DISTANCE OF SIGN PROJECTION. The distance from the exterior wall surface of
a building to the sign element farthest distant from such surface.
   DISTRICT OR DISTRICT, ZONING. See Subsection
8-302Z, "Zoning District," of this Section.
   DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE. A line on the Zoning Map separating one district
from another. See also Subsection
2-103C of this Code.
   DISTRICT BOUNDARY LOT. Any lot or parcel of land, any lot line of which
coincides with a district boundary line or which is contiguous to any public or
private right-of-way containing a district boundary line.
   DOMESTIC SERVANT. A person employed primarily to perform personal care,
cooking, cleaning, maintenance, or other household services for a dwelling and
its occupants.
   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY. An establishment or facility that by
design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages
or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product that may be used
or consumed in a motor vehicle on or off the  premises or to be entertained
while remaining in a motor  vehicle.
   DRIVE-IN EATING PLACE. See Subsection
8-302E, "Eating Place, Drive-In," of this Section.
   DRIVEWAY. A private access way that provides direct access from a street to
not more than two lots or two principal buildings or uses.
   DWELLING. Any structure or portion thereof designed or used only for
habitation by one or more families; not including the use of building or
premises for the conduct of any business, commercial, or manufacturing purpose,
except as expressly provided in this Code.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A detached dwelling having accommodations for and
occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A dwelling providing two or more dwelling units
for residential use.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming
a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation by one family.
   DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one
habitable room together with cooking and sanitation facilities.
   E.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   EASEMENT, PUBLIC. See Subsection
8-302P, "Public Easement," of this Section.
   EATING PLACE. An establishment where food is available to the general public
primarily for consumption within a  structure on the premises, where at least
50 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment is devoted to patron
seating, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is
neither encouraged nor permitted.
   EATING PLACE, DRIVE-IN. A drive-in establishment, as defined in Subsection
8-302D, "Drive-In Establishment or Facility," of this Section, where food is
prepared and served for consumption in motor vehicles.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. See Section
8-107 of this Code.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV). A vehicle that stores electric energy to be used for
propulsion.
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION (EVCS) : Equipment designed to safely
supply power from a facility or structure to EVs. EVCSs include hard-wired
EVCSs and EVCSs that plug into standard wall outlets, and may also integrate
communication, metering, GPS and other features that assist EV drivers and the
host facility.
   ELEMENTARY SCHOOL. A public or private school furnishing academic courses
for kindergarten through grade 8, or any of such grades, but having no rooms
used for housing or sleeping purposes.
   EMERGENCY GENERATOR : A permanently-installed electromechanical machine
connected to the natural gas utility and used to supplement existing
electricity supply to a residential structure in the event of a power failure
that converts mechanical energy into electrical energy and generates electrical
power either as an alternating current, an alternator, or as a direct current,
a dynamo. (Am. Ord. 2012-01-3302, passed 1-19-2012)
   ENLARGEMENT. An addition to the floor area of, or any other increase in the
size of, any existing structure.
   EXTENDED WINDOW WELL. Either:
      (1)   Any window well (as provided in the Village’s Building Code)
directly serving a portion of a basement or cellar in a single family dwelling
that has any dimension (other than depth) in excess of 3.5 feet as measured
from the interior of such window well; or
      (2)   Any exterior access directly serving a portion of a basement or
cellar in a single family dwelling that projects more than 3.5 feet from an
exterior wall of the basement or cellar that it serves; or
      (3)   Any window well or exterior access directly serving a portion of a
cellar in a single family dwelling that does not have at least one story
directly above it, provided that there are at least two other such window wells
and/or accesses having equivalent or smaller dimensions serving a portion of
such cellar. (Amended 5/18/2006)
   EXTENSION. An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use within an existing structure or an increase in that portion of a
tract of land occupied by an existing use.
   EXTERIOR WALL. Any wall of a building or structure one side of which is
exposed to the outdoors.
   F.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   FAMILY. Any of the following combinations of persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit, together with domestic servants: (1) one or more
persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship; or (2) two
groups of persons where all persons in each group are related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, or guardianship; or (3) not more than four persons
not so related. A family in either (1) or (2) above may include, in addition to
its basic members, a total of not more than two boarders or long-term guests.
For the purposes of this definition, "living together as a single housekeeping
unit" shall be deemed to mean that all members of the household share common
meals, all members have the equal right to use, in common with each other, the
areas customarily considered to be common area in a dwelling, and all members
share customary household obligations in a manner typical of a traditional
nuclear family.
   FENCE. A man-made barrier structure used as a boundary or as a means of
protection, confinement, or screening.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of
the buildings, on a lot measured from the exterior face of exterior walls of
each such building. Gross floor area shall include areas such as basement
floors (but not cellar floors , except that one-half of the gross horizontal
area of any portion of a cellar and any accompanying extended window well in a
single family dwelling that does not have at least one story directly above
such portion of the cellar shall be included in gross floor area ); elevator
shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor spaces, and shafts used for
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment; penthouses, attic floors,
except where the clear ceiling height is less than seven feet; interior
balconies and mezzanines; atria; covered porches; bay overhangs; under bays;
under eaves; sun decks; courtyards; decks having either a floor at least 3.5
feet above  adjacent ground  or protective, decorative, or ornamental
appurtenances (such as hand railings, benches, and the like)  higher than  3.5
feet above the deck floor; and floor space used for accessory uses. Gross floor
area shall include floor area devoted to parking structures. Where any space
has a floor to ceiling height of more than 14 feet, each 14 feet of height or
fraction thereof shall be treated as a separate floor. For purposes of this
definition, the clear ceiling height of an attic shall be measured from the top
of the ceiling joists for the floor below to the underside of the roof rafters,
notwithstanding any cross ties, trusses, or other building components that may
interrupt such space.
   FOOT CANDLE. The illumination of a surface one foot distant from a source of
one candle power, equal to one lumen per square foot.
   FRONT LOT LINE. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Line, Front," of this Section.
   FRONT OF BUILDING. See Subsection
8-302B, "Building or Structure Front," of this Section.
   FRONT YARD. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard, Front," of this Section.
   FRONT YARD LINE. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard Line, Front," of this Section.
   FRONTAGE. All of the property fronting on one side of a street, measured
along such street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another
intersecting or intercepting street, a right-of-way in excess of 30 feet, an
end of a dead-end street, or a Village boundary.
   FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT. All of the property of a zoning lot fronting on a
street, measured between side or corner side lot lines.
   G.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   GARAGE OR GARAGE, PARKING. A structure, or part thereof, designed or used
for the parking and storage of vehicles at one or more levels. (Also see 3-111-
G-20) 
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure, or
other place used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of any motor
vehicle fuels or oil having pumps and storage tanks, located wholly within the
lot lines; provided, however, that when such dispensing, sale, or offering for
sale of such fuels or oil is incidental to the principal use of a garage, the
premises shall be classified as a garage.
   GLARE, DIRECT. Light visible directly from the source thereof.
   GOLF COURSE PROTECTIVE STRUCTURE . Netting, fencing, or similar material,
along with support structures, used to contain golf balls at golf courses or
driving ranges.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D1 of this Code.
   GRADE. The curb level of a zoning lot; provided that, where a building is
located on a natural terrace or slope, the grade shall be established by the
average ground level at the building front.
   GRADING. Reshaping natural land contours using natural land materials.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. See Subsection
8-302F, "Floor Area, Gross," of this Section.
   GROUND COVERAGE, TOTAL. That proportion of the area of a lot that is or may
be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and by residential
recreational facilities. In addition, for buildings other than single family
dwellings, total ground coverage shall include 50 percent of the area required
for parking spaces.
   GROUND SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   H.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   HALF STORY (deleted August 17, 2000)
   HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, or to the deck line for mansard roofs, or to the mean
height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, or to the
highest point of a structure without a  roof. When a parapet wall, a penthouse,
or any similar structure is located on the roof of a building, height shall be
measured to the highest point of said structure if any part of it extends above
the height as measured pursuant to the first sentence of this definition.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, mechanical equipment and any wall or similar
structure designed exclusively for the purpose of screening such mechanical
equipment from view shall not be considered in determining the height of a
building. Chimneys shall not be considered in determining the height of a
building.
   HEIGHT OF COURT OR YARD. The vertical distance from the lowest level of such
court or yard to the highest point of any bounding wall.
   HIGHER CLASSIFICATION. A district or use subject to greater restrictions.
   HOLIDAY DECORATIONS. See Subsection
5-105D1 of this Code.
   HOME OCCUPATION. See Section
5-103 of this Code.
   HOST LOT. A lot that: (i) is located in a Residential District; (ii) is
vacant or developed for a lawful residential use or purpose; (iii) abuts a lot
used for a place of public worship; and (iv) is or will be, subject to issuance
of a special use permit, encumbered by an easement to allow parking for the
abutting place of worship on a portion of such lot. (May 28, 1998)
   HOUSING FOR SENIOR CITIZENS AND HANDICAPPED PERSONS. Housing, excluding
nursing homes, which (1) is in a development, maintained and operated for
exclusive occupancy of individual units therein by (a) persons who are at least
62 years of age; (b) persons who are under a disability or handicap as
determined by the regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development; or (c) two or more persons, living together in a single unit as a
family, one of whom meets the occupancy criteria as stated in (a) or (b);
provided, however, that not more than one unit in such a development may be
occupied by the family of a manager, janitor, or similar person without regard
to such occupancy criteria; and (2) complies with such special building or
construction standards for such housing as the Board of Trustees may from time
to time approve by ordinance or resolution.
   I.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE. Any hard surfaced, man-made area on a lot that does not
readily absorb or retain storm water or runoff, including but not limited to
buildings and structures, parking areas, parking lots, driveways, sidewalks,
and paved recreational facilities. (Added Feb 6, 2003)
   IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY, PUBLIC. A sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage
appurtenance, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, planting strip, or other
facility for which the Village or any other government agency may assume
maintenance or operational responsibility.
   INNER COURT. See Subsection
8-302C, "Court, Inner," of this Code.
   INTERIOR SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105F7 of this Code.
   INTERPRETATION. See Sections
7-401 and
8-301 of this Code.
   INTERIOR LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Interior," of this Section.
   J.   When used in this Code, the following term shall have the meaning
herein ascribed to it, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   JOINT-IDENTIFICATION SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   K.   [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
   L.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   LATTICEWORK. See Subsection
8-302-T, “Tower”, of this section. (3/1999)
   LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. See Subsection
8-302N, "Nonconforming Lot of Record, Legal," of this Section.
   LESS RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. See Section
2-102 of this Code.
   LINEAR BLOCK. That property abutting on one side of a street, railroad
right-of-way, or other boundary of a block.
   LINEAR FRONTAGE. The length of the front lot line.
   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. A public performance intended to be diverting or
engaging  with or without the use of instrumental, electronic, or mechanical
accompaniment.
   LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot of Record" and "Lot, Zoning," of this Section. Unless the context
indicates otherwise, all references in this Code to a "lot" shall be deemed to
mean a "zoning lot."
   LOT AREA. The total land and water area included within lot lines,
excluding, however, land areas subject to easements for public or private
access or egress.
   LOT AREA PER UNIT. That portion of the total lot area allocated for each
dwelling unit located on a lot.
   LOT, AVERAGE WIDTH OF. The quotient resulting from the division of the total
lot area in square feet by the maximum depth of the lot in feet.
   LOT, BUILDABLE AREA OF A. That portion of a lot bounded by the required
yards.
   LOT, BUILDABLE WIDTH OF A. The width of a lot remaining as buildable after
side yards and corner side yards are provided.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets or rights-of-way at
their intersection or junction or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving
street or right-of-way, any two adjacent chords of which form an interior angle
not exceeding 120 degrees.
   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT, MAXIMUM DEPTH OF. The distance between the front base line of the lot
and the farthest point of the lot therefrom, measured along a line
perpendicular to the front base line, or its extension, and passing through the
farthest point therefrom of the lot. The front base line of a lot shall be a
line passing through the two termini of the front lot line.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding a lot; provided, however, that when a
lot includes land subject to a public right-of-way easement for street
purposes, the line separating such right-of-way from the rest of the lot shall
be deemed to be the lot line.
   LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE. Any street line of a corner lot other than its front
lot line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot abutting upon only one
street, the line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a through
lot, each line separating  such lot from a street shall be considered a front
lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the shorter lot line separating such lot
from a street shall be considered to be the front lot line. In no case shall a
front lot line be less than 20 feet in length.
   LOT LINE, REAR. That lot line that is parallel to and most distant from the
front lot line of the lot.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front, corner-side, or rear lot
line.
   LOT, MINIMUM TOTAL AREA OF. The smallest lot on which a particular use or
structure may be located in a particular district.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel
of land separately described in a recorded deed.
   LOT OF RECORD, LEGAL NONCONFORMING. See Subsection
8-302N, "Nonconforming Lot of Record, Legal," of this Section.
   LOT OF RECORD, NONCONFORMING. See Subsection
8-302N, "Nonconforming Lot of Record," of this Section.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontages on two non-intersecting streets or
rights-of-way.
   LOT, WIDTH OF. The shortest distance between side lot lines measured by a
line passing through the center point of the required front yard line.
   LOT, ZONING OR LOT. A parcel of land, exclusive of its  right-of-way area,
consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts thereof, under single
control or fee title ownership, located entirely within a block and occupied
by, or designated by its owner or developer at the time of filing for any
zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be developed for, a principal
building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such
open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged, or required under this
Code, to be used with such building or use. A lot may be land so recorded on
the records of the County Recorder of Deeds, but it may include parts of or a
combination of such lots when adjacent to one another, provided such ground is
used for one main building or use. Each lot shall, in addition to meeting the
other requirements of this  Code, be of a shape and size such that an area
equal to 75 percent of the minimum lot area enclosed within rectangular borders
(i.e., bounded by two sets of parallel lines intersecting at right angles) will
be fully enclosed by the boundaries of such lot. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
sale of individual lots of record underlying individual dwelling units in a
 multi-family dwelling, following the issuance of a  Certificate of Occupancy
for such dwelling, shall not prevent treatment of the tract of land underlying
such  dwelling as a zoning lot, and all applicable bulk, space, and yard
requirements shall be applied with respect to such dwelling and such zoning lot
rather than with respect to individually-owned dwelling units and  lots of
record.
   M   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   MARQUEE. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature that projects from the
wall of a building.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis
Dispensaries with usable medical cannabis in accordance and full compliance
with the state Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (P.A.
98-0122).
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY . A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients in
accordance and full compliance with the state Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act (P.A. 98-0122).
   MEMORIAL SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D1 of this Code.
   MINIMUM LOT AREA. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Minimum Total Area Of," of this Section.
   MONOPOLE. See Subsection
8-302T, “Tower,” of this section. (3/1999)
   MORE RESTRICTIVE DISTRICT. See Section
2-102 of this Code.
   MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. See Subsection
8-302D, "Dwelling, Multiple Family," of this Section.
   N.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   NAICS. The North American Industry Classification System. See post this
subsection.
   NAMEPLATE SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A lot of record that does not comply with the
lot requirements for any use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD, LEGAL. A nonconforming lot of record that:
      (1)   was created by a plat or deed recorded at a time when, and came
into ownership separate from adjoining tracts of land at a time when, the
creation of a lot of such size, shape, depth, and width at such location would
not have been prohibited by any ordinance or other regulation; and
      (2)   has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining
tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such a
lot has been prohibited by any applicable ordinance or other regulation.
   A lot shall not be deemed to have been owned separately and individually
from adjoining tracts of land unless the owner of such lot did not, directly or
indirectly, have legal title to or enjoy the beneficial interest in the tract
or tracts contiguous thereto at any relevant time.
   A legal nonconforming lot of record cannot be created by the sale or
transfer of property that results in the creation of a nonconforming lot of
record or that increases the degree of nonconformity of any existing
nonconforming lot of record.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign that: (1) on the effective date of this Code
was lawfully maintained and had been lawfully erected in accordance with the
provisions of all applicable prior sign, zoning, and other ordinances but does
not conform to the limitations and standards established by this Code in the
zoning district in which the sign is located; or (2) on or after the effective
date of this Code was lawfully erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this  Code but, by reason of further amendment to this Code after
the effective date hereof, does not conform to the limitations as established
by this Code in the zoning district in which the sign is located.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any building or structure, other than a sign,
lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it
rendering such  building or structure nonconforming, that:
         (a)   does not comply with all of the regulations of this Code, or any
such amendment thereto, governing parking, loading, or bulk and space
requirements for the zoning district in which such building or structure is
located; or
         (b)   is located on a lot that does not, or is so located on a lot as
not to, comply with the  area, dimension, yard, or setback requirements for the
zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or
         (c)   both (a) and (b); except
         (d)   any building containing more than one dwelling unit in addition
to the number permitted by the district regulations in the district where it is
located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use rather than a nonconforming
structure.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or
structure, other than a sign, on the effective date of this Code, or any
amendment to it  rendering such use nonconforming, that does not comply with
all of the regulations of this Code, or any such amendment hereto, governing
use for the zoning district in which such land, building, or structure is
located.
   NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS). The 2012 edition of
the North American Industry Classification System prepared by the Office of
Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President of the United States,
available from the National Technical Information Service of the United States
Department of Commerce.
   O.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   OPEN AIR MARKET. A temporary retail marketplace having no permanent
structures and selling no goods or wares except the following:
         (i)   fresh (never having been frozen or packaged) dairy goods,
fruits, vegetables, juices, flowers, plants, herbs, and spices produced or
grown by the vendor; and
         (ii)   baked goods made by the vendor.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, or
renting merchandise out-of-doors.
   OPEN SPACE AND USABLE OPEN SPACE. An area or areas of a lot, including
required yards, that is:
         (a)   open and unobstructed from ground to sky except by facilities
specifically designed, arranged, and intended for use in conjunction with
passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation; and
         (b)   located at least five feet from any structure except structures
specifically designed, arranged, and intended for use in conjunction with
passive or active outdoor recreation or relaxation; and
         (c)   landscaped, maintained, or otherwise treated to create a setting
appropriate to recreation or relaxation; and
         (d)   accessible and usable by the residents of all  dwellings, or the
users of all non-residential  buildings, it is intended or required to serve.
   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Open space held in private ownership, regularly
available for use by the occupants of more than one dwelling or the users of
more than one non-residential building.
   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Open space held in private ownership, the use of which
is normally limited to the occupants of one dwelling or the users of one non-
residential building.
   OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC. Open space dedicated to or owned by any government or
governmental agency or authority.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The placing, depositing, or maintaining for future use of
materials, goods, supplies, equipment, or other items other than in a
completely enclosed building.
   OUTER COURT. See Subsection
8-302C, "Court, Outer," of this Section.
   OWNER. Includes the holder of legal title as well as holders of any
equitable interest, such as trust beneficiaries, contract purchasers, option
holders, lessees under leases having an unexpired term of at least 10 years,
and the like.
   P.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   PARKING AREA. Any land area, not located in a garage, designed and used for
the parking of not more than four vehicles.
   PARKING GARAGE OR STRUCTURE. See Subsection
8-302G, "Garage, Parking," of this Section.
   PARKING LOT. Any land area designed or used for the parking, and associated
circulation, of more than four vehicles.
   PARK SITE: A lot owned or controlled by the Glencoe Park District or
Winnetka Park District that meets the requirements of Section
3-111G17 and is used for public park purposes. (Adopted March 11, 1999)
   PARKING SPACE. An area for the parking of a vehicle.(for R-D also see ground
coverage, total)
   PATIO. See Subsection
8-302T, "Terrace," of this Section.
   PERGOLA. A structure attached to a residential structure at ground level
usually consisting of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of girders
and cross rafters. (Adopted December 15, 2011)
   PERIMETER LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE. A landscaped open space intended to enhance
the appearance of, or screen from view, parking lots and other outdoor
aesthetically unpleasant uses or areas or to create a transition between
incompatible uses by means of appropriate buffering, landscaping, or screening
primarily along lot lines.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile telecommunications services,
unlicensed wireless telecommunications services, and common carrier wireless
telecommunications exchange access services. (3/1999)
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES ANTENNA. An antenna used in connection with the
provision of personal wireless services. A personal wireless services antenna
may be an array of not more than 12 interrelated “whip” (omnidirectional) or
“panel” (unidirectional) antennae. (3/1999)
   PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the Village of Glencoe. See Section
2-119 of the Glencoe Village Code.
   POLE SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   POLITICAL SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   PORCH. A roofed, open-air area of a building with no exterior wall
(including windows, screens, shades, curtains, etc.) over 3.5 feet above the
floor of such area, including loggias, pergolas, and the like. (Also see Sec 3-
111-G-20)
   PORTABLE SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   PRE-FAR SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING A single family dwelling for which at least
50% of its existing gross floor area was constructed before 6 September 1990.
(17 August 2000)
   PREKINDERGARTEN SCHOOL. A public or private school furnishing programs for
pupils before kindergarten designed to foster mental skills and social
development through constructive play and group activities, but having no rooms
used for housing or sleeping purposes.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, together with the buildings and
structures thereon.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A structure or building on a zoning lot
intended to be utilized for a principal use and to which any other structure on
such lot must be accessory.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The use of a zoning lot, whether a permitted or specially
permitted use, designated by the owner of such lot as the primary or main use
of such lot and to which any other use on such lot must be accessory.
   PRIVATE GOLF CLUB. A not-for-profit golf club whose golf and other
recreational, concession, and necessary service facilities are operated under
the exclusive control of the club for the sole use and benefit of its members
and guests.
   PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY. See Subsection
8-302R, "Right-Of-Way, Private," of this Section.
   PRIVATE SALE SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D1 of this Code.
   PRIVATE WARNING SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D1 of this Code.
   PROJECTING SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D2 of this Code.
   PROPERTY LINE. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Line," of this Section.
   PUBLIC EASEMENT. A space other than a street or alley permanently reserved
as the principal means of access to abutting property and as a location for
public utilities.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public must be
permitted to give testimony, evidence, or opinions relevant to the subject
matter.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT OR FACILITY. See Subsection
8-302I, "Improvement or Facility, Public," of this Section.
   PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public, as opposed
to members of the committee, board, or commission and as opposed to the
applicant for relief, have no right (but may be given the opportunity) to offer
testimony, evidence, or opinions.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person under public regulation furnishing franchised
services such as cable television, electricity, gas, telephone, water, or
sewage service.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC WAY. See Subsection
8-302R, "Right-Of-Way, Public," of this Section.
   Q.   [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
   R.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   RAILROAD PASSENGER STATION. A building serving railway patrons and excluding
all business, wholesale, and industrial uses except the sale of tickets,
newspapers and magazines, express and baggage handling services, porter
services, telephone and telegraph services, and vending machines, all of which
permitted sales and services shall be carried on within the building or, in the
case of telephone services, within 150 feet of any passenger station building.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. See Paragraph
5-105D1 of this Code.
   REAR LOT LINE. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Line, Rear," of this Section.
   REAR YARD. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard, Rear," of this Section.
   REAR YARD LINE. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard Line, Rear," of this Section.
   RECREATIONAL DEVICE. A structure or outdoor facility not attached to the
principal structure on a lot and intended principally for recreational use or
enjoyment, including, but not limited to, the following: a trampoline; a
sandbox; a freestanding basketball standard; garden furniture; a dog house; and
a play house, swing set, platform, climbing bars, or similar structure. Except
for freestanding basketball standards, no such structure or outdoor facility
exceeding a height of five feet above grade shall be deemed a "recreational
device."
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, RESIDENTIAL. An area, court, pool, or facility, other
than a recreational device, intended for active recreational or athletic use
such as game courts, swimming pools, or ball fields established as an accessory
use to a dwelling.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle or boat originally designed for living
quarters, recreation, or human habitation and not used as a commercial vehicle,
including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Boat. Any vessel used for water travel. A boat mounted on a
trailer shall be considered one vehicle.
         (b)   Camper Trailer. A folding or collapsible vehicle without its own
motive power, designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping,
recreation or vacation use;
         (c)   Motorized Home. A temporary dwelling designed and constructed
for travel, camping, recreational, or vacation uses as an integral part of a
self--propelled vehicle.
         (d)   Off-The-Road-Vehicle. A vehicle intended principally for
recreational use off of roads where state vehicle licenses are required, such
as a dune buggy, go-cart, or snowmobile.
         (e)   Racing Car or Cycle. A vehicle intended to be used in racing
competition, such as a race car, stock car, or racing cycle.
         (f)   Travel Trailer. A vehicle without its own motive power, designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreational, or
vacation uses.
         (g)   Truck Camper. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a
pickup or truck chassis and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for
travel, camping, recreational, or vacation uses. When mounted on a truck, such
a structure and the truck shall together be considered one vehicle.
         (h)   Van. A general term applied to a non-commercial motor vehicle
licensed by the State of Illinois as a Recreational Vehicle.
         (i)   Vehicle Trailer. A vehicle without its own motive power that is
designed to transport another vehicle, such as a boat, motorcycle or snowmobile
for recre-ational or vacation use and that is eligible to be licensed or
registered and insured for highway use. A vehicle trailer with another vehicle
mounted on it shall be considered one vehicle.
   RELIGIOUS CONGREGATION. A use intended for the purpose of religious exercise
(including prayer, study, assembly, and community service.) A religious
congregation shall include without limitation churches, temples, synagogues,
and mosques. (Amended 8/2004)
   REQUIRED YARD. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard, Required," of this Section.
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A structure containing one or more dwelling units.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district the designation of which begins with the
letter "R" as set forth in Section
2-101 of this Code.
   RESIDENTIAL USE OR PURPOSE. Any use permitted in a residential district.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land used or designated for  use in whole or in
part for vehicular or pedestrian access or passage serving three or more lots.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The division line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land
and a contiguous right-of-way, including in such rights-of-way all property
dedicated for right-of-way purposes or subject to public or private easements
therefore.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE. A right-of-way that has not been dedicated to or
accepted by any government agency.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A right-of-way that has been dedicated to and accepted
by, or otherwise acquired by, a government agency.
   ROOF SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   S.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   SCREEN; SCREENING. A structure erected or vegetation planted that
substantially conceals an area from view at all times during the year.
   SECONDARY SCHOOL. A public or private school furnishing academic courses for
grades 9 through 12, but having no rooms used for housing or sleeping purposes.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a specified lot line,
measuring along a straight line and at a right angle to such lot line, and the
nearest point of a building or structure.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A grouping of three or more business establishments on a
single zoning lot together with an on-premises parking lot designed and
intended for the joint and common use of all business establishments on the
zoning lot.
   SIC. The Standard Industrial Classification Manual. See post this
Subsection.
   SIDE LOT LINE. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Line, Side," of this Section.
   SIDE YARD. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard, Side," of this Section.
   SIDE YARD LINE. See Subsection
8-302Y, "Yard Line, Side," of this Section.
   SIGN. Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means including letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, or projected images; whether or not
illuminated. For definitions of particular, functional and structural types of
signs, see Subsection
5-105D of this Code.
   SIGN WITH BACKING. Any sign that is displayed upon, against, or through any
material or color surface or backing that forms an integral part of such
display and differentiates the total display from the background against which
it is placed.
   SIGN WITHOUT BACKING. Any sign other than a sign with backing.
   SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. See Subsection
8-302D, "Dwelling, Single Family," of this Section.
   SITE PLAN. A graphic rendering of a proposed use, construction, or
development.
   SPECIAL USE. A use that has some special impact or uniqueness that requires
careful review of its location, design, configuration, and impact. See Section
7-502 of this Code.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. See Section
7-502 of this Code.
   STACKING SPACE. An area, measuring at least eight feet in width and 20 feet
in length, for the temporary storage of a vehicle awaiting access to a drive-in
establishment or facility.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION MANUAL (SIC). The 1987 edition of the
publication prepared by the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office
of the President of the United States, available from the Superintendent of
Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C.
   STORAGE, OUTDOOR. See Subsection
8-3020, "Outdoor Storage" of this Section.
   STORY. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, that portion
of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it; provided, however, that for purposes of
Subparagraphs
3-111-A-1(b) and
4-110-A-1(b), no floor used exclusively for parking purposes shall be counted
as a story. The floor of a story may split levels provided that there is not
more than four feet difference in elevation between the different levels of the
floor. When the uppermost story of a structure has a ceiling height of seven
feet or more over a floor area that is less than one-third of the floor area of
the next lower story, then said uppermost story shall not be counted as a
story; and when the uppermost story of a structure has a ceiling height of
seven feet or more over a floor area that is one-third or more but less than
one-half of the floor area of the next lower story, then said uppermost story
shall be counted as a half story. A basement shall be counted as a half story.
A cellar shall not be counted as a story. Any area in which the distance from
one floor to the floor or ceiling above it is more than 14 feet shall be deemed
to consist of one story for each 14 feet of height or fraction thereof. (See
February 25, 1997 ceiling interpretation at end of definition section and
August 20, 1996 interpretation on story.)
   STREET. The paved portion of a public or private right-of-way, other than a
driveway, that affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property.
   STREET LINE. The right-of-way line. See Subsection
8-302R.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on the ground, or anything attached to
something having a permanent location on or in the ground, but not including
paving or surfacing less than eight inches above the ground. "Structure" shall
in all cases be deemed to refer to both structures and buildings.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. See Section
5-101 of this Code.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, that would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations, or that would alter the
dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls of a structure, or
that would increase the gross floor area of a structure.
   STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING. See Subsection
8-302N, "Nonconforming Structure," of this Section.
   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. See Subsection
8-302P, "Principal Structure," of this Section.
   SUN DECK. An area without roof or any other overhead structure or element
located above any story of a building, which area has a fence, wall, or rail
exceeding 42 inches in height above its floor.
   SURFACE AREA, ANTENNA. An area determined by adding together the actual
surface area of each solid element or part of an antenna and its support
structure, plus all air spaces that are fully bounded by such solid elements.
   T.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   TEMPORARY SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   TEMPORARY USES. See Section
5-102 of this Code.
   TERRACE. A level plane or surfaced patio, adjacent to a principal building
at or within eight inches of grade and not covered by any permanent structure.
   THROUGH LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Through," of this Section.
   TOWER. An antenna support structure serving personal wireless services
antennae that exceed twelve (12) feet in height and are not attached to a
building or another structure. Towers are designed either as:
   Latticework: A network of crossed metal braces, forming a tower which is
usually triangular or square in cross-section.
   Monopole: A single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a
foundation. (3/1999)
   TOWNHOME. A dwelling unit in a multiple family dwelling that is separated
from other dwelling units in the multiple family dwelling only by one or more
unpierced common walls extending from ground to roof. (Added Feb 6, 2003)
   U.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   UNDERBAY. Any area not within the exterior walls of a building but lying
directly beneath other gross floor area of a building, provided that: (i) such
other gross floor area extends horizontally beyond the foundation of the
building by more than 30 inches; and (ii) the clear ceiling height from the
floor or grade of such area to the underside of such other gross floor area is
at least seven (7) feet.
   UNDEREAVE. Any area not within the exterior walls of a building but lying
directly beneath eaves of such building, provided that: (i) the undereave shall
only include the area beneath that portion of an eave extending more than 30
inches beyond the exterior wall of such building; and (ii) the clear ceiling
height from the floor or grade of such area to the underside of such eave is at
least seven (7) feet.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. See Subsection
8-302O, "Open Space and Usable Open Space," of this Section.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which a structure or land is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. See Section
5-101 of this Code.
   USE INTERPRETATION. An interpretation of the permitted use or special use
lists established by this Code for the purpose of allowing a use not expressly
mentioned in those lists to be established in a zoning district found to be
appropriate for such use by application of the standards established in Section
7-401 of this Code.
   USE, NONCONFORMING. See Subsection
8-302N, "Nonconforming Use," of this Section.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use that appears on the permitted use list of a particular
zoning district.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. See Subsection
8-302P, "Principal Use," of this Section.
   USE, SPECIAL. A use that appears on the special use list in a particular
district.
   USE, TEMPORARY. See Section
5-102 of this Code.
   V.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   VACANT. Not developed with any building, structure, or paving or surfacing
of the ground.
   VARIATION. See Section
7-403 of this Code.
   VEHICLE. Any device for carrying passengers, goods, or equipment including,
but not limited to, passenger automobiles, vans, trucks, buses, recreational
vehicles, and vehicles used for commercial, business, or governmental purposes.
   VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL. See Subsection
8-302R, "Recreational Vehicle," of this Section.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. See Section
2-76(k) of the Glencoe Village Code.
   VILLAGE MANAGER. See
2-20 of the Glencoe Village Code. The chief adminis-trative official of the
Village, subject to the superior right and power of the Board of Trustees to
supervise and administer the government and affairs of the Village. When used
in this Code, the term Village Manager shall refer either to such official or
to his or her duly authorized delegatees.
   VILLAGE USE. The use of a building, structure, or lot (or portion thereof)
by the Village,  or for an authorized governmental purpose designated from
time-to-time by the corporate authorities of the Village. (2/2009)
   W.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   WALL SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   WARNING SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D1 of this Code.
   WINDOW SIGN. See Paragraph 5-105D2 of this Code.
   WIDTH OF LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot Width," of this Section.
   WIDTH OF LOT, AVERAGE. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Average Width of," of this Section.
   X.   [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
   Y.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   YARD. A required open space on a lot between a lot line and a yard line that
is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by this Code, unoccupied and
unobstructed from grade to the sky.
   YARD, CORNER SIDE. A yard extending from the front yard line to the rear lot
line between the corner side lot line of the lot and the corner side yard line.
   YARD, DEPTH OF. The distance required in the applicable district regulations
between a lot line and its corresponding yard line.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines and between the front lot line of the lot and the
front yard line.
   YARD LINE, CORNER SIDE. A line drawn parallel to a corner side lot line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required corner side yard.
   YARD LINE, FRONT. A line drawn parallel to a front lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard. If the front lot line
is not straight, then the front yard line shall be drawn as nearly parallel to
such front lot line as possible but shall in no case be drawn closer to any
point on such front lot line than the depth of the required front yard.
   YARD LINE, REAR. A line drawn parallel to a rear lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard.
   YARD LINE, SIDE. A line drawn parallel to a side lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required side yard.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line
between the side lot lines and between the rear lot line and the rear yard
line, except that in the case of a corner lot the rear yard shall extend from
the inner side lot line to the corner side yard line.
   YARD REQUIRED. The minimum yard depth designated in the regulations of this
Code establishing minimum front, corner side, side, and rear yard requirements
for various uses, structures, and districts.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard line
to the rear lot line and between the side lot line and the side yard line.
   Z.   When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Glencoe. See Section
7-102 of this Code.
   ZONING CLASSIFICATION. See Subsection
8-302C, "Classification or Zoning Classification," of this Section.
   ZONING CODE. The Glencoe Zoning Code; that is, this Code. Unless the context
specifically requires otherwise, all references to this Code shall be deemed to
refer to any certificate, permit, approval, resolution, or ordinance granted or
adopted pursuant to this Code.
   ZONING COMMISSION. The Zoning Commission of the Village of Glencoe. See
Section
7-103 of this Code.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A part of the corporate area of the Village wherein
regulations of this Code are uniform. See also Section
2-101 of this Code.
   ZONING DISTRICT MAP OR ZONING MAP. See Section
2-103 of this Code.
   ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Village Manager of the Village.
   ZONING LOT. See Subsection
8-302L, "Lot, Zoning or Lot," of this Section.
(Am. Ord. 2013-01-3331, passed 1-17-13; Am. Ord. 2014-15-3367, passed 10-16-14;
Am. Ord. 2021-09-3505, passed 3-18-2021; Am. Ord. 2023-12-3557, passed 6-15-
2023; Amd. Ord. 2023-19-3564, passed 9-21-2023; Amd. Ord. 2023-23-3568, passed
10-19-2023)
WRITTEN INTERPRETATIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Code Amendment
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/
   Community Development
   DATE: August 20, 1996
   SUBJECT: R-D multiple Family Number of Stories and Building Height
Interpretation
   This memo is written as an interpretation based on the previous and current
Zoning Code of Village staff interpretation for number of stories and building
height restrictions in the R-D multiple family district for at least 20 years.
   Multiple family construction is limited to 2 stories. Any cellar (what most
people might consider a basement) must have an average ceiling height under 3.5
feet above grade (grade is the natural grade on the lot or top of sidewalk
depending on my review of the particular site). This lower level cellar has
typically been used for a lower level garage such can be seen in the townhouse
construction at 314 Hawthorn (built in 1979), 966-972 Greenbay (built in 1987),
and 91-101 Linden at Glencoe Road (built in 1989).
nd
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Commission
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/
   Community Development
   DATE: February 25, 1997
   SUBJECT: Ceiling Measurements for Basement/Cellars and F.A.R.
   This memo is written as an interpretation based on an interpretation since
1990 of how ceiling measurements are made for F.A.R. and the basement/cellar
calculations. The ceiling of any space will be measured to the bottom of the
structural floor or ceiling supports such as floor joists or roof rafters.
Several examples are provided as illustrations. For a home, measurements as to
whether a basement/cellar is counted in F.A.R. will be made to the bottom of
the first floor joists. Other interpretations such as occasional steel or wood
beams, ventilation system ducts, etc., will not be included in this
measurement. Similarly, in reinforced concrete floor construction the basement/
cellar or other ceiling height measurements will be to the underside of the
concrete floors not to the artificial dropped ceiling below. These methods of
measuring apply for both F.A.R. calculations and for determining the definition
requirements of basements and cellars. The overall philosophy of Zoning Code
requirements is to restrict height or volume above grade and this
interpretation follows this goal.
nd
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Code Attachment
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/
   Community Development
   DATE: Effective May 15, 1999
   SUBJECT: F.A.R. Measurements for Room Areas 5 Feet or More High.
   This memo is to clarify and provide a more detailed interpretation of an
element of our floor area ratio requirement as it applies to attic areas over
dwelling areas and roof areas next to or part of dwelling areas of a house.
   Attic areas above dwelling areas will continue to be included or excluded as
previously detailed in our F.A.R. handout. Spaces next to or part of occupied
areas of the house that are 5 feet or more high will now be included in F.A.R.
calculations even if interrupted by cross ties or truss structural members.
   Below are common design examples that will now be affected by this
interpretation review:
      1) Area above one story attached garage next to second floor of a house.
Unfinished or finished areas 5 feet or more high are now included in F.A.R.
calculations.
      2) Third floor habitable room located next to under roof areas. Under
roof areas 5 feet or more high will be included in F.A.R. calculations even if
interrupted by cross ties or truss structural members.
      3) Cape Cod or Tudor-style houses with usable or unusable roof areas next
to habitable rooms. Areas over 5 feet or more high inside or next to these
rooms will be included in F.A.R. calculations.
   We encourage you to let us review any design questions you have on any of
these F.A.R. requirements before submitting final drawings for permit issuance.
   Preliminary design cross sections can be faxed to us at 847-835-4234.
nd
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Code Amendment
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/ Community Development
   DATE: Effective in F.A.R. Handout Since 1999 Zoning Code Insert March 2006
   SUBJECT: F.A.R. Bonuses For Attached Garages
   This memo is to elaborate on the attached garage bonus in Section
3-111-G-12-(6) of the Zoning Code. All of the attached garage space on a home
must be located in the rear half of the lot in order to qualify for this first
200 square feet exclusion bonus from F.A. R. Calculations. This clarification
has been part of our Floor Area Ratio handout since 1999.
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Code
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/Community Development
   DATE: October 11, 2006
   SUBJECT: Clarification of Attached Garage Requirements     
   This memorandum clarifies the Village’s interpretation of zoning
requirements related to attached and detached garages applied for, for the past
20+ years. Section
3-111-F of the Zoning Code requires a minimum space of 10 feet between
principal and accessory structures and uses. For instance, 10 feet of
separation is required between a residence and a detached garage. In order for
a garage to be considered attached, a minimum 3-foot wide connection between
garage and residence is required. The connection must be 7 feet or taller in
height and covered with a flat or pitched roof. An open trellis or arbor
structure does not meet this requirement. The area under the roof is not
required to be enclosed and may be open to the elements.
   VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
   MEMORANDUM
   TO: Zoning Code
   FROM: John Houde, Deputy Director of Public Works/Community Development
   DATE: January 2007
   SUBJECT: Clarification of 6-103 Nonconforming Structures and Demolition of
existing homes on lots that are nonconforming in width or area    
   This memorandum sets forth the Village’s staff longstanding interpretation
of Section
6-103 regarding Non-Conforming Structures. This interpretation extends as far
back as at least 1955. The Zoning Board of Appeals followed this interpretation
in connection with 475 Greenleaf, and it has been affirmed by the Circuit Court
of Cook County and the Illinois Appellate Court for the First District in the
case of R. Eden Martin et al. V. Zoning Board of Appeals, et al., No. 05 CH
7885 (Cir. Ct.) and No. 05-3743 (App. Ct.)
   According to this interpretation, a lot that may be legally nonconforming in
some respect shall be treated as a Nonconforming Structure under the Zoning
Code if it had been lawfully improved with
a structure. In addition, the original Nonconforming Structure can be removed
and replaced either in the same location or in a different location on the same
lot so long as the new structure either:
         (a)   fully conforms with the Zoning Code requirements for bulk,
height, setbacks, and the like (except for those requirements that cannot be
satisfied because of characteristics of the lot itself that are nonconforming,
such as lot size or lot dimensions), or
         (b)   the new structure shares in part the same foot print as the
original structure and is only nonconforming to the same extent as the original
structure (e.g., both the original and replacement structure extend into a side
yard by two feet).
   The replacement structure cannot, however, increase the degree of
nonconformity of the original structure, nor may it include a new nonconforming
element, unless appropriate zoning relief is granted.
VILLAGE OF GLENCOE
MEMORANDUM
TO: Zoning Code Attachment
FROM: John Houde, Building & Zoning Administrator
DATE: May 7, 2013
SUBJECT: Public street frontage requirements for a subdivision of two or more
lots from one zoning lot
Different elements of the Zoning Code and Subdivision Ordinances imply, but do
not clearly state, the longstanding Village interpretation since the 1950's
that a subdivided vacant lot or larger subdivision of lots must provide
frontage on a public-dedicated street. Section 31-3.9 of the Subdivision
Ordinance additionally states under "Lot Access and Circulation,""All
subdivisions shall be designed to provide appropriate public street access to
all lots in the subdivision." The minimum public street frontage is 20 feet as
noted in Section 8-302 of the Zoning Code definition under "Lot Line, Front."
This memo is to clearly note this requirement, which more often becomes a
question on the subdivision of an existing house lot into two or more lots
located on the small number of remaining private streets in the Village.
ZONING CODE MAP
To view the Zoning Code Map in PDF, please click HERE
 
