CITY CODE
of
GRAFTON
ILLINOIS
Code current through:
Ord. 781, passed July 15, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This City Code of the City of Grafton, as supplemented, contains provisions
from the 2006 City Code and ordinances up to and including ordinance 781,
passed July 15, 2025. Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance
supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in
conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City Office in order to
ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
               American Legal Publishing
               Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 782
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE CITY OF GRAFTON, ILLINOIS TO TRANSFER THE MARINA
LEASE AGREEMENT.
WHEREAS 
the City of Grafton, Illinois and Desherlia Marina Management, Inc., desire
to assign the Marina Lease dated 19 October 2021 (hereinafter referred
to as "Marina Lease"), and
WHEREAS Desherlia Marina Management, Inc. is the current leaseholder of the
Marina Lease with the City of Grafton, and
WHEREAS 
the Marina Lease requires the express written consent of both the City of
Grafton and Desherlia Marina Management, Inc. for assignment
of the Marina Lease, and
WHEREAS 
The City of Grafton and Desherlia Marina Management, Inc., desire to assign
the Marina Lease to New Haven Holdings LLC, or any of its affiliates, and
WHEREAS New Haven Holdings LLC, or any of its affiliates
agrees to abide by all the terms and conditions of the lease as written.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
GRAFTON ILLINOIS, THAT: The Marina Lease for the Grafton Marina has been
reviewed by legal counsel for the Desherlia Marina Management, Inc., New Haven
Holdings LLC, or any of its affiliates, and the City of Grafton and
is therefore approved for assignment by the City Council at the regular City
Council meeting on 21 October 2025.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by
the City Council of the City of Grafton, Illinois, approval by the Mayor of the
City of Grafton, Illinois, and its publication in pamphlet form as authorized
by law.
 
Passed by the City Council of the City of Grafton, Illinois, this 21 st 
day of October 2025.
AYES:   6 
NAYES:   0
ABSENT:   0
ABSTAINED:  0
 
Approved by the Mayor of the City of Grafton, Illinois, this 21 st 
Day of October 2025..
 
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/82d59b1d98f58ba66fb2fa4f0f9f44ff85990e81/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1788_4197x820.jpg]
 
Michael R. Morrow
Mayor, City of Grafton, Illinois
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/82d59b1d98f58ba66fb2fa4f0f9f44ff85990e81/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1791_3462x1497.jpg]
 
 
 
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1: GRAFTON CITY CODE
Section
1-1-1:   Title
1-1-2:   Acceptance
1-1-3:   Amendments
1-1-4:   Jurisdiction
1-1-5:   Code Alterations
1-1-1:   TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Grafton. This City Code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the GRAFTON CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter under the direction of the City Attorney acting for the
City Council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by
title in any legal documents.
(2006 Code § 1-1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
1-1-2:   ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title.
(2006 Code § 1-1-2)
1-1-3:   AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section numbers of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code.
(2018 Code)
1-1-4:   JURISDICTION:
Unless otherwise provided herein, this Code applies to acts performed within
the corporate limits of the City. Provisions of this Code also apply to acts
performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by law,
where the law confers power on the City to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
(2006 Code § 1-1-5)
1-1-5:   CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the Office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the Office of the City Clerk.
Said Code Books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 1-1-4; amd. 2018 Code)
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1:   Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2:   Court Proceedings
1-2-3:   Severability Clause
1-2-1:   REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   G.   Improvement ordinances;
   H.   Bond ordinances;
   I.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   J.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the City;
   K.   All special ordinances; and
   L.   Zoning amendments including variances.
(2006 Code § 1-1-8)
1-2-2:   COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any claim arising under the former ordinance or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this City Code.
(2006 Code § 1-1-10)
1-2-3:   SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City
Code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any codes or portions
of codes adopted herein by reference. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(2018 Code)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
Section
1-3-1:   Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2:   General Definitions
1-3-3:   Catchlines
1-3-1:   RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and City Council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
   C.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other City officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   D.   Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to
be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
   E.   May; Shall: The word “may” is permissive; the word “shall” is
mandatory.
   F.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   G.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   H.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words “of the City of Grafton”.
   I.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   J.   Official Time: Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the
transaction of City business, except during applicable Daylight Savings Time
set by National or State standards when the official time shall be advanced one
hour. All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other
premises maintained by or at the expense of the City shall be set and run at
the official time prescribed by this subsection.
   K.   Ordinance: The word “ordinance” contained in the ordinances of the City
has been changed in the content of this City Code to “title”, “chapter”,
“section” and/or “subsection” or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to City ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(2006 Code § 1-1-16; amd. 2018 Code)
1-3-2:   GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of Grafton, Illinois.
CODE OR THIS CODE: The City Code of the City of Grafton.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Mayor and the City Council.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated shall mean the City Council of the City.
COUNTY: The County of Jersey.
FEE OR FEES: A sum of money charged by the City for carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: Shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the
following year.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES (ILCS): The Illinois Compiled Statutes, the latest
publication thereof.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and Statutes of the State
of Illinois, the ordinances of the City and, when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
LEGAL HOLIDAY: The holidays as authorized and recognized by the City Council.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: The Mayor of the City.
MUNICIPAL YEAR: The municipal year of the City shall begin on May 1 of each
year and shall end on April 30 of the following year.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT, AND NEGLIGENTLY: Import a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act of omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City or any act or thing repugnant to or creating a hazard
to or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
ORDINANCE VIOLATION: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this
Code which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by State law.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or
corporation in his or its own capacity as administrator, conservator, executor,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court. Whenever the
word PERSON is used in any section of this Code prescribing a penalty or fine
as applied to partnerships or any such word as applied to corporations, it
shall include the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are responsible
for any violation of said section.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE OR THIS STATE: Unless otherwise indicated shall mean the “State of
Illinois”.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark.
(2006 Code §§ 1-1-16, 1-2-30; amd. 2018 Code)
1-3-3:   CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2018 Code)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
1-4-1:   General Penalty
1-4-2:   Summons By Certified Mail
1-4-3:   Application Of Provisions
1-4-4:   Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-1:   GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
Code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this Code shall be fined in an amount not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any
one offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in
subsection A1 of this section, the Circuit Court may impose a period of
“conditional discharge”, as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4,
or “court supervision”, as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21,
for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to
perform community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any
other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
Code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set
forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to
time.
      3.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
Code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this subsection,
to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
      4.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The City Attorney may retain attorneys and
private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment
of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the City
with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the City
Attorney under this subsection A4 shall be charged to the offender.
   B.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by State Statute for the same offense and no penalty shall include possible
incarceration for the underlying ordinance violation.
(2018 Code)
   C.   License Revocation: When a person is convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code, any license previously issued to him by the City may be
revoked by the court or by the Mayor after an opportunity for a hearing.
(2006 Code § 1-1-25)
   D.   Aiding In Or Causing An Offense:
      1.   Whoever commits an offense against the City or aids, abets,
counsels, commands, induces or procures its commission is punishable as a
principal.
      2.   Whoever wilfully causes an act to be done which, if directly
performed by him or another would be an offense against the City, is punishable
as a principal.
(2006 Code § 1-1-20)
1-4-2:   SUMMONS BY CERTIFIED MAIL:
In all actions for violation of any Municipal ordinance where the fine would
not be in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and no jail term
could be imposed, service of summons may be made by the City Clerk or the
office of the Jersey County Circuit Court by certified mail, return receipt
requested, whether service is to be within or without the State.
(2006 Code § 1-1-22)
1-4-3:   APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this City Code, the same as though it were a
part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of
any section of this City Code, where any duty is prescribed or obligation
imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in
this City Code.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this City Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but
not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this City Code,
and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs
or continues.
(2006 Code § 1-1-23)
1-4-4:   NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the
intent of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty.
(2018 Code)
CHAPTER 5: OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
Section
1-5-1:   Corporate Seal
1-5-2
:   Location of Official Records And Corporate Seal
1-5-3:   Elections
1-5-4:   Wards
1-5-1:   CORPORATE SEAL:
   A.   Description: The seal provided by the City Council, shall be circular
in form with the words, “City of Grafton, Illinois” in the outer circle and the
words “Incorporated, A.D. April 8, 1907”.
   B.   Use: The Corporate Seal shall be used as such seal in all cases
provided by law or by the ordinances of the City and in all other cases in
which, by law and custom, it is usual and necessary for the corporation to use
a seal. The seal shall be and remain with the City Clerk who shall be the legal
custodian.
(2006 Code § 1-2-19)
1-5-2:   LOCATION OF OFFICIAL RECORDS AND CORPORATE SEAL:
All official records, including the Corporate Seal, shall be kept in the City
Hall.
(2006 Code § 1-2-32)
1-5-3:   ELECTIONS:
   A.   Procedure: The provisions of the 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes and 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/3.1-10-10 concerning municipal elections
shall govern the conduct of the City elections.
(2006 Code § 1-2-20)
   B.   Inauguration: The inauguration of newly elected City officials shall
occur at the first regular or special meeting of the City Council following the
canvass of votes and certification of election results following each Municipal
election in April.
(Ord. 674, 2017)
1-5-4:   WARDS:
There are hereby established in the City three (3) wards described as follows:
   A.   Ward One: Ward One shall consist of all territory in the City north of
the City Maintenance Building on Grafton Hills Drive.
   B.   Ward Two shall consist of all territory in the City west of the
Visitor's Center to the east side of Mulberry Street and their extensions
northward.
   C.   Ward Three shall consist of all territory in the City west of the west
side of Mulberry Street and its extensions northward.
(2006 Code § 1-7-1; amd. Ord. 760, 10-18-2022)
CHAPTER 6: MAYOR
Section
1-6-1:   Election And Term
1-6-2:   Presiding Officer; Voting
1-6-3:   Duties
1-6-4:   Appointment Of Officers; Vacancies
1-6-5:   Supervisory Duties; Removal Of Officers
1-6-6:   Mayor Pro Tem; Temporary Chair
1-6-7:   Vacancy In Office; Acting Mayor
1-6-1:   ELECTION AND TERM:
The Mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term and shall serve until a
successor is elected and has qualified.
(2006 Code § 1-2-40)
1-6-2:   PRESIDING OFFICER; VOTING:
   A.   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The Mayor
shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion, except:
      1.   Where the vote of the Aldermen has resulted in a tie; or
      2.   Where one-half (½) of the Aldermen elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie; or
      3.   Where a vote greater than a majority of the Corporate Authorities is
required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes to adopt an ordinance, resolution or
motion.
   B.   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote. Nothing in this
section shall deprive an Acting Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem from voting in his or
her capacity as Alderman, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote
in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem.
(2006 Code § 1-2-53)
1-6-3:   DUTIES:
   A.   Chief Executive Officer: The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer
of the City and shall see to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances. The
Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the City Council and perform such
duties as may be required of him by statute or law. The Mayor shall have
supervision over all of the executive officers and City employees; provided,
however, his or her control is subject to the power of the City Council to
prescribe the duties of various officers and employees. The Mayor shall have
the power and authority at any reasonable time to inspect all books, papers and
records pertaining to City affairs and kept by any officer of the City.
(2006 Code § 1-2-43)
   B.   General Duties:
      1.   The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by law
and shall take care that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
      2.   The Mayor from time to time may, and annually shall give, the City
Council information relative to the affairs of the City, and may recommend for
their consideration such measures as he or she believes expedient.
(2006 Code § 1-2-49)
   C.   Signature:
      1.   The Mayor shall sign all City warrants, commissions, permits and
licenses granted by authority of the City Council, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require his or
her official signature.
      2.   The Mayor may designate another to affix his or her signature to any
written instrument that requires the Mayor's signature. The Mayor must send
written notice of this designation to the City Council stating: a) the name of
the person whom he or she has selected; and b) what instrument the person will
have authority to sign.
      3.   A written signature of the Mayor executed by the person so
designated with the signature underneath the signature of the person so
designated shall be attached to the notice. The notice with the signature
attached shall be recorded in the journal of the City Council and then filed
with the City Clerk. When the signature of the Mayor is placed on a written
instrument at the direction of the Mayor in the specified manner, the
instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the City as if signed by
the Mayor in person.
(2006 Code § 1-2-44)
   D.   Designation Of Officers' Duties: Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the City, this dispute
shall be settled by the Mayor, after consultation with the City Attorney; and
the Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointive officer, any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform
that duty.
(2006 Code § 1-2-47)
   E.   Formal Occasions: The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the City on
formal occasions and receptions, but in the absence or inability to attend any
such function, the Mayor may select any other City officer to so act.
(2006 Code § 1-2-48)
   F.   Serve As Other Officials:
      1.   Business License Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby designated as
License Commissioner to issue and revoke any and all business licenses as
prescribed by law.
(2006 Code § 1-2-50)
      2.   Local Liquor Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby designated as Local
Liquor Commissioner with all the powers to license and/or revoke any City
liquor license according to State and City laws. (2006 Code § 1-2-51)
      3.   Health Commissioner: The Mayor is hereby declared to be Health
Commissioner with all powers to abate and remove all nuisances or health
hazards within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City authority as
prescribed by law. The Mayor may appoint other officials to assist him in the
performance of these duties.
(2006 Code § 1-2-52)
1-6-4:   APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS; VACANCIES:
   A.   At the first meeting of a new City Council following a municipal
election, the Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the
City Council, all officers of the City whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for, and said officers shall hold their offices until a new
City Council is inaugurated following a municipal election and until their
respective successors are appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in an
appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. The Mayor shall issue a
commission or certificate of appointment to all persons appointed to office in
the City.
   B.   The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the City
Council, all officers of the City whose appointment will not otherwise be
provided for by law; and whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office, which by
law or ordinance the Mayor is empowered and required to fill, the Mayor shall,
at the next regular meeting of the City Council, communicate to it the name of
the appointee to such office and pending the concurrence of the City Council in
such appointment, the Mayor may designate some suitable person to discharge the
functions of such office.
(2006 Code § 1-2-45)
1-6-5:   SUPERVISORY DUTIES; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the City and see that
they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their respective
offices. Except where otherwise provided by statute, the Mayor may remove any
officer appointed by the Mayor under this Code, whenever the Mayor is of the
opinion that the interests of the City demand removal. The Mayor shall report
the reasons for the removal to the Corporate Authorities at the next meeting to
be held not less than five (5) days after the removal. If the Mayor fails or
refuses to report to the Corporate Authorities the reasons for the removal, or
if the Corporate Authorities, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members
authorized by law to be elected after a motion and second disapprove of the
removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which the
officer was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which shall be entered
upon the journal of the Corporate Authorities. Upon restoration, the officer
shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense.
(2006 Code § 1-2-46)
1-6-6:   MAYOR PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIR:
   A.   Mayor Pro Tem: If the Mayor is temporarily absent because of an
incapacity to perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a
vacancy in the office, the Corporate Authorities shall elect one of their
members to act as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem, during this absence or
disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of
the Mayor but shall not be entitled to vote both as Mayor Pro Tem and as an
Alderman.
   B.   Temporary Chair: In the absence of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, the
Corporate Authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary
chair. The temporary chair shall have only the powers of a presiding officer
and a right to vote only in the capacity as Alderman on any ordinance,
resolution, or motion.
(2006 Code § 1-2-41)
1-6-7:   VACANCY IN OFFICE; ACTING MAYOR:
If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Mayor, the vacancy shall be filled in
accordance with Illinois state statutes.
(2006 Code § 1-2-42)
CHAPTER 7: CITY COUNCIL
Section
1-7-1:   Composition And Term
1-7-2:   Vacancy In Office
1-7-3:   Meetings
1-7-4:   Committees
1-7-5:   Rules Of Order And Procedure
1-7-6:   Ordinances, Resolutions And Motions
1-7-1:   COMPOSITION AND TERM:
The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and six (6) Aldermen, two (2) from
each of the three (3) wards, and their term of office shall be for four (4)
years, and until their successors are elected and have qualified.
(2006 Code § 1-2-1)
1-7-2:   VACANCY IN OFFICE:
When a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with Illinois
state statutes.
(2006 Code § 1-2-4)
1-7-3:   MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular stated meetings of the City Council shall
be held in the City Hall building on the third Tuesday in each month at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. When said meeting date falls upon a legal holiday declared
by the State of Illinois, the meeting shall be held on the following Thursday
at the same hour. Adjourned meetings may be held at such times as may be
determined by the Council and announced prior to adjournment. Public notice of
regular meetings shall be given in accordance with the Illinois State Statutes.
(Ord. 649, 9-8-2015)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the City Council may be called by
the Mayor or any three (3) Aldermen by giving at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice thereof by delivering to them personally written or printed notices of
the time of such meeting at the residences of the Aldermen. Such notices may
also be served by mail or e-mail, by the City Clerk or a designated
representative. Said notices shall specify the purpose of said special meeting
and the business to be taken up at that time and place. Such notice shall be
posted at the City Hall and shall be provided to any local newspaper of general
circulation or any local radio or television station that has filed an annual
request for such notice. The notice shall be provided to such news media in the
same manner as said notice is given to the Mayor and members of the City
Council, provided such news media has given the City an address at which such
notice may be given.
(2006 Code § 1-2-3)
   C.   Quorum: At all meetings of the City Council, a majority of the
Corporate Authorities shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, and if no such quorum attends such meeting of the Council, the
Aldermen may adjourn from day to day until a quorum is present; and shall have
power to compel the attendance of absent members, except when such members are
physically unable to attend such meetings.
(2006 Code § 1-2-6)
   D.   Agenda; Voting; New Business:
      1.   The Mayor shall prepare the agenda for each regular or special
meeting of the City Council, which shall be delivered to the City Clerk for
posting in accordance with law not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to
each respective regular or special meeting of the City Council. All motions to
be presented to the City Council or in any committee shall be stated in the
positive and must receive an affirmative vote to be approved. The Mayor shall
have the right to vote to break a tie vote of the Aldermen or to create a tie
vote of the Aldermen.
      2.   Any new business or new matter may be introduced by way of a motion
presented by any Alderman or by the Mayor at any regular or special meeting of
the City Council. A motion to introduce any new business or new matter does not
require a second. However, any new matter or new business introduced by motion
as aforesaid, must be referred to the next meeting of the City Council for
consideration and any final action. Final action upon any new matter or new
business may not be taken until and unless the matter has been properly placed
on the agenda of a meeting of the City Council. To suspend the rule requiring
referral to a subsequent meeting of the City Council as to any new matter or
new business, and to permit the City Council to act on any new matter or new
business, a motion to suspend the rules must be made, seconded and passed by
the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council. Any motion
presented by the Mayor or any Alderman to introduce a new matter or new
business not on an agenda before the City Council at a regular or special
meeting should be in writing and must specifically identify the subject matter
of the new business or new matter.
(2006 Code § 1-2-12)
1-7-4:   COMMITTEES:
   A.   Special Committees: The Mayor may appoint such special committees of
the City Council as he or she may deem appropriate from time to time if
approved by a motion passed by the City Council in a regular or special meeting
of the City Council. Each such special committee to be appointed by the Mayor
shall include at least one Alderman. Special committees approved by motion
passed by the City Council shall comply with all requirements of the Illinois
Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.)
   B.   Ad Hoc Committees: The Mayor may establish ad hoc committees from time
to time to advise the Mayor or City Council on issues pertaining to items of
interest to the City. An ad hoc committee so formed by the Mayor shall consist
of members to be appointed solely in the discretion of the Mayor and shall not
require approval of the City Council. The Mayor shall inform the City Council
should he or she elect to establish an ad hoc committee from time to time and
the identity of those persons appointed by the Mayor to so serve. Meetings of
the ad hoc committees so established, if any, shall not be subject to the Open
Meetings Act of the State of Illinois, and no decision or recommendation of any
such ad hoc committee shall in any way be binding upon the City Council or the
City.
   C.   Schedule Of Meetings:
      1.   The schedule shall, by the first day of the calendar year which it
represents, be posted in the City Council Chambers of the City Hall.
      2.   The City Clerk shall provide copies of the schedule of meetings
required by circulation or to any local radio or television station that has
filed an annual request for such notice.
   D.   Open Meetings; Addressing Meetings: At any committee meeting subject to
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, any person desiring to address the committee
shall be afforded an opportunity to do so subject to compliance with the
following procedures: Any person wishing to address a committee shall notify
the office of the City Clerk of his or her intent to address a committee prior
to the commencement of the committee meeting. Public comments before a
committee shall be permitted as the last item of business on the agenda of the
committee before adjournment. If a person desiring to address the committee
will advise of the subject matter they wish to address, the chair may recognize
the person for public comment during the committee’s consideration of that
subject matter when pertinent to an item on the agenda for the committee. Each
individual’s public comment may be limited in duration to not more than five
(5) minutes.
   E.   Finance Committee: The Mayor shall appoint members of the Finance
Committee. The Finance Committee shall be charged with reviewing all
expenditures prior to presentation of the expenditures to the City Council for
approval. The Finance Committee shall make a recommendation to the City Council
whether to pay each bill or expenditure presented for payment. Payments may be
presented to the City Council for one vote covering multiple items. The Finance
Committee shall consist of the City Treasurer, the Finance Manager, two members
of the community not serving on other committees of the City, and one council
member to be selected by majority vote of the council. The Finance committee
shall meet at times and dates to be determined by members of the committee but
not less than at least one time before each regular meeting of the City
Council.
(2006 Code § 1-2-5; amd. Ord. 743, 5-6-2021)
1-7-5:   RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE:
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations and
meetings of the City Council:
   A.   Order Of Business:
      1.   The order of business shall be as follows:
         a.   Call to order/pledge of allegiance.
         b.   Roll call.
         c.   Approval of minutes.
         d.   Public forum.
         e.   Treasurer’s report.
         f.   Zoning Board/Planning Commission reports.
         g.   Public Works report.
         h.   Committee reports. The Mayor shall determine and set forth the
order of reports from various committees on each agenda of the regular meetings
of the City Council. Any committee chairman may request to be placed on a
agenda to present a report by notifying the Mayor's office not less than
seventy-two (72) hours prior to any regular or special meeting of the City
Council and such request shall be honored.
         i.   Old business.
         j.   New business.
         k.   Approval or actions taken under suspension of rules.
         l.   Possible executive session as permitted by 5 ILCS 120/2(c).
         m.   Adjournment.
      2.   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided
by the Chair without debate, subject to appeal.
   B.   Duties Of Presiding Officer:
      1.   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak
to points of order in preference to other Aldermen, and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to appeal.
      2.   In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding
officer shall have the power to require that the chamber be cleared.
   C.   Duties Of Members:
      1.   While the presiding officer is putting the question, no member shall
walk across or out of the Council Chamber.
      2.   Every member, previous to his speaking, making a motion or seconding
the same shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the
Chair. He shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding
personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other member’s
argument or vote.
   D.   Visitors: Members of the public wishing to address the City Council are
requested to advise the City Clerk of their name, any group they purport to
represent, and the subject matter they wish to address before the close of
regular business by the day of the meeting at which they desire to address the
City Council. The City Clerk shall present to the Mayor or Chair a list of all
such persons and the Mayor or Chair shall call such persons to the podium to
address the City Council during the public forum section of the City Council
meeting. Any person desiring to address the City Council shall begin by
identifying himself or herself by name and residential address. The Mayor shall
have authority to limit the time allotted to an individual if the presentation
from that individual is deemed repetitive, incoherent or does not pertain to
any matter of interest likely to come within the purview of the City Council.
Unless recognized by the Mayor or Chair of the meeting, members of the public
shall not speak to the City Council or interrupt the proceedings of the City
Council, unless in compliance with the rules pertaining to the public forum
section of the City Council meeting.
   E.   Presentation Of New Business: When a member wishes to present a
communication, petition, order, resolution, ordinance or other original matter,
the member shall read such matter when reached in its proper order. Such
matters need not be read in full if a title or a brief explanation will suffice
to advise the Council and the public of the materials presented.
   F.   The City Council, by motion, may limit debate. The Presiding Officer
shall have the right to participate in debate. While a member is speaking, no
Alderman shall hold any private discussion, nor pass between the speaker and
the Chair.
   G.   Call Of Aldermen To Order: A member, when called to order by the Chair,
shall thereupon discontinue speaking and take his seat, and the order or ruling
of the Chair shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to the right to
appeal.
   H.   Appeals From Decision Of The Chair:
      1.   Any member may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the Chair, and
if the appeal is seconded, the Alderman making the appeal may briefly state his
reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his ruling; but there
shall be no debate on the appeal and no other person shall participate in the
discussion except the City Attorney. The presiding officer shall have the right
to participate in debate.
      2.   The Chair shall then put the question, “Shall the decision of the
Chair be sustained?”. If a majority of the Aldermen present vote “No”, the
decision of the Chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
   I.   Question Of Personal Privilege: The right of a member to address the
Council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which
his integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
   J.   Voting: Every member who shall be present when a question is stated
from the Chair shall vote thereon, unless he is personally interested in the
question, in which case, he shall take whatever steps are necessary to ensure
that his vote is not taken.
   K.   Special Order Of Business: Any matter before the City Council may be
set down as a special order of business at a time certain if two-thirds (2/3)
of the Aldermen present vote in the affirmative, but not otherwise.
   L.   Seconding Of Motions Required; Written Motions: No motion shall be put
or debated in the meeting or in committee unless it be seconded. When a motion
is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before debate, and
every motion in the Council, except motions of procedure, shall be reduced to
writing if required by a member, and the proposer of the motion shall be
entitled to the floor.
   M.   Withdrawal Of Motions: After a motion or resolution is stated by the
presiding officer, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the Aldermen, but
it may be withdrawn at any time before decision, by consent of the Aldermen.
   N.   Division Of Questions: If any question under consideration contains
several distinct propositions, the Aldermen, by a majority vote of the Aldermen
present may divide such question.
   O.   Record Of Motions: In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered
in the journal, the name of the Aldermen moving the same shall be entered also.
   P.   Taking And Entering The Votes; Explanations Of Votes Not Permitted:
      1.   The “yeas” and “nays” upon any question shall be taken and entered
in the minutes or records of the City Clerk.
      2.   When the Clerk has commenced to call the roll of the members for the
taking of a vote by yeas and nays, all debate on the question before the City
Council shall be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote, no member
shall be permitted to explain his vote, but shall respond to the calling of his
name by the Clerk, by answering yea or nay, as the case may be. A member of the
Council may ask the chair for clarification of the motion under consideration.
   Q.   Announcement And Changes Of Vote: The result of all votes by yeas and
nays shall be announced by the Clerk, and no vote shall be changed after the
announcement.
   R.   Precedence Of Motions: When a question is under debate, the following
motions shall be in order and shall have precedence over each other in order,
as listed:
      1.   To adjourn to a day certain.
      2.   To adjourn.
      3.   To take a recess.
      4.   To lay on the table.
      5.   The previous question.
      6.   To refer.
      7.   To amend.
      8.   To defer or postpone to a time certain.
      9.   To defer or postpone (without reference to time).
      10.   To defer or postpone indefinitely.
Numbers 2, 4, and 5 to be decided without debate.
   S.   Motions To Adjourn:
      1.   A motion to adjourn the City Council shall always be in order,
except:
         a.   When an Alderman is in possession of the floor.
         b.   While the yeas and nays are being called.
         c.   When the members are voting.
         d.   When adjournment was the last preceding motion.
         e.   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be
taken.
      2.   A motion simply to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment or
debate, but a motion to adjourn to a time certain shall be.
      3.   The City Council may, at any time, adjourn over one or more regular
meetings on a vote of a majority of all the Aldermen authorized by law to be
elected.
   T.   Previous Question: When the previous question is moved on the main
question and seconded, it shall be put on this form: “Shall the main question
now be put?”. If such motion be carried, all further amendments and all further
motions and debate shall be excluded, and the question put without delay upon
the pending amendment in proper order and then upon the main question.
   U.   Motions To Lay On The Table And To Take From The Table:
      1.   A motion to lay the question on the table shall not be debatable,
but a motion to lay on the table and publish, or with any other condition shall
be subject to amendment and debate.
      2.   A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may
be proposed at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid
upon the table, provided two-thirds (2/3) of the Aldermen vote therefor.
      3.   A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table
shall apply to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main
question or other pending question may be laid on the table and neither the
main question nor such other pending question shall be affected thereby.
   V.   Motion To Defer:
      1.   When consideration of a motion or other proposition is postponed,
the motion shall specify a time certain for further consideration of the motion
or proposition.
      2.   A motion to postpone indefinitely shall not open the main question
to debate.
      3.   A motion to defer or postpone without any reference to time shall
not be construed as a motion to postpone indefinitely, but shall be considered
to be of the same general nature and to possess the same general attributes so
far as applicable under these rules, as a motion to postpone indefinitely or to
a time certain.
   W.   Motion To Refer: A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take
precedence over a similar motion to refer to a special committee.
   X.   Motion To Amend:
      1.   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend
an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
      2.   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order;
but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
      3.   On an amendment to “Strike Out and Insert”, the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be
stricken out, then those to be inserted, and finally, the paragraph as it will
stand if so amended shall be read.
   Y.   Filling Of Blanks: When a blank is to be filled and different sums or
times proposed, the question shall be taken first on the least sum or the
longest time.
   Z.   Motion To Substitute: A substitute for any original proposition under
debate or for any pending amendment or such proposition may be entertained
notwithstanding that at such time, further amendment is admissible; and if
accepted by the Aldermen by a vote shall entirely supersede such original
proposition or amendment, as the case may be, and cut off all amendments
appertaining thereto.
   AA.   Reconsideration:
      1.   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration having been once made and decided in the negative shall not be
renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered.
      2.   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by Aldermen who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received
a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered.
   BB.   Adoption Of “Robert’s Rules of Order Revised”: The rules of
parliamentary practice comprised in the 2nd Edition of “Robert’s Rules of Order
Revised” shall govern the Council in all cases to which they are applicable and
in which they are not inconsistent with the special rules of the Council.
   CC.   Temporary Suspension Of Rules; Amendment Of Rules: These rules may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Aldermen present and
shall not be repealed, altered or amended, unless by concurrence of two-thirds
(2/3) of all the Aldermen present.
   DD.   Censure, Expulsion Of Aldermen: Any Alderman acting or appearing in a
lewd or disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious, obscene and insulting
language to or about any member of the Council, or who does not obey the order
of the Chair, shall be, on motion, censured by a majority vote of the members
present, or expelled by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all Aldermen elected.
(2006 Code § 1-2-11; amd. Ord. 743, 5-6-2021)
1-7-6:   ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS:
   A.   Preparation: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prepare such
ordinances as may be required by the City Council.
   B.   Consideration: When a proposed ordinance is considered, it shall be
read one time by title only unless the City Council shall otherwise
specifically direct.
   C.   Vote Required; Record Kept: The passage of all ordinances for whatever
purpose, and of any resolution or motion: 1) to create any liability against a
city; or 2) for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require
the concurrence of a majority of all members then holding office on the City
Council, including the Mayor, unless otherwise expressly provided by this Code
or any other act governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution, or motion;
provided, that where the Council consists of an odd number of Aldermen, the
vote of the majority of the Aldermen shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance.
The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the
designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and recorded in the journal of
the City Council. In addition, the Corporate Authorities at any meeting may, by
unanimous consent, take a single vote by yeas or nays on the several questions
of the passage on any two (2) or more of the designated ordinances, orders,
resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group.
The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal under the
designation “omnibus vote”, and in such event, the Clerk may enter the words
“omnibus vote” or “consent agenda” in the journal in each case in lieu of
entering names of the members of City Council voting “yea” and of those voting
“nay” on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
and motions included in such omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of
such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words “omnibus vote” or
“consent agenda” in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the
requirements of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect
as if the vote in each case had been separately by yeas and nays on the
question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion
included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded in the journal.
Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of
any other resolution or motion at the request of any Alderman and shall be
recorded in the journal.
   D.   Approval; Veto: All resolutions and motions: 1) which create any
liability against the City; or 2) that provide for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money; or 3) to sell any City property, and all ordinances
passed by the City Council shall be deposited with the City Clerk. If the Mayor
approves an ordinance or resolution, the Mayor shall sign it. Those ordinances,
resolutions and motions which the Mayor disapproves shall be returned to the
City Council, with the Mayor’s written objections, at the next regular meeting
of the City Council occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage.
The Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance,
resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall
be effective. However, the Mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance,
resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the Mayor fails to return any
ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written objections,
within the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of
the Mayor’s signature.
(2006 Code § 1-2-14)
   E.   Reconsideration; Passing Over Veto: Every resolution and motion
specified in subsection D of this section and every ordinance that is returned
to the City Council by the Mayor shall be reconsidered by the City Council at
the next regular meeting following the regular meeting at which the City
Council receives the Mayor’s written objection. If, after reconsideration, two-
thirds (2/3) of all the Aldermen then holding office on the City Council agree
at that regular meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion,
notwithstanding the Mayor’s refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective.
The vote on the question of passage over the Mayor's veto shall be by yeas and
nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
(2006 Code § 1-2-15)
   F.   Reconsideration At Special Meeting: No vote of the City Council shall
be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there are present at
the special meeting at least as many Aldermen as were present when the vote was
taken.
(2006 Code § 1-2-16)
CHAPTER 8: CITY CLERK
Section
1-8-1:   Election And Term
1-8-2:   Vacancy In Office
1-8-3:   Duties
1-8-4:   Deputy Clerk
1-8-1:   ELECTION AND TERM:
The City Clerk shall be elected at the same election as the Mayor for a four
(4) year term and shall serve until a successor is elected and has qualified.
(2006 Code § 1-2-56)
1-8-2:   VACANCY IN OFFICE:
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of City Clerk, it shall be filled in
accordance with Illinois state statutes.
(2006 Code § 1-2-57)
1-8-3:   DUTIES:
   A.   Publication Of Ordinances; Minutes And Records:
      1.   Publication Of Ordinances: The City Clerk shall cause all ordinances
passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor, imposing any fine,
penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation, to be
published or printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the
Corporate Authorities, or be published at least once within thirty (30) days
after passage, in one or more newspapers published in the City.
      2.   City Clerk Duties:
         a.   The City Clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by
the corporate authorities, and all papers belonging to the City the custody and
control of which are not given to other officers. The City Clerk shall attend
all meetings of the corporate authorities including executive sessions and keep
a full record of their proceedings in the journal, except if the City Clerk is
the subject matter of the meeting and his presence creates a conflict of
interest. The record of those proceedings shall be made available for public
inspection within seven (7) days after being approved or accepted by the
corporate authorities as the official minutes of their proceedings.
         b.   The City Clerk shall have other duties prescribed by the
Corporate Authorities.
         c.   Copies of all papers duly filed in the City Clerk’s office and
transcripts from the journals and other records and files of the City Clerk’s
office, certified by the City Clerk under the corporate seal, shall be evidence
in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced.
         d.   Closed Meetings: The Clerk shall prepare and preserve the minutes
of closed meetings according to the provisions of the Closed Meetings Act. At
least twice a year, the Corporate Authorities shall meet to review minutes of
all closed sessions and make a public statement as to whether there is still a
need to maintain such matters in confidence or whether minutes or portions of
minutes from closed meetings no longer require confidential treatment and are
available for public inspection.
      3.   Issue Notices: The Clerk shall issue and cause to be served upon all
Aldermen, notices of all special meetings of the City Council; also notices to
the members of the different committees of that body and all persons whose
attendance may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the
chair thereof.
(2006 Code § 1-2-58)
   B.   Documents To Officers: The Clerk shall deliver to all committees of the
City Council and to the officers of the City, all petitions, communications,
reports and resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those
committees or officers by the Council on demand therefor. The Clerk shall also,
without delay, deliver to the Mayor, all ordinances or resolutions, orders, and
claims in his or her charge which may require to be approved or otherwise acted
upon by the Mayor.
(2006 Code § 1-2-59)
   C.   Preparation Of Documents: The Clerk shall prepare all commissions,
licenses, permits and other official documents required to be issued by him or
her under this Code and shall attest the same with the Corporate Seal, and the
Clerk shall, in like manner, attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned
and conveyed by the City.
(2006 Code § 1-2-60)
   D.   Report And Delivery Of Licenses:
      1.   The Clerk shall report to the City Council at its regular meeting
each month and more often if the Council so requires the data contained in the
license register with respect to licenses issued during the previous month.
(2006 Code § 1-2-61)
      2.   In all cases where the City requires a license to be obtained for
the purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation, and the
licensee is required to obtain plates, tags or stickers from the Clerk, it
shall be the duty of the Clerk to deliver such plates, tags, or stickers to the
person paying the license fee.
(2006 Code § 1-2-62)
   E.   Administer Oaths: The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths or
affirmations for all lawful purposes.
(2006 Code § 1-2-63)
   F.   Outstanding Bonds: The Clerk shall keep in his office in a book or
books kept expressly for that purpose a correct list of all the outstanding
bonds of the City, showing the number and amount of each, for and to whom the
bonds are issued; and when the City bonds are issued, or purchased, or paid, or
canceled, the book or books shall show that fact; and in the annual report, the
Clerk shall describe particularly the bonds sold during the year and the terms
of sale with each and every item of expense thereof. 
(2006 Code § 1-2-64)
   G.   Reports And Payments:
      1.   The Clerk shall, on or before the regular meeting in each month,
make out and submit to the City Council a statement or report in writing of all
the monies received and warrants drawn during the preceding month, showing
therein from or what sources and on what account monies were received, and for
what purposes and on what account the warrants were drawn or paid.
(2006 Code § 1-2-65)
      2.   The Clerk shall prepare monthly an itemized list of all monies
received and shall deliver a copy of the same to the City Treasurer and shall
also pay over to the Treasurer all monies received in the office and take a
receipt therefor.
(2006 Code § 1-2-67)
   H.   Records To Successor: The City Clerk shall carefully preserve all
books, records, papers, maps and effects of every detail and description
belonging to the City or pertaining to the office, and not in actual use and
possession of other City officers; and upon the expiration of his or her
official term, the Clerk shall deliver all such books, records, papers and
effects to the successor in office.
(2006 Code § 1-2-66)
   I.   Additional Duties: In addition to the foregoing duties, the Clerk shall
perform all such other duties pertaining to the office as are or may be imposed
upon the office by law or resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 1-2-69)
1-8-4:   DEPUTY CLERK:
   A.   The City Clerk, when authorized by the City Council, may appoint a
Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute all documents
required by any law to be executed by the Clerk and affix the seal of the City
thereto whenever required. In signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall
sign the name of the City Clerk followed with the word, “By” and the Deputy
Clerk’s name and the words, “Deputy Clerk”.
   B.   The powers and duties herein described shall be executed by the Deputy
Clerk only in the absence of the City Clerk from the City Clerk’s office in the
City Hall, and only when either written direction has been given by the City
Clerk to such Deputy Clerk to exercise such power or the City Council has
determined by resolution that the City Clerk is temporarily or permanently
incapacitated to perform such functions.
(2006 Code § 1-2-70)
CHAPTER 9: FINANCE DEPARTMENT
Section
1-9-1:   Department Established
1-9-2:   Finance Committee
1-9-3:   City Treasurer
1-9-3-1:   Election And Term
1-9-3-2:   Vacancy In Office
1-9-3-3:   Bond
1-9-3-4:   Duties
1-9-3-5:   Deposit Of Funds
1-9-3-6:   Personal Use Of Funds Prohibited
1-9-4:   Finance Officer
1-9-1:   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the City government which shall be
known as the “Finance Department”. It shall embrace the Finance Committee and
the Treasurer.
(2006 Code § 1-2-72)
1-9-2:   FINANCE COMMITTEE:
The Finance Committee shall exercise a general supervision over the affairs of
the Finance Department. It shall ascertain the condition and needs thereof;
shall, from time to time, report the same to the Mayor and City Council so that
a full understanding thereof shall be had; and generally shall do all the acts
necessary to promote the efficiency of the Department.
(2006 Code § 1-2-73)
1-9-3:   CITY TREASURER:
1-9-3-1:   ELECTION AND TERM:
The City Treasurer shall be elected at the same election as the Mayor for a
four (4) year term and shall serve until a successor is elected and has
qualified.
(2006 Code § 1-2-74)
1-9-3-2:   VACANCY IN OFFICE:
If a vacancy occurs in the office, it shall be filled in accordance with the
Illinois state statutes.
(2006 Code § 1-2-74)
1-9-3-3:   BOND:
The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties and to indemnify the City for any loss due to neglect of duty or
wrongful act on his part; and the amount of such bond shall not be less than
ten percent (10%) of the highest amount of taxes and special assessments
received by the Treasurer during any fiscal year in the preceding five (5)
fiscal years, nor less than one and one-half (1-1/2) times the largest amount
which the Council estimates will be in his custody at any one time, nor less
than three (3) times the number of residents of the City, as determined by the
last Federal Census. Such bond shall be filed with the City Clerk as required
by statute.
(2006 Code § 1-2-78)
1-9-3-4:   DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The City Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the
City and shall pay all warrants signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
City Clerk and not otherwise; and shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto. The Treasurer shall
give to every person paying money into the City Treasury a receipt therefor,
specifying the date of payment, and upon what account paid, and shall file
copies of such receipts with the Clerk with the monthly reports.
(2006 Code § 1-2-75)
   B.   Warrant Register: The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants
redeemed and paid, showing the number, date, and amount of each, the fund from
which paid, and the name of the person to whom and when paid; and the Treasurer
shall cancel all warrants as soon as they are redeemed.
(2006 Code § 1-2-76)
   C.   Special Assessments: The Treasurer shall collect all payments on
special assessments and shall see to it that the same are properly recorded and
credited to the particular account entitled thereto.
(2006 Code § 1-2-79)
   D.   Recordkeeping: The Treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such
a manner as to show with accuracy all monies received and disbursed for the
City, stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and on what
account paid out, and in such a way that the books and accounts may be readily
investigated and understood, and the books and accounts and all files and
papers of the office shall be, at all times, open to examination by the Mayor
or the Finance Committee of the Council.
(2006 Code § 1-2-80)
   E.   Reports:
      1.   Monthly Report: The Treasurer shall report to the Corporate
Authorities at the regular monthly meeting a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures of the City as shown by his books up to the time of
the report.
(2006 Code § 1-2-81)
   2.   Treasurer; Annual Accounts:
         a.   Within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year, the
Treasurer shall annually prepare and file with the City Clerk an account of
moneys received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as
specified in this section. The Treasurer shall show in the account:
            (1)   All moneys received by the City, indicating the total
amounts, in the aggregate, received in each account of the City, with a general
statement concerning the source of receipts. In this paragraph, the term
“account” does not mean each individual taxpayer, householder, licensee,
utility user, or other persons whose payments to the City are credited to a
general account.
            (2)   Except as provided in subsection 2a3, all moneys paid out by
the City where the total amount paid during the fiscal year exceeds two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in the aggregate, giving the name of
each person to whom moneys were paid and the total paid to each person.
            (3)   All moneys paid out by the City as compensation for personal
services, giving the name of each person to whom moneys were paid and the total
amount paid to each person from each account, except that the Treasurer may
elect to report the compensation for personal services of all personnel by
name, listing each employee in one of the following categories:
               (A)   Under $25,000.00;
               (B)   $25,000.00 to $49,999.99;
               (C)   $50,000.00 to $74,999.99;
               (D)   $75,000.00 to $99,999.99;
               (E)   $100,000.00 to $124,999.99; or
               (F)   $125,000.00 and over.
            (4)   A summary statement of operations for all funds and account
groups of the municipality, as excerpted from the annual financial report as
filed with the appropriate State agency.
         b.   Upon receipt of the account from the Treasurer, the City Clerk
shall publish the account at least once in one or more newspapers published in
the City or, if no newspaper is published in the City, then in one or more
newspapers having a general circulation within the City.
   F.   Submit Appropriation To City Council:
      1.   The Treasurer shall, on or before May 15 in each year, and before
the annual appropriations to be made by the City Council, submit to the City
Council a report of the estimates as nearly as may be of monies necessary to
defray the expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal year. The
Treasurer shall, in said report, classify the different objects and branches of
expenditures, giving as nearly as may be the amount required for each; and for
the purpose of making such a report, the Treasurer is hereby authorized to
require of all officers their statement of the condition and expenses of their
respective offices or departments with any proposed improvements, and the
probable expense thereof, all contracts made and unfinished and the amount of
any and all unexpended appropriations of the preceding year.
      2.   The Treasurer shall, in such report, show the aggregate income of
the preceding fiscal year, from all sources, the amount of liabilities
outstanding upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable
during the year, when due and when payable; and in such report, shall give such
other information to the City Council as he or she may deem necessary to the
end that the City Council may fully understand the money exigencies and demands
upon the corporation for the current year.
(2006 Code § 1-2-84)
   G.   Report Delinquent Officers: It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to
report to the City Clerk any officer of the City authorized to receive money
for the use of the City who may fail to make a return of the monies received by
the Treasurer at the time required by law or by ordinances of the City.
(2006 Code § 1-2-82)
1-9-3-5:   DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
   A.   The City Treasurer is hereby required to keep all funds and monies in
his or her custody belonging to the City in such places of deposit as have been
designated by subsection F of this section. When requested by the Treasurer,
the Corporate Authorities shall designate a bank or banks in which may be kept
the funds and monies of the City in the custody of the Treasurer. When a bank
or savings and loan association has been designated as a depository, it shall
continue as such depository until ten (10) days have elapsed after a new
depository is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of
resources and liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is
designated, the Corporate Authorities shall notify the sureties of the City
Treasurer of that fact in writing at least five (5) days before the transfer of
funds. The Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or
money that the Treasurer deposits in a designated bank or savings and loan
association while the funds and money are so deposited.
   B.   The City Treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan association
to deposit with the Treasurer securities or mortgages that have a market value
at least equal to the amount of the funds or monies of the City deposited with
the bank or savings and loan association that exceeds the insurance limitation
provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
   C.   The City Treasurer may enter into agreements of any definite or
indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment, reinvestment, or
withdrawal of City funds.
   D.   The City Treasurer may:
      1.   Combine monies from more than one fund of a single municipality for
the purpose of investing those funds and;
      2.   Join with other municipal treasurers or municipalities for the
purpose of investing the municipal funds of which the Treasurer has custody.
Joint investments shall be made only in investments authorized by law for the
investment of municipal funds. When monies of more than one fund of a single
municipality or monies of more than one municipality are combined for
investment purposes, the monies combined for that purpose shall be accounted
for separately in all respects, and the earnings from investments shall be
separately and individually computed, recorded, and credited to the fund or
municipality, as the case may be, for which the investment was acquired.
   E.   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds as
permitted by this section unless it has complied with the requirements
established by section 6 of the Public Funds Investment Act (30 ILCS 235/0.01
et seq.)
   F.   The following bank(s) is herewith designated as a place of deposit
where the City Treasurer is required to keep all funds and monies in his
custody belonging to the City: Jersey State Bank and CNB Bank & Trust N.A.
(2006 Code § 1-2-85; amd. Ord. 694, 6-19-2018)
1-9-3-6:   PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS PROHIBITED:
The City Treasurer shall keep all monies belonging to the City and in the
Treasurer’s custody separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s own money and
shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the City's monies or warrants for
the personal use and benefit of the Treasurer or of any other person. Any
violation of this section shall subject the Treasurer to immediate removal from
office by the Corporate Authorities, who may declare the Treasurer’s office
vacant.
(2006 Code § 1-2-77)
1-9-4:   FINANCE OFFICER:
The Mayor may appoint, with advice and consent of the City Council, a Finance
Officer who shall work under the supervision of the Mayor and Treasurer.
CHAPTER 10: CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
Section
1-10-1:   Elected Officials To Appointive Positions
1-10-2:   Bonds
1-10-3:   Liability Insurance
1-10-4:   Regulations For City Officers And Employees
1-10-5:   Compensation
1-10-6:   Personnel Policy Adopted
1-10-7:   Risk Management Association
1-10-8:   Retirement
1-10-9:   Payment of Invoices
1-10-1:   ELECTED OFFICIALS TO APPOINTIVE POSITIONS:
No Alderman of the City, the Mayor, Clerk, and Treasurer during the term of
office for which he is elected, may accept or be appointed to or hold any
compensated office appointed by the Mayor except if such is granted a leave of
absence from such office. However, such may serve as a volunteer firefighter
and receive compensation for such service. Any appointment in violation of this
section is void.
(2006 Code § 1-2-21)
1-10-2:   BONDS:
   A.   Established: Bonds of City officers required under 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-10-30 shall be executed in the following penal sums:
 
Mayor             $50,000.00
City Treasurer    50,000.00
City Clerk        50,000.00
Police Chief      25,000.00
Financial Officer 50,000.00
 
   B.   Payment By City: The surety bonds required by law shall be paid by the
City.
   C.   Surety: The City Council shall not receive or approve any bond or
security whereon the name of the City Council, any one of the Aldermen or any
elected or appointed officer of the City appear as bondsman or security. If, by
mistake, a bond containing the name of any such officer is approved by the City
Council or if any bondsman, after becoming such, is elected or appointed to any
City office, this section shall not act as a release of any such obligation
incurred.
(2006 Code § 1-2-25)
1-10-3:   LIABILITY INSURANCE:
   A.   The City Council shall have the power to purchase liability insurance
covering and insuring all Municipal officers, employees and elected officials;
said insurance to cover incidents occurring while in the performance of their
duties, which insurance may insure, cover and protect any liability which the
Municipal corporation, officer, employee or elected official may incur. When
the insurance has been purchased, the City shall be responsible for all
premiums and deductible charges called for by any valid liability insurance
policy covering the Municipal corporation, officer, employee or elected
official.
   B.   The City shall indemnify its Municipal officers, elected officials,
appointees, and employees from any claims arising out of the performance (or
alleged failure of performance) of their respective official duties, including
costs of defense.
(2006 Code § 1-2-26)
1-10-4:   REGULATIONS FOR CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section shall apply
alike to all officers and employees of the City regardless of the time of
creation of the office or position or the time of the appointment of the
officer or employee.
(2006 Code § 1-2-22)
   B.   Qualifications:
      1.   A person is not eligible for an elective City office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the City and has resided in the City at least
one year next preceding the election, except as provided in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-25-75.
      2.   A person is not eligible for the office of Alderman of a ward unless
that person has resided in the ward that the person seeks to represent at least
one year next preceding the election or appointment, except as provided in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-25-75(b).
(2006 Code § 1-2-24)
   C.   Oath:
      1.   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
City officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe to the
following oath:
I,                  , do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I
will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of                 according
to the best of my ability.
      2.   The Mayor and the City Clerk shall have the power to administer this
oath or affirmation upon all lawful occasions.
   D.   Bond: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the City Council
upon entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount and
with such sureties as may be determined by the Council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of his office or position (see section
1-10-2 of this chapter).
   E.   Fees: No officer of the City shall be entitled to charge or receive any
fees as against the City. All officers of the City entitled to receive fees
shall keep a correct account thereof, and make a report thereof under oath to
the City Council prior to the regular meeting of each month. In the report,
they shall specify from whom such fees were received, for what service, and
when received. All fees received shall be paid into the City Treasury.
   F.   Documents Open To Inspection: Every officer shall, at all times when
required, submit the books and papers of his office to the inspection of the
Mayor or any committee or member of the City Council.
   G.   Police To Issue Warrants: All warrants for the violation of City
ordinances or the State criminal law, directed to any person, may be served and
executed within the limits of a municipality by any police officer of the City.
For that purpose, police officers have all the common law and statutory powers
of sheriffs.
(2006 Code § 1-2-22)
   H.   Resignation Of Appointive Officials: Any appointive officer of the City
may resign from office. If such officer resigns, he shall continue in office
until his successor has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to
appoint a City officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person
filling the office shall continue in office until his successor has been chosen
and has qualified.
(2006 Code § 1-2-23)
   I.   Books And Records To Successor: Every officer shall, upon going out of
office, deliver to his successor all books, papers, furniture, and other things
appertaining to such office, and which are the property of the City. Within
five (5) days after notification and request, any person who has been an
officer of the City is required to deliver to his successor in office, all
property, books and effects in his possession belonging to the City, or
pertaining to the office he has held. Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be
liable for all damages caused thereby, and shall, upon conviction, be penalized
according to the provisions of section
1-4-1 of this title. He shall not receive his final check until his City Code
Book and keys are turned over to the City Clerk.
   J.   Other Rules And Regulations: Every officer of the City shall perform
such other duties and be subject to such other rules and regulations as the
City Council may provide by law.
(2006 Code § 1-2-22)
1-10-5:   COMPENSATION:
   A.   Salaries:
      1.   Established: The following salaries are hereby established for
elected City officials:
         a.   Mayor: The Mayor shall receive three hundred dollars ($300.00)
per month.
         b.   Aldermen: Each Alderman shall receive one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00) per month.
         c.   City Clerk: The City Clerk shall receive one hundred twenty five
dollars ($125.00) per month.
         d.   City Treasurer: The City Treasurer shall receive one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) per month.
(2006 Code § 1-3-1)
      2.   Restrictions On Changes:
         a.   Elective Officials: No salary or compensation of any elected City
officer who is elected for a definite term of office shall be increased or
diminished during such term.
         b.   Appointive Officials: No salary or compensation of any appointed
official who is appointed for a definite term of office shall be decreased
during such term, but may be increased.
(2006 Code § 1-2-28)
   B.   Expenses Reimbursement: Each member of the Corporate Authorities may
receive reimbursement from the City for expenses incurred by the member in
attending committee meetings of the Corporate Authorities or for other expenses
incurred by the member in the course of performing official duties.
(2006 Code § 1-2-31)
   C.   An elected or appointed official in the City of Grafton shall be
allowed to elect to decline their W-2 City compensation when they are in-
processed at the finance section in City Hall.
(amd. Ord. 757, 8-16-2022)
1-10-6:   PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED:
The city’s personnel policies are hereby adopted by reference. A full copy of
the policies can be found in the City Clerk’s office.
1-10-7:   RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION:
   A.   Participation: The City Council does hereby authorize and approve
membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Ma’agement Association and
directs the Mayor and City Clerk to execute an intergovernmental cooperation
contract with the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association for
membership for a period of one year beginning the date the association
commences providing risk coverage to its members and each year thereafter
unless this section is repealed.
(2006 Code § 1-4-1)
   B.   Contribution: Each member hereby agrees to contribute to the
association a sum of money to be determined by the association at the time of
application based on the needs of the association and the loss experience of
the member, which sum shall constitute the cost of the member’s first year
contribution for membership in the association. Membership contributions for
second and subsequent years shall be calculated in accordance with the loss
experience of the City and the needs of the association including total losses
and expenditures of the Self-Insured Retention Fund of the association.
(2006 Code § 1-4-2)
1-10-8:   RETIREMENT:
   A.   Definition: When used in this section, the term “eligible employees”
shall mean all employees of the City, eligible under the Federal Act, except
persons elected to office by popular election and also the City Treasurer and
City Attorney.
   B.   Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the
purpose provided in sections hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the
amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable State or Federal
laws or regulations, and shall be paid quarterly.
(2006 Code § 1-2-33)
1-10-9:   PAYMENT OF INVOICES:
All invoices and requests for reimbursement are to be submitted to the City for
payment on or before the end of business on the second Tuesday of the month in
order to be considered for payment in that month. If invoices and requests for
reimbursement are not submitted by said time, they will not be processed for
payment until the following month.
(Ord. 735, 9-15-2020)
ARTICLE A: CITY ATTORNEY
Section
1-10A-1:   Appointment And Term; Compensation
1-10A-2:   Duties
1-10A-3:   Additional Counsel
1-10A-1:   APPOINTMENT AND TERM; COMPENSATION:
The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and
consent of the City Council, for the term of one year, or until a successor
shall have been appointed and qualified, whichever shall last occur. The City
Attorney shall have full charge of the law affairs of the City and shall be
known as the “City Attorney”, and shall receive reasonable fees for services
rendered when, in his or her judgment, or in the judgment of the Mayor or City
Council, the same are necessary or are for the best interests of the City.
(2006 Code § 1-2-88)
1-10A-2:   DUTIES:
   A.   The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend on behalf of the City in
all cases in which the interests of the corporation or any officer thereof are
involved; and the City Clerk shall furnish him or her with certified copies of
any ordinance, bond or paper in keeping necessary to be filed or used in any
suit or proceedings.
   B.   The City Attorney shall, when required, advise the City Council or any
officer in all matters of law in which the interests of the corporation are
involved, and shall draw such ordinances, bonds, forms and contracts, or
examine and pass upon the same, as may be required by the Mayor, the City
Council, or any committee thereof.
   C.   The City Attorney shall direct executions to be issued upon all
judgments recovered in favor of the City, and shall direct their prompt
service. He shall examine all the bills of the officers of courts, and of other
officers of the law, and shall certify to their correctness and the liability
of the City therefor.
   D.   The City Attorney shall institute and prosecute an action in every case
of violation of a City ordinance when instructed to do so by the Mayor or the
City Council. The Mayor, with consent of the City Council, may appoint an
Assistant City Attorney to prosecute ordinance violations.
   E.   The City Attorney or Assistant City Attorney shall not be required to
prosecute any suit or action arising under the ordinances of the City when,
upon investigation of the same, he shall become satisfied that the complaint
was instituted maliciously, vexatiously, or without just cause; and shall
dismiss or discontinue any such suit or proceeding upon such terms as he or she
may deem just or equitable.
   F.   The City Attorney is hereby authorized and instructed to enforce the
collection of any and all taxes and special assessments in the collection of
which the City is interested and to attend all sales of real or personal
property made to enforce the collection of such taxes or special assessments
and to bid thereat on behalf of the City.
   G.   The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor for the Planning
Commission, for the Zoning Board of Appeals and for all other boards and
commissions hereafter established by the City Council. He shall perform all
legal services as may be required for those boards and commissions.
(2006 Code § 1-2-89)
1-10A-3:   ADDITIONAL COUNSEL:
The City Council may at any time engage legal counsel, separate and in addition
to the City Attorney, whenever, in the City Council's opinion such additional
counsel is necessary.
(Ord. 742, 5-4-2021)
ARTICLE B: CITY ENGINEER
Section
1-10B-1:   Appointment And Term
1-10B-2:   Duties
1-10B-3:   Compensation
1-10B-1:   APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
With the advice and consent of the City Council, the Mayor may appoint an
engineer for the City, who shall serve for the term of the Mayor or for such
period not exceeding the term of the Mayor, as may be designated by the Mayor
and City Council.
(2006 Code § 1-2-100)
1-10B-2:   DUTIES:
The City Engineer shall make and submit plans, estimates and specifications for
any public work which may be proposed or ordered by the City Council. The
engineer shall also examine all public works under his or her charge and see
that the plans, estimates and specifications for the same are properly
executed.
(2006 Code § 1-2-101)
1-10B-3:   COMPENSATION:
The City Engineer shall receive reasonable compensation for his services, and
the same will be provided in the annual appropriation ordinance on an estimated
basis.
(2006 Code § 1-2-101)
ARTICLE C: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Section:
1-10C-1:   Purpose; Office Created
1-10C-2:   Authority
1-10C-3:   Department Employees
1-10C-4:   Property Custodian
1-10C-1:   PURPOSE; OFFICE CREATED:
The City understands the need for proper coordination and management of City
projects and the supervision of City employees and City departmental operations
to ensure proper organization, management and that City personnel are
performing in the most economically feasible way possible. Therefore, the City
has created the position of Director of Public Works.
(2006 Code § 1-2-103)
1-10C-2:   AUTHORITY:
The Director of Public Works shall have charge of and be responsible for:
   A.   The construction and care of all public streets, alleys and driveways
in the City.
   B.   The cleaning and safekeeping of all public streets, alleys and
driveways.
   C.   The construction, repair and maintenance of all gutters and drains
located within or upon public streets, alleys and driveways and elsewhere by
easement or right-of-way ensuring that the same are kept free from defects.
   D.   Supervision of the lighting of public streets and alleys.
   E.   Taking into custody of all City property which is not otherwise
assigned to the care and custody of any other City officer or official.
   F.   Such other duties and responsibilities as may be otherwise defined in
this Code.
(2006 Code § 1-2-104)
1-10C-3:   DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES:
All officers or employees assigned to the Department of Public Works shall
perform their duties subject to the directions and under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works.
(2006 Code § 1-2-105)
1-10C-4:   PROPERTY CUSTODIAN:
The Director of Public Works shall be the custodian of all City property which
is not assigned to the care or custody of any other City officer.
(2006 Code § 1-2-106)
CHAPTER 11: ETHICS
Section
1-11-1:   State Regulations Adopted
1-11-2:   Definitions
1-11-3:   Interpretation
1-11-4:   Ethics Officer
1-11-5:   Ethics Commission
1-11-6:   Prohibited And Restricted Acts
1-11-7:   Penalties
1-11-8:   Amendments
1-11-9:   Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-11-1:   STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 10-40 of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred
to as the “act” in this chapter) are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers and employees of the City to the extent required by
5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
FAMILY MEMBER OR FAMILY: A spouse, parent, child, grandchild, sibling, or
sibling-in-law.
OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE: As defined in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-3:   INTERPRETATION:
It is the intent of the City that the provisions of this chapter shall be
substantially in accordance with the requirements of 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 10-40 of
the State Officials And Employees Ethics Act. To the extent that 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through
10-40 of the State Officials And Employees Ethics Act may be more restrictive
than the requirements of this chapter, the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 10-40 of
the State Officials And Employees Ethics Act shall apply and control. This
chapter does not repeal other relevant personnel rules or regulations adopted
by the City (“existing regulations”). To the extent that the existing
regulations are less restrictive than 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and
5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 10-40 of the State Officials And
Employees Ethics Act and this chapter, the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 10-40 of
the State Officials And Employees Ethics Act and this chapter shall apply and
control.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-4:   ETHICS OFFICER:
The duly appointed and acting City Attorney shall be designated the Ethics
Officer for the City. The Ethics Officer shall be available to provide guidance
to officers and employees in completing statements of economic interest before
they are filed with the appropriate office, provide guidance to officers and
employees in interpretation of this chapter and the requirements of 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through
10-40 of the State Officials And Employees Ethics Act and with regard to any
other questions presented from time to time concerning the interpretation and
implementation of other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations
of the City pertaining to ethics, conflicts of interest, or related issues. Any
person may file a complaint in writing with the Ethics Officer alleging any
violation of this chapter by any officer or employee of the City. Any such
complaints received by the Ethics Officer shall be conveyed in writing to the
Ethics Commission.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-5:   ETHICS COMMISSION:
The Ethics Commission shall consist of the entire City Council. The Ethics
Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To promulgate such procedure and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers as deemed necessary or appropriate;
   B.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate,
conduct research, conduct closed hearings and deliberations, issue findings,
decisions and recommendations, and impose a fine when warranted;
   C.   To act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter, and not upon its own prerogative;
   D.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations
and to require additional information and documents from persons who may have
violated this chapter as the commission deems appropriate;
   E.   When necessary, to subpoena witnesses and compel the production of
books and papers pertinent to an investigation authorized by this chapter;
   F.   When necessary, to request that the State’s Attorney provide legal
advice without charge to the commission;
   G.   To prepare and publish such manuals and guides as the commission deems
appropriate explaining the duties of individuals covered by this chapter;
   H.   To prepare such public information materials as the commission deems
appropriate to facilitate compliance, implementation and enforcement of this
chapter;
   I.   May delegate to a subcommittee its authority to conduct investigations
pursuant to this subsection and require a report of the subcommittee's findings
to the full commission for final action; and
   J.   In the event that a member of the commission is the subject of a
claimed violation of this chapter, such commissioner shall immediately recuse
himself or herself from the investigation of such claimed violation, and shall
take no part in the final action of the commission regarding such claimed
violation.
   K.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly
within the purview of this chapter.
   L.   Within two (2) weeks after the conclusion of the hearing on the
complaint, the commission shall:
      1.   Dismiss the complaint; or
      2.   Issue a preliminary recommendation to the alleged violator and to
the violator's ultimate jurisdictional authority or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both. The particular findings in the instant case, the preliminary
recommendation, and any fine shall be made public.
   M.   A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within
one year after the alleged violation.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-6:   PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED ACTS:
   A.   1. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act by any officer or any employee of the City is hereby
prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the City is hereby prohibited.
   B.   1. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act
by any officer or employee of the City is hereby prohibited.
      2.   No officer or employee of the City shall intentionally use any
property or resources of the City in connection with any campaign for elected
office or to benefit any political organization. No employee shall engage in
any political activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for any
elected office or to benefit any political organization during any time for
which he or she is to be compensated by the City. At no time shall any officer
or employee of the City intentionally require any other officer or employee to
perform any political activity in support of or in connection with any campaign
for any elected office or to benefit any political organization.
   C.   No officer or employee of the City with respect to any transaction
which is or which is reasonably expected to become the subject of an official
act or action shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the City or use
such information to advance the interests of such officer or employee or his or
her family members. No officer or employee shall have an interest in, or have a
family relationship with a person having an interest in a transaction that is
incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties in the
public interest or that may impair his or her independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his or her official duties.
   D.   Any employee or officer whose office is elective or appointive shall
recuse himself or herself from any transaction that comes before such employee
or officer in the course of his or her official duties, whenever such employee
or officer has actual knowledge that he or she has any interest in the
transaction, any family relationship with a person having an interest in such
transaction, of any interest in an applicant appearing before the employee or
officer in an official capacity, even if the employee or officer does not have
an interest in the transaction itself.
   E.   No officer or employee shall be in a position of the immediate
supervisor of an employee who is a family member of the officer or employee.
   F.   Each elected official shall file with the City Clerk a statement
disclosing direct or indirect ownership by the official or by the spouse or
minor children of the official in any real state located within the corporate
limits within the City. The statement shall include the common address of the
real estate, tax parcel identification number, and shall indicate the ownership
interest held in each parcel of real estate. For the purposes of this chapter,
the ownership of a beneficial interest in real estate held in a land trust,
real estate being purchased by contract or real estate held by a corporation,
investment group or partnership in which the official, or the spouse or minor
children of the official, owns more than a five percent (5%) interest, shall be
considered real estate. The real estate in which the official resides shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter, unless the real estate contains
more than three (3) residential units.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-7:   PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-8:   AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
1-11-9:   UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the Corporate Authorities of the City if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   B.   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by
this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
(2006 Code § 22-3-1)
CHAPTER 12: OPEN RECORDS POLICY
Section
1-12-1:   Public Policy
1-12-2:   Definitions
1-12-3:   Individual Privacy Protected
1-12-4:   Public Records Available
1-12-5:   Written Requests
1-12-6:   Fees
1-12-7
:   Time To Comply With Request; Extensions
1-12-8:   Unduly Burdensome Requests
1-12-9:   Exemptions From Inspections And Copying
1-12-10:   Denial Of Request; Appeals
1-12-11:   Dissemination Of Information About Public Bodies
1-12-12:   List Of Categories Of Records
1-12-1:   PUBLIC POLICY:
It is declared to be the public policy of the City that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the City.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the City shall be consistent with the terms of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 15-1-2)
1-12-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COPYING: The reproduction of any public record by means of any photographic,
electronic, mechanical, or other process, device or means.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT: The Illinois Freedom of Information Act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 140/1.1 et seq.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization, or
association, acting individually or as a group.
PUBLIC RECORD: All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memorandums,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, recorded information, and all other
documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having
been or being prepared, used, received, possessed, or under control of the
City.
(2006 Code § 15-1-1)
1-12-3:   INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED:
This chapter is not intended to be used to violate individual privacy, nor for
the purpose of furthering a commercial enterprise, or to disrupt the duly
undertaken work of the City.
(2006 Code § 15-1-3)
1-12-4:   PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE:
The City shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Freedom of Information Act.
(2006 Code § 15-1-4)
1-12-5:   WRITTEN REQUESTS:
   A.   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in
writing and shall be addressed to the City Clerk. The requestor shall include
the following information in any request for public records:
      1.   The requestor’s full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requestor can be reached during normal business hours;
      2.   A description of the records sought, being as specific as possible;
      3.   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying, or
both.
   B.   The Clerk shall make available a form for use by requestors; however,
no request shall be denied for failure to use the form.
(2006 Code § 15-1-5)
1-12-6:   FEES:
   A.   Established: The City hereby establishes and shall charge fees
reasonably calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and
certifying public records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of
the City to copy records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and
review of the record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and
certification, unless otherwise provided by State Statute. The charges for
complying with providing the requested records shall be the maximum fees
allowed by 5 ILCS 140/6. In the event materials must be reproduced by copy
services or by the City Engineer (e.g., large plan sheets), the requestor shall
be responsible for the actual charges.
   B.   Waivers Or Reductions: Documents shall be furnished without charge or
at a reduced charge where the City determines that waiver or reduction of the
fee is in the public interest because furnishing information can be considered
as primarily benefiting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is
in the public interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and
disseminate information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal
rights of the general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal
or commercial benefit. In setting the amount of the waiver or reduction, the
City may take into consideration the amount of materials requested and the cost
of copying them.
(2006 Code § 15-1-6)
1-12-7:    TIME TO COMPLY WITH REQUEST; EXTENSIONS:
   A.   The City shall either comply with or deny a request for public records
within five (5) working days after its receipt. Denials shall be in writing and
in accordance with section
1-12-10 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 15-1-7)
   B.   1. The time limit prescribed in subsection A of this section may be
extended in each case for not more than five (5) additional working days for
any of the following reasons:
         a.   The requested records are stored, in whole or in part, at other
locations than the office having charge of the requested records.
         b.   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records.
         c.   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it.
         d.   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions.
         e.   The request for records cannot be complied with by the City
within the time limits prescribed by subsection B1d of this section without
unduly burdening or interfering with the City.
         f.   The requested records have not been located in the course of
routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them.
         g.   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with
all practicable speed, with another public body or among two (2) or more
components of a public body having a substantial interest in the determination
or in the subject matter of the request.
      2.   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the
Clerk shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the time
limits specified in this subsection, of the reasons for the delay and the date
by which the records will be made available or denial will be forthcoming. In
no instance may the delay in processing last longer than seven (7) working
days. A failure to render a decision within seven (7) working days shall be
considered a denial of the request.
(2006 Code § 15-1-8)
1-12-8:   UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUESTS:
   A.   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the City, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
City strongly outweighs the public interest in the information. If the City
responds to a categorical request by stating that compliance would unduly
burden its operation, it shall do so in writing signed by the Clerk specifying
the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome and the extent to which
compliance will so burden the operation of the City.
   B.   After receipt of this response in writing, the person making the
request shall have an opportunity to reduce the request to manageable
proportions. If the person making the request fails to reduce the request to
manageable proportions, the response of the City shall be treated as a denial
of the request information.
(2006 Code § 15-1-9)
1-12-9:   EXEMPTIONS FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING:
Information exempted by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes ILCS 140/7 of the Freedom
of Information Act shall be exempt from inspection and copying. If a record
contains both exempt and nonexempt information, the exempt information shall be
deleted and the remainder of the record made available for inspection and
copying.
(2006 Code § 15-1-10)
1-12-10:   DENIAL OF REQUEST; APPEALS:
   A.   The Clerk, when denying a request for public record, shall notify the
requestor, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, and the reason
for the denial. Each notice of denial by the Clerk shall inform the person of
his or her right to appeal to the Public Access Counselor pursuant to 5 ILCS
140/9.
   B.   A requestor may appeal a denial of a request for public records to the
Mayor. All appeals shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the Mayor in an
envelope clearly marked “FOIA APPEAL”, and shall include a copy of the original
request, a copy of the denial or a statement that the City failed to respond
within seven (7) working days; and a written statement setting forth the
reasons the requestor believes the appeal should be granted.
   C.   The Mayor shall respond in writing to an appeal within seven (7)
working days of receipt thereof. Failure to respond shall be considered a
denial of the appeal. If the Mayor denies an appeal, in whole or in part, the
requestor shall be informed of his or her rights to judicial review under 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/11 of the Freedom of Information Act.
(2006 Code § 15-1-11)
1-12-11:   DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES:
The City shall prominently display at the City Hall, make available for
inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the mail if
requested, each of the following:
   A.   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be limited
to, a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional
subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number and location
of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part time
employees, and the identification and membership of any board, commission,
committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body is required to report and be answerable for its
operations; and
   B.   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating by titles and business
addresses of those employees to whom requests for public records should be
directed, and any fees allowable under section
1-12-6 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 15-1-14)
1-12-12:   LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS:
As to public records prepared or received after the effective date hereof, the
City Clerk shall maintain and make available for inspection and copying a
reasonably current list of all types or categories of records under its
control. The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid persons in
obtaining access to public records pursuant to this chapter. The City Clerk
shall furnish upon request a description of the manner in which public records
stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in a form
comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or printout
format.
(2006 Code § 15-1-15)
CHAPTER 13: LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION PLAN
Section
1-13-1:   Plan Adopted
1-13-1:   PLAN ADOPTED:
The Land Use and Transportation Plan of the City, as attached to ordinance 664
and made a part hereof and as on file in the office of the City Clerk, is
hereby adopted amending all previous comprehensive plans of the City.
(Ord. 681, 7-18-2017)
CHAPTER 14: POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Section
1-14-1:   Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-14-2:   Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-14-3:   Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-14-4:   Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment
Allegations
1-14-5:   Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-14-6:   Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-14-1:   PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person’s sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations, it is a policy of the City to prohibit harassment of any person
by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal
agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal officials,
municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or offices are
prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any employment
relationship or lack thereof.
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
1-14-2:   DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as any
unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a
sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual’s employment;
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   B.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature;
      2.   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “smacking”
or “kissing” noises;
      3.   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
      4.   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
      5.   Textual/electronic: “sexting” (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   C.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person.”
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
1-14-3:   PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating his position to the
offending employee, and his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary for
sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   B.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal, if subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel:
         a.   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the City Manager or Administrator, or the Chief Executive Officer of
the municipality.
         b.   The employee experiencing what he believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      3.   Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
   C.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   D.   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
1-14-4:   PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
ALLEGATIONS:
   A.   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
chapter;
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   D.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation;
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   E.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer may
not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   F.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he has opposed that which he reasonably and
in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   G.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed
over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may file a
retaliation charge due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or three
hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
1-14-5:   CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this chapter or the
prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per offense, applicable
discipline or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and
penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State law or Federal law.
Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
State or Federal agency.
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
1-14-6:   CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
   A.   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining.
   B.   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging
a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a State’s
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor, An ethics commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 687, 1-16-2018)
TITLE 2: FINANCES AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
Section
2-1-1:   Claims Against City
2-1-2:   Certificate Of Insurance Required For Contractors
2-1-1:   CLAIMS AGAINST CITY:
All claims against the City for goods purchased, damaged, or originating in any
other way, except for claims for salaries and other allowances that are fixed
by ordinance, must be presented on or before the first Monday of each month to
the City Treasurer or Finance Officer. All such claims must be in writing and
items shall be specified. This does not prohibit the City Council from passing
on any claims not previously presented if, in the opinion of the Council,
justice to the claimant requires it.
(2006 Code § 1-2-29)
2-1-2:   CERTIFICATES OF INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR CONTRACTORS:
All contractors and subcontractors doing work for the City shall first provide
a certificate of insurance indicating workers’ compensation and employers’
liability coverage and the policy limits for such coverage.
(2006 Code § 1-2-34)
CHAPTER 2: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES
Section
2-2-1:   Competitive Bidding Requirements
2-2-2:   Open Market Procedure
2-2-3:   Professional Services
2-2-4:   Emergency Purchases
2-2-5:   Cooperative Purchasing
2-2-1:   COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bids Required:
      1.   Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases
of and contracts for supplies, materials, and services shall, except as
specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids.
      2.   All work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in
whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases,
orders or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services
except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall
exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding
is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Aldermen then holding office.
   B.   Notice Inviting Bids:
      1.   Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper
with general circulation within Jersey County, Illinois. The City shall also
advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public
bulletin board in the City Hall.
      2.   The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general
description of the work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall
state where specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening
bids.
   C.   Bid Deposits: When deemed necessary by the City Council, bid deposits
shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the
contract by the City Council. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit
required by the City Council upon failure on his part to enter into a contract
within ten (10) days after the award.
   D.   Bid Opening Procedure:
      1.   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City and shall be identified
as bids on the envelope.
      2.   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the
public notice.
      3.   A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the City Council
or by a City employee, in which event, a tabulation of the bids shall be
furnished to the City Council at its next regular meeting.
   E.   Rejection Of Bids: The City shall have the authority to reject all bids
or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served thereby.
   F.   Bidders In Default To City: The City shall not accept the bid of a
contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies
due the City.
   G.   Award Of Contract:
      1.   Authority: The City Council shall have the authority to award
contracts within the purview of this section.
      2.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
City to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the City
Council shall consider:
         a.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required.
         b.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference.
         c.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
         d.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services.
         e.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service.
         f.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service.
         g.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
         h.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
         i.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
         j.   Whether the bidder has furnished a certificate of insurance
indicating workers' compensation and employers' liability coverage and the
policy limits for such coverage.
      3.   Performance Bonds: The City Council shall have the authority to
require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as
it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City.
(2006 Code § 1-2-27)
2-2-2:   OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
All work and purchases of supplies, materials and services of less than the
estimated value of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be made in the
open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the
procedure prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal contracts.
(2006 Code § 1-2-27)
2-2-3:   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers and architects and any other
professions whose ethical code involved prohibits or discourages involvement in
normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the City without observing
the bidding procedures prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal
contracts.
(2006 Code § 1-2-27)
2-2-4:   EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate work or purchase of
supplies, materials or services, the City Council shall be empowered to secure
by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price,
any work, supplies, materials or services regardless of the amount of the
expenditure.
(2006 Code § 1-2-27)
2-2-5:   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The City shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the City would be
served thereby.
(2006 Code § 1-2-27)
CHAPTER 3: INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
2-3-1:   City Policy
2-3-2:   Scope
2-3-3:   Prudence
2-3-4:   Objectives
2-3-5:   Management And Administrative Authority
2-3-6:   Ethics And Conflicts Of Interest
2-3-7:   Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
2-3-8:   Authorized And Suitable Investments
2-3-9:   Collateralization
2-3-10:   Safekeeping And Custody
2-3-11:   Diversification
2-3-12:   Maximum Maturities
2-3-13:   Internal Control
2-3-14:   Performance Standards
2-3-15:   Reports
2-3-16:   Review Of And Modifications To Policy
2-3-1:   CITY POLICY:
It is the policy of the City to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the City and conforming to all State and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(2006 Code § 1-5-1)
2-3-2:   SCOPE:
This policy includes all public funds governed by the City Council.
(2006 Code § 1-5-2)
2-3-3:   PRUDENCE:
   A.   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   B.   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio.
(2006 Code § 1-5-3)
2-3-4:   OBJECTIVES:
   A.   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      1.   Legality: Conformance with Federal, State and other legal
requirements.
      2.   Safety: Preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal.
      3.   Liquidity: Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements.
      4.   Yield: Attainment of market rates of return.
   B.   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the City’s needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
(2006 Code § 1-5-4)
2-3-5:   MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer who may establish written procedures for the
operation of the investment program.
(2006 Code § 1-5-5)
2-3-6:   ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(2006 Code § 1-5-6)
2-3-7:   AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
(2006 Code § 1-5-7)
2-3-8:   AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS:
Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in Illinois
Statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Investments shall be made
that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund type being invested.
(2006 Code § 1-5-8)
2-3-9:   COLLATERALIZATION:
Collateralization may be required, at the discretion of the City, on all funds
held in banks or savings and loans above the insured limits provided by the
FDIC or FSLIC. In order to anticipate market changes and provide a level of
security for all funds, the collateralization level will be a minimum of one
hundred two percent (102%) of market value of principal and accrued interest.
(2006 Code § 1-5-9)
2-3-10:   SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY:
All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the City, shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment (DVP)
basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement.
(2006 Code § 1-5-10)
2-3-11:   DIVERSIFICATION:
The City shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.
(2006 Code § 1-5-11)
2-3-12:   MAXIMUM MATURITIES:
   A.   To the extent possible, the City shall attempt to match its investments
with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash
flow, the City will not directly invest in securities maturing more than two
(2) years from the date of purchase.
   B.   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding two (2) years if
the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds.
(2006 Code § 1-5-12)
2-3-13:   INTERNAL CONTROL:
The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an internal
control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the City are protected
from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be designed to
provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The internal
controls shall address the following points:
   A.   Control of collusion.
   B.   Separation of transaction authority from accounting.
   C.   Custodial safekeeping.
   D.   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and wire
transfers.
(2006 Code § 1-5-13)
2-3-14:   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio maintained by the Illinois Public
Treasurer's Investment Pool (IPTIP).
(2006 Code § 1-5-14)
2-3-15:   REPORTS:
The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The report
should be provided to the City Council and available upon request. The report
should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An annual
report should also be provided to the City Council. A statement of the market
value of the portfolio shall be issued to the City Council quarterly.
(2006 Code § 1-5-15)
2-3-16:   REVIEW OF AND MODIFICATIONS TO POLICY:
The investment policy has been adopted by ordinance. The policy shall be
reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer, and any modifications made
thereto shall be made by ordinance.
(2006 Code § 1-5-16)
CHAPTER 4: TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Section
2-4-1:   Short Title
2-4-2:   Scope; Application Of Provisions
2-4-3:   Definitions
2-4-4:   Notice Requirements
2-4-5:   Delinquent Notices, Payments, Remittances Or Other Filings
2-4-6:   Application Of Tax; Payments
2-4-7:   Certain Credits And Refunds
2-4-8:   Audit Procedure
2-4-9:   Appeals
2-4-10:   Payment Required; Interest And Penalties
2-4-11:   Installment Contracts
2-4-12:   Statute Of Limitations
2-4-13:   Voluntary Disclosure
2-4-14:   Publication Of Tax Ordinances; Copies
2-4-15:   Review Of Liens
2-4-1:   SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY CODE.
(2006 Code § 36-4-1)
2-4-2:   SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the City’s
procedures in connection with all of the City’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
(2006 Code § 36-4-2)
   B.   Application Of Provisions: This chapter shall be liberally construed
and administered to supplement all of the City’s tax ordinances. To the extent
that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter,
this chapter shall be controlling.
(2006 Code § 36-4-18)
2-4-3:   DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The “Local Government Taxpayer’ Bill of Rights Act” (50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.)
CITY: The City of Grafton, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The Mayor and City Council.
HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Corporate Authorities, to conduct hearings and to
issue final determinations regarding the collection of all locally imposed and
administered taxes.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The City’s Mayor is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff,
employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the Local Tax
Administrator to act in the Local Tax Administrator’s stead. The Local Tax
Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter
to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the
Local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the City that
is collected or administered by the City not an agency or department of the
State. The term does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the City.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the City’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
City.
(2006 Code § 36-4-3)
2-4-4:   NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the Local
Tax Administrator. The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as
follows:
   A.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
   B.   Personal service or delivery.
(2006 Code § 36-4-4)
2-4-5:   DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the City
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   A.   Physically received by the City on or before the due date; or
   B.   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City,
with adequate postage prepaid.
(2006 Code § 36-4-5)
2-4-6:   APPLICATION OF TAX; PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period.
(2006 Code § 36-4-6)
2-4-7:   CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   Written Protest Required: The City shall not refund or credit any taxes
voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event
that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer
shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked
knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment
or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
   B.   Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for
credit or refund shall be four (4) or less years after the end of the calendar
year in which payment in error was made. The City shall not grant a credit or
refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a
person who has not paid the amounts directly to the City.
   C.   Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the City.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator
shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, based
on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund
check or the grant of a credit.
(2006 Code § 36-4-7)
2-4-8:   AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Information Required: Each notice of audit shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   B.   Time For Conducting Audit:
      1.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
      2.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the Local Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   C.   Taxpayer’s Books And Records:
      1.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the City.
      2.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or
tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the Local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   D.   Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a
locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the City’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   E.   Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to
the incorrect local governmental entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall
notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax.
(2006 Code § 36-4-8)
2-4-9:   APPEALS:
   A.   Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The Local Tax Administrator
shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the Local Tax Administrator’s
issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a
notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the
following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   B.   Request For Hearing: A taxpayer who receives written notice from the
Local Tax Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file
with the Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing,
setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator
within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax
determination and assessment.
   C.   Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for
hearing is filed, the Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date
convenient to all parties.
   D.   Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and
petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the
tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
   E.   Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable
cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along
with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the Local Tax
Administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and
petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest
and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days
after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
(2006 Code § 36-4-9)
   F.   Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under this section, the Local Tax
Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may
request that a hearing officer conduct the hearing rather than the Local Tax
Administrator.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
      3.   At the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator or hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator or
hearing officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision.
(2006 Code § 36-4-10)
2-4-10:   PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax
is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   B.   Interest: The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be twelve
percent (12%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   C.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
(2006 Code § 36-4-11)
   D.   Abatement Of Penalties: The Local Tax Administrator shall have the
authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the Local Tax Administrator shall determine
reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.
(2006 Code § 36-4-12)
2-4-11:   INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the Local Administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer.
(2006 Code § 36-4-13)
2-4-12:   STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The City, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice
of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   B.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   C.   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
City, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   D.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (2006 Code § 36-4-14)
2-4-13:   VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which
case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the Local Tax
Administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.
(2006 Code § 36-4-15)
2-4-14:   PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s Office.
(2006 Code § 36-4-16)
2-4-15:   REVIEW OF LIENS:
The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the City’s expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(2006 Code § 36-4-17)
CHAPTER 5: CITY TAXES
ARTICLE A: NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’
AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES
Section
2-5A-1:   Statute Authority
2-5A-2:   Intent
2-5A-3:   Definitions
2-5A-4:   Taxes Imposed; Rates; Exemptions; Disposition Of Revenues
2-5A-5:   Limitations Of Taxes
2-5A-6:   Collection And Administration Of Taxes
2-5A-7:   Effective Date Of Taxes
2-5A-1:   STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Sections 8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4).
(2006 Code § 36-8-9; amd. Ord. 761, 10-18-2022)
2-5A-2:   INTENT:
It is the intent of this article to impose a one percent (1%) nonhome rule
municipal retailers' occupation tax and a one percent (1%) nonhome rule
municipal service occupation tax, as authorized by and pursuant to Illinois
Statutes, specifically 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.1 et seq.
(2006 Code § 36-8-1; amd. Ord. 761, 10-18-2022)
2-5A-3:   DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words used in this article shall have the same meanings and
definitions as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.1 et seq.,
including especially 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.2.
(2006 Code § 36-8-2)
2-5A-4:   TAXES IMPOSED; RATES; EXEMPTIONS; DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled and registered with an agency of this State's government, at
retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business.
   B.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
   C.   This "Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and this "Non-
Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax" may not be imposed on tangible
personal property taxed at the rate of one percent (1.0%) under the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act and the Service Occupation Tax Act.
   D.   The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Sections 8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4
of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-
11-1.4).
(amd. Ord. 761, 10-18-2022)
2-5A-5:   LIMITATIONS OF TAXES:
With respect to the provisions of this article imposing a nonhome rule
municipal retailers’ occupation tax (subsection
2-5A-4A of this article) and nonhome rule municipal service occupation tax
(subsection
2-5A-4B of this article), nothing in either subsection would be construed to
impose a tax upon the privilege of engaging in any business which, under the
Constitution of the United States, may not be made the subject of taxation by
the State or by the City.
(2006 Code § 36-8-5)
2-5A-6:   COLLECTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 36-8-6; amd. Ord. 761, 10-18-2022)
2-5A-7:   EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAXES:
This article shall take effect on (i) the first day of July next following the
adoption and filing of Ordinance 761 with the Department of Revenue, if filed
on or before the preceding May 1 or (ii) the first day of January next
following the adoption and filing of Ordinance 761 with the Department of
Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1.
(2006 Code § 36-8-7; amd. Ord. 761, 10-18-2022)
ARTICLE B: ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
Section
2-5B-1:   Tax Imposed
2-5B-2:   Exceptions
2-5B-3:   Additional Taxes
2-5B-4:   Collection
2-5B-5:   Reports to Municipality
2-5B-6:   Credit For Overpayment
2-5B-7:   Violation; Penalty
2-5B-1:   TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges. The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed, within the corporate limits of the
municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
First 2,000 KWH     0.61 cents per KWH
Next 48,000 KWH     0.40 cents per KWH
Next 50,000 KWH     0.36 cents per KWH
Next 400,000 KWH    0.35 cents per KWH
Next 500,000 KWH    0.34 cents per KWH
Next 2,000,000 KWH  0.32 cents per KWH
Next 2,000,000 KWH  0.315 cents per KWH
Next 5,000,000 KWH  0.310 cents per KWH
Next 10,000,000 KWH 0.305 cents per KWH
Over 20,000,000 KWH 0.300 cents per KWH
 
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
2-5B-2:   EXCEPTIONS:
None of the taxes authorized by this article may be imposed with response to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statues of the United
States, be made the subject of taxation by this State or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this article for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers
Occupation Tax Act as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax
authorized by this section be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or
on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate
upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the municipality.
All accounts of the city shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this
article.
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
2-5B-3:   ADDITIONAL TAXES:
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
2-5B-4:   COLLECTION:
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the purchaser by the
person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to file purchaser and if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt,
owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such
tax to the gross charge for delivering electricity. Persons delivering
electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount
equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to
collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the municipality in the manner prescribed by the
municipality. On or before the last day of each month, persons delivering
electricity shall make a return to the City for the preceding month and shall,
at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
2-5B-5:   REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY:
   A.   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer who has not paid
the tax imposed by this article to a person delivering electricity as set forth
in section
2-5B-1 and who is not otherwise exempted from paying such tax shall make a
return to the City Treasurer for the preceding month stating:
      1.   Taxpayer’s name;
      2.   Taxpayer’s principle place of business;
      3.   Taxpayer’s gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax; and
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   B.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the City, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects,
report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of businesses subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon
any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
   C.   All businesses and individuals who are subject to pay monthly taxes
directly to the City of Grafton must provide to the City of Grafton Finance
Manager a copy of their completed monthly Illinois Form RHM-1 or Form RHM-7 by
the fifteenth of the following month and a copy of their annual IRS Form 1099-
K by May 1 of each year in which they file taxes.
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 764, - -2023)
2-5B-6:   CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article form the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior
to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited. No action to recover
any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced
more than three years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
2-5B-7:   VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who willfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than five
hunched dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
and in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due
(see 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
(Ord. 695, passed 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE C: MUNICIPAL GAS TAX
Section
2-5C-1:   Definitions
2-5C-2:   Tax Imposed; Rate
2-5C-3:   Tax Is Additional
2-5C-4:   Exemptions
2-5C-5:   Tax Returns And Remittances
2-5C-6:   Credit For Overpayment
2-5C-7:   Penalties
2-5C-1:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS:
   A.   The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the consideration
received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling water for use or
consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. GROSS
RECEIPTS shall not include that portion of the consideration received for
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas or water to business
enterprises to the extent and during the period in which the exemption is in
effect or for school districts or units of local government during the period
in which the exemption is in effect.
   B.   For utility bills issued on or after May 1, 1996, but before May 1,
1997, and for receipts from those utility bills, GROSS RECEIPTS does not
include one-third (1/3) of amounts added to customers’ bills under Section 9-
222 of the Public Utilities Act, or amounts added to customers’ bills by
taxpayers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities described
in Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act. For utility bills issued on or
after May 1, 1997, but before May 1, 1998, and for receipts from those utility
bills, GROSS RECEIPTS does not include two-thirds (2/3) of amounts added to
customers’ bills under Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, or amount
added to customers’ bills by taxpayers who are not subject to rate regulation
by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the
tax liabilities described in Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act. For
utility bills issued on or after May 1, 1998, and for receipts from those
utility bills, GROSS RECEIPTS does not include amounts added to customers’
bills under Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, or amounts added to
customers’ bills by taxpayers who are not subject to rate regulation by the
Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities described in Section 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act.
   C.   For purposes of this article,  GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include amounts
added to customers’ bills under Section 9-221 of the Public Utilities Act. This
subsection is not intended to nor does it make any change in the meaning of
GROSS RECEIPTS for the purposes of this article, but is intended to remove
possible ambiguities, thereby confirming the existing meaning of GROSS RECEIPTS
prior to January 1, 1996 (the effective date of Public Act 89-325).
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, limited liability company, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(2006 Code § 36-6-4)
2-5C-2:   TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the City and
not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom.
(2006 Code § 36-6-1)
2-5C-3:   TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to the City by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of
its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayers’ business.
(2006 Code § 36-6-3)
2-5C-4:   EXEMPTIONS:
The tax authorized by this article may be imposed with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be
made the subject of taxation by this State or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this article, for such transactions as are or may become subject
to taxation under the provisions of this article, for such transactions as are
or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act" authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
11-1.1 et seq., nor shall the tax authorized by this article be imposed upon
any person engaged in the business unless such tax is imposed in like manner
and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class
in the City, whether privately or Municipally owned or operated.
(2006 Code § 36-6-2)
2-5C-5:   TAX RETURNS AND REMITTANCES:
   A.   On or before September 30, each taxpayer shall make a return to the
City Treasurer for the months of June, July and August, 2002, stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
Authorities may require.
   B.   On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer for a corresponding
three (3) month period.
   C.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the City Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(2006 Code § 36-6-5)
2-5C-6:   CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. No action to
recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be
commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(2006 Code § 36-6-6)
2-5C-7:   PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due.
(2006 Code § 36-6-7)
ARTICLE D: SIMPLIFIED TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
2-5D-1:   Definitions
2-5D-2:   Tax Imposed; Rates
2-5D-3:   Exemptions
2-5D-4:   Collection Of Tax By Retailers
2-5D-5:   Tax Returns
2-5D-6:   Resales
2-5D-1:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the City
regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the City and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money, whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination
point within the City and charges for the portion of the interoffice channels
provided within the City. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel
connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is
located within the jurisdictional boundary of the City, shall be determined by
the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the
interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary
of the City and the denominator of which is the total number of channel
termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, GROSS CHARGE
shall not include any of the following:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
      1.   The tax imposed by this article;
      2.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35 ILCS
630/1 et seq.);
      3.   The tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      4.   911 surcharges; or
      5.   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of
section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 9-
222.2), as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City.
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time sharing agreement.
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-222.1) to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce
and Economic Opportunity.
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
   G.   Bad debts (“bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices.
   I.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act (35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.)
   J.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if:
      1.   Those charges are aggregated with other charges for
telecommunications that are taxable;
      2.   Those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice; and
      3.   The retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on the
retailer’s books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the
nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the
sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this State.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this State.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of
any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities
created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision
of this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making SALES AT RETAIL as
defined in this section. The department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by the
department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE Or Any Like Term: Means
and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State, directly or
by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities,
sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and
State universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event, this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air to ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or
permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the City and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by
this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this article, private line means a
dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the
customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of
channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form,
content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this article. For purposes of this definition,
“prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in section
2-27 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-27).
(2006 Code § 36-3-1)
2-5D-2:   TAX IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%)
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall
be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
subsection to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the
municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%)
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in
this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted
pursuant to or authorized by this subsection to the extent of the amount of
such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and
paid in a municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a
credit against any other state.
(2006 Code § 36-3-2)
2-5D-3:   EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to the
extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the City.
(2006 Code § 36-3-2)
2-5D-4:   COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the department. The tax authorized by this article shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale
at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the
manner provided by the department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(2006 Code § 36-3-3)
2-5D-5:   TAX RETURNS:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this article on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this
article.
(2006 Code § 36-3-4)
2-5D-6:   RESALES:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax free on the
ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number
from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection
with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable
because of being a sale for resale.
(2006 Code § 36-3-5)
ARTICLE E: HOTEL TAX
Section
2-5E-1:   Definitions
2-5E-2:   Tax Imposed; Rate
2-5E-3:   Responsibility For Tax; Payment And Collection
2-5E-4:   Inspection Of Books And Records
2-5E-5:   Tax Returns And Remittances; Failure To Pay
2-5E-6:   Disposition Of Proceeds And Fines
2-5E-7:   Penalty
2-5E-1:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure offered for rental on a
daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping. One room offered for rental
with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered as a single hotel or
motel room. The number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall be computed
on the basis of those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
OWNER: Any person having an ownership interest in, conducting the operation of
a hotel or motel room, or receiving the consideration for the rental of such
hotel or motel room.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, or other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor,
vendee, operator, user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other
representative, acting either for himself or for any other person in any
capacity, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstances.
(2006 Code § 36-7-1)
2-5E-2:   TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
There is hereby levied and imposed a tax of five percent (5%) of the rent
charged for the privilege and use of renting a hotel or motel room within the
City for each twenty four (24) hour period or any portion thereof for which a
daily room charge is made.
(2006 Code § 36-7-2)
2-5E-3:   RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAX; PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to
be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel
room, said person hereinafter referred to as “renter”.
   B.   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every hotel or motel to
secure said tax from the renter of the motel or hotel room, and to pay over to
the City Treasurer or any authorized representative of the City said tax under
procedures prescribed by the City Treasurer, or as otherwise provided in this
article.
   C.   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall
secure said tax from the renter at the time he collects the rental payment for
the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other statement or
memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment, the amount
due under the tax provided in this article shall appear separately on said
document.
(2006 Code § 36-7-3)
2-5E-4:   INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The City Treasurer, or authorized representative, may enter the premises of any
hotel or motel for inspection and examination of records in order to effectuate
the proper administration of this article, and to assure the enforcement of the
collection of the tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder, or interfere with the City Treasurer or authorized representative in
the discharge of his duties in the enforcement of this article. It shall be the
duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete books and records to which
the City Treasurer, or authorized representative, shall at all times have full
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
   A.   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24)
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel rooms where
such shall occur; and
   B.   The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question.
(2006 Code § 36-7-4)
2-5E-5:   TAX RETURNS AND REMITTANCES; FAILURE TO PAY:
   A.   Preparation Of Return: Commencing on October 1, 2016, the owner or
owners of each hotel, motel, bed and breakfast or guesthouse within the City
shall prepare tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each
room rented during each month commencing on October 1, 2016.
   B.   Filing Return; Payment Of Tax: The tax returns shall be filed by the
owner or owners with the City Finance Manager on a monthly basis. The tax
returns for the previous month shall be due on the 15th day of the following
month.
   C.   Failure To Pay Tax: If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a
penalty shall be imposed as provided in
2-4-10 of this code.
   D.   All businesses and individuals who are subject to pay monthly taxes
directly to the City of Grafton must provide to the City of Grafton Finance
Manager a copy of their completed monthly Illinois Form RHM-1 or Form RHM-7 by
the fifteenth of the following month, and a copy of their annual IRS Form 1099-
K by May 1 of each year in which they file taxes.
(Ord. 668, 10-18-2016; amd. Ord. 698, 7-17-2018; Ord. 764, - -2023)
2-5E-6:   DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS AND FINES:
All tax and fines collected shall be paid into the City of Grafton General Fund
to be allocated under the annual City budget process to maintain and provide
city municipal services.
(2006 Code § 36-7-7; amd. Ord 768, 10-17-2023)
2-5E-7:   PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found wilfully guilty of failing to pay,
collect, report and transmit said hotel or motel tax to the City Finance
Manager in accordance with the terms of this article shall, except when
otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such
violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof.
(2006 Code § 36-7-8)
ARTICLE F: CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Section
2-5F-1:   Tax Imposed; Rate
2-5F-2:   Collection Of Tax By Retailers
2-5F-1:   TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
sections 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
(Ord. 726, 9-16-2019)
2-5F-2:   COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax imposed by this article shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department. The
Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article.
(Ord. 726, 9-16-2019)
ARTICLE G: WATER UTILITY TAX
Section
2-5G-1:   Imposition of Water Utility Tax
2-5G-2:   Exceptions; Exemptions
2-5G-3:   Additional Taxes
2-5G-4:   Collection
2-5G-5:   Reports To City
2-5G-6:   Credit for Over-Payment
2-5G-7:   Definitions
2-5G-8:   Limitation of Liability
2-5G-9:   Notice; Address List
2-5G-10:   Prior Ordinances
2-5G-11:   Effective Date
2-5G-1:   IMPOSITION OF WATER UTILITY TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the privilege of using or consuming
water acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the City shall be taxed at the rate of five percent (5%) of
the gross receipts and calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-2:   EXCEPTIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with
respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this State or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling, or using or consuming water
acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation under the provisions
of this article for those transactions that are or may become subject to
taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act”
authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code; nor shall any tax
authorized by this article be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or
on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate
upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the City, whether
privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege
within the City. None of the within taxes shall be imposed on water sold
directly by the City but shall instead be imposed upon the sale of water by any
other entity not otherwise excluded by this article.
   B.   The City shall be exempted from the taxes imposed by this article for
City accounts attributable to its buildings and facilities located in the City.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-3:   ADDITIONAL TAXES:
Such taxes shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or a
person maintaining a place of business in this State. All of the taxes
enumerated in this article are in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to the City by the taxpayer or person
maintaining a place of business in this State as compensation for the use of
its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of equipment used in the operation of its
business.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-4:   COLLECTION:
The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the purchaser by the
person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers the water to
the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person
who delivers the water to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the water. Any tax collected
by the person maintaining a place of business in this State delivering the
water shall constitute a debt owed to the City by such person maintaining a
place of business in this State. Persons delivering the water shall collect the
tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering
the water. Persons delivering the water shall also be authorized to add to such
gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the
person delivering the water for the expense incurred in keeping records,
billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the City upon request. If the person delivering the water
fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the City in the manner prescribed by the
City. Persons delivering the water who file returns pursuant to this section
shall, at the time of tiling such return, pay the City the amount of the tax
collected pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-5:   REPORTS TO CITY:
   A.   On or before the last day of each month, each person maintaining a
place of business in this State who delivers the water to the purchaser, in the
case of the tax imposed by this Chapter, and each taxpayer shall make a return
to the City for the preceding month stating:
      1.   Its name;
      2.   Its principal place of business;
      3.   Its gross receipts, as applicable, during the month upon the basis
of which the tax is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax; and
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   B.   Each person making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the City, the amount of tax herein imposed; provided
that in connection with any return, the person may, if he so elects, report and
pay an amount based upon a reasonable estimate of the total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings.
   C.   All businesses and individuals who are subject to pay monthly taxes
directly to the City of Grafton must provide to the City of Grafton Finance
Manager a copy of their completed monthly Illinois Form RHM-1 or Form RHM-7 by
the fifteenth of the following month and a copy of their annual IRS Form 1099-
K by May 1 of each year in which they file taxes.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 764, - -2023)
2-5G-6:   CREDIT FOR OVER-PAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited to the extent permitted by
law.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-7:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein:
GROSS RECEIPTS:  The consideration received for distributing, supplying, or
selling water for use or consumption and not for resale, and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any
other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not
include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts
in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal Code and that portion of the
consideration received for the distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
water to the City.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any
State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed, or qualified to do business in this State.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act, but shall include alternative retail water suppliers as
defined in section 16-102 of that Act.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of water by a purchaser for purposes of use
or consumption, and not for resale.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
City, water acquired in a purchase at retail, excluding any local governmental
body or school district whose territory includes the municipality.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-8:   LIMITATION OF LIABILITY:
If the provisions of this article with respect to the exemption of the City
from the taxes imposed by this article or the application thereof are held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the amount of tax due as a consequence
of such holding shall be limited to the amount that the taxpayer is authorized
to charge and collect from such school districts and units of local government
pursuant the provisions of section 9-221 of the Public Utilities Act or any
successor thereto.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-9:   NOTICE; ADDRESS LIST:
The City Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of this article to
all utilities which provide service to customers within the City and to
cooperate with such utilities in determining addresses of premises subject to
the taxes herein described, including but not limited to the names and
addresses of each school district and unit of local government which own
facilities within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-10:   PRIOR ORDINANCES:
To the extent that this article conflicts with any prior ordinances relating to
the taxation of water in the City, this article shall prevail.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
2-5G-11:   EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall be in full force and effect, following its passage, approval
and publications as required by law and shall be effective with respect to the
use or consumption of water and gross receipts actually paid to the taxpayer
for services billed on or after the adoption of this article.
(Ord. 699, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE H: AMUSEMENT TAX
Section
2-5H-1:   Title
2-5H-2:   Definitions
2-5H-3:   Tax Imposed
2-5H-4:   Payment And Collection Of Tax
2-5H-5:   Administration And Enforcement
2-5H-6:   Suit For Collection; Revocation Of License
2-5H-7:   Interest And Penalties
2-5H-8:   Disposition Of Proceeds Of Tax
2-5H-1:   TITLE:
This article may be cited and referred to as the amusement tax.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-2:    DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Any theatrical, dramatic, musical, or other types of concerts, or
spectacular performance or show, or motion picture show, or similar exhibition
for public entertainment, in the city (not to include public taxing bodies).
   B.   Any athletic contests or exhibitions at which admission is charged or
tickets sold for private gain (not to include public taxing bodies).
   C.   Any equipment rentals of amusement devises, such as skis, boats, water
craft, golf carts, off street vehicles, bicycles, carts, or other equipment the
primary purpose of which is to provide or facilitate amusement opportunities
for the customer or his assigns.
   D.   Any rides, experiences, or virtual simulation experience such as
carnival rides, buggy or wagon rides, animal rides, balloon or parachute rides,
ziplines, bungee rides, gondola rides, helicopter rides and similar experiences
the primary purpose of which is to provide or facilitate amusement
opportunities for the customer or his assigns.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business, trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, or otherwise. Whenever the term PERSON
is used in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied
to associations shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-3:    TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon all amusements within the city
at the rate of three percent (3%) of the total charges received for any
amusement activities. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the ticket user or purchaser.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-4:   PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX:
The owner, manager, licensee or operator of each amusement shall bear, jointly
and severally, the duty to collect the tax from each ticket user or purchaser.
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this chapter shall secure
said tax from the ticket user, renter, or purchaser at the time that he
collects the price or charge for the amusement activity. Whenever suitable, the
amount of the tax may be shown separately on each ticket of admission or
receipt. The tax shall be paid to the City Treasurer under procedures
prescribed by the City Treasurer and as otherwise provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-5:   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The City Treasurer or his designated agent is designated as the
administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of
the City. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the City Treasurer or his
designated agent to collect all amounts due the City from the owners, managers,
licensees and operators of amusements in the city. A sworn monthly amusement
tax return, on a calendar month basis, shall be filed by each owner, manager,
licensee or operator of each amusement in the city with the City Treasurer or
his designated agent, regardless of whether there is any tax due for the month
covered by the return, on forms prescribed by the City Treasurer showing the
gross receipts from the amusement and the number of admission tickets sold and
issued, the purchase price thereof and the tax imposed, if any. Said returns
are to be filed by the fifteenth (15th) day of the month following the month
covered by said return. The tax herein imposed due and owing shall accompany
the return and shall likewise be due as of the fifteenth (15th) day of the
month following the month covered by said return.
   B.   The City Treasurer or his designated agent may enter the premises of
any amusement for the purposes of inspection and examination of its books and
records for the proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement
of the collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, hinder or interfere with the City Treasurer or his designated agent in
the discharge of his duties hereunder. It shall be the duty of every owner,
manager, licensee or operator of any amusement to keep an accurate and complete
set of books and records, containing all information necessary for the
collection of the tax herein imposed, to which the City Treasurer or his
designated agent shall at all times have full access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing the details of all income received from
amusements.
   C.   The Police Chief, Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator shall be
granted access to inspect the premises or equipment of any amusement activities
to assure public health, safety and welfare.
   D.   All businesses and individuals who are subject to pay monthly taxes
directly to the City of Grafton must provide to the City of Grafton Finance
Manager a copy of their completed monthly Illinois Form RHM-1 or Form RHM-7 by
the fifteenth of the following month and a copy of their annual IRS Form 1099-
K by May 1 of each year in which they file taxes.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 764, - -2023)
2-5H-6:   SUIT FOR COLLECTION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or when any
owner, manager, licensee or operator of an amusement in the city shall fail to
collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who has the ultimate liability
for payment of the same, the City Attorney shall, upon request of the city,
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on
behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction. If the Mayor, after
a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any amusement owner, manager,
licensee or operator has wilfully evaded his responsibility o collect the tax
imposed by this chapter, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses, including,
but not limited to, any liquor license issued to and held by such person. Said
person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing. Pending notice,
hearing and finding, any license of which such person may be possessed may be
temporarily suspended by the mayor but not to exceed seven (7) days. Any
suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or
discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-7:   INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
If for any reason tax is not paid when due, a penalty shall be imposed as
provided in section
2-4-10 of this code.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
2-5H-8:   DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the City
and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the City.
(Ord. 697, 6-19-2018)
ARTICLE I: BUSINESS DISTRICT TAXES
Section
2-5I-1:   Business District Retailers’ Occupation Tax
2-5I-2:   Business District Service Occupation Tax
2-5I-3:   Business District Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax
2-5I-4:   Notice To Illinois Department Of Revenue
2-5I-5:   Business District No. 1 Tax Allocation Fund
2-5I-6:   Enforcement
2-5I-7:   Rescinding Of Business District Taxes And Business District
Dissolution Date
2-5I-1:   BUSINESS DISTRICT RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed to be known as the “Business District Retailers’
Occupation Tax” upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or
registered with an agency of this state’s government, at retail within the
boundaries of the Business District No. 1 at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while
this article is in effect. This “Business District Retailers’ Occupation Tax”
shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to
be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages,
soft drinks and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and
prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances,
modifications to a motor vehicle for the purpose of rendering it usable by a
disabled person, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics, for human use.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-2:   BUSINESS DISTRICT SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed to be known as the “Business District Service
Occupation Tax” upon all persons engaged, within the Business District No. 1,
in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those
sales of service, transfer tangible personal property within the business
district, either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service. The tax shall be imposed at
the same rate as the tax imposed in section
2-5I-1 upon the selling price of tangible personal property so transferred
within the business district. The tax may not be imposed on food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption), prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances, modifications to a motor vehicle for the purpose of
rendering it usable by a disabled person, and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes, and needles used by diabetics, for human use.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-3:   BUSINESS DISTRICT HOTEL OPERATORS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed to be known as the “Business District Hotel Operators’
Occupation Tax” upon all persons engaged in the Business District No. 1 in the
business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in a hotel, as defined in the
Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq., at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross rental receipts of from the renting, leasing or
letting of rooms within the Business District, excluding, however, from the
gross rental receipts the proceeds of renting, leasing, or letting to permanent
presidents of a hotel, as defined in the Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax Act.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-4:   NOTICE TO ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
On or before, April 1, 2019, the City Clerk and other appropriate City staff
are directed to provide the Illinois Department of Revenue (the “Department”)
with a certified copy of this article and such other information required by
the Department so that the Business District Retailers’ Occupation Tax provided
for in section
2-5I-1 above, and the Business District Service Occupation Tax provided for in
section
2-5I-2 above may be administered and enforced by the Department, beginning on
July 1, 2019. Thereafter, the appropriate City staff are directed to provide
any address change, addition, or deletion of businesses located within the
Business District to the Department on or before October 1 for administration
and enforcement by the Department of the change beginning on the following
January 1 and on or before April 1 for administration and enforcement by the
Department of the change beginning on the following July 1.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-5:   BUSINESS DISTRICT NO. 1 TAX ALLOCATION FUND:
All proceeds of the taxes imposed, civil penalties, and interest, which accrues
from the business district taxes imposed hereby, shall be deposited into a
special fund of the City called the “Business District No. 1 Tax Allocation
Fund” in accordance with the Business District Law.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-6:   ENFORCEMENT:
The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have the authority to administer and
enforce the Business District Retailers’ Occupation Tax and the Business
District Service Occupation Tax imposed under sections
2-5I-1 and
2-5I-2 of this article. The City shall have the authority to administer and
enforce the Business District Hotel Operators’ Occupation Tax imposed under
section
2-5I-3 of this article.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
2-5I-7:   RESCINDING OF BUSINESS DISTRICT TAXES AND BUSINESS DISTRICT
DISSOLUTION DATE:
When business district project costs, including, without limitation, all
obligations paying or reimbursing business district project costs have been
paid, any surplus funds then remaining in the Business District No. 1 Tax
Allocation Fund shall be distributed to the municipal treasurer for deposit
into the general corporate fund of the City. Upon payment of all business
district project costs and retirement of all obligations paying or reimbursing
business district project costs, but in no event more than twenty three (23)
years after the date of adoption of this article imposing the taxes pursuant to
the Business District Law, the City shall adopt an ordinance immediately
rescinding the taxes imposed. The dissolution date of the Business District No.
1 shall be not later than two hundred seventy (270) days following payment to
the City of the last distribution of taxes as provided in section 11-74.3-6 of
the Business District Law.
(Ord. 717, 2-19-2019)
ARTICLE J: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX;
MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Section
2-5J-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
2-5J-2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
2-5J-3: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
2-5J-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
Ordinance is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 781, 7-15-2025)
2-5J-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 2, above. The imposition
of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-
11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 781, 7-15-2025)
2-5J-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 781, 7-15-2025)
CHAPTER 6: TIF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRIES
Section
2-6-1:   Definitions
2-6-2:   Registries Established
2-6-3:   Maintenance Of Registry
2-6-4:   Submission Of Registries
2-6-5:   Eligibility Determined
2-6-6:   Renewals And Termination
2-6-7:   Amendment To Registration
2-6-8:   Public Inspection Of Registries
2-6-9:   Notices To Interested Parties
2-6-10:   Noninterference
2-6-11:   Amendment Of Provisions
2-6-1:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions set
forth in this section:
ACT: The Tax Increment Finance Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY: The City of Grafton, Jersey County, Illinois.
INTERESTED PARTY(S):
   A.   Any organization(s) active within the City;
   B.   Any resident(s) of the City; and
   C.   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to register
in a specific registry who has been registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been otherwise terminated in accordance with this chapter.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that:
   A.   Is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
redevelopment project area under the act; and
   B.   Is subject to the interested parties registry requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION APPLICATION FORM: The form appended to this chapter or such
revised form as may be approved by the City consistent with the requirements of
the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the City pursuant to section 5/11-
74.4-4.2 of the act for the redevelopment project area. (2006 Code § 36-1-1)
2-6-2:   REGISTRIES ESTABLISHED:
The City shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the effective date hereof or
hereafter established. The City shall establish a new registry whenever it has
identified an area for study and possible designation as a redevelopment
project area. In any event, the process of establishing the new registry must
be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices required by
subsection
2-6-9B of this article or any other notices required by the act with respect to
the proposed redevelopment project area.
(2006 Code § 36-1-2)
2-6-3:   MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRIES:
The City Clerk or his or her designee shall maintain the registries. The
registries shall include the name, address, and telephone number of each
registered resident; and for organizations, the name and phone number of a
designated contact person.
(2006 Code § 36-1-3)
2-6-4:   SUBMISSION OF REGISTRIES:
   A.   Individuals: An individual seeking to register as an interested party
with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a
registration application form to the City Clerk. Such individual must also
submit a copy of a current driver's license, lease, utility bill, financial
statement, or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the Clerk to
establish the individual's current residency in the City.
(2006 Code § 36-1-4)
   B.   Organizations: An organization seeking to register as an interested
party with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a
registration application form to the City Clerk. Such organization must also
submit a copy of a one page statement describing the organization's current
operations in the City.
(2006 Code § 36-1-5)
2-6-5:   ELIGIBILITY DETERMINED:
All individuals and organizations whose registration application form and
supporting documentation complies with this chapter shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the City Clerk's receipt
of all such documents. If the City Clerk determines that an applicant's
registration application form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with this chapter, the Clerk shall give written notice to the
applicant specifying the defect(s). The applicant shall be entitled to correct
any defects and resubmit a new registration application form and supporting
documentation.
(2006 Code § 36-1-6)
2-6-6:   RENEWALS AND TERMINATION:
An interested party’s registration shall remain effective for a period of three
(3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period, the City Clerk shall
provide written notice by regular mail to the interested party stating that
such registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews such
registration within thirty (30) days of the Clerk’s mailing of written notice.
To renew such registration, the interested party shall, within such thirty (30)
day period, complete and submit the same registration application form and
supporting documentation then required of initial registrants in order to
permit the Clerk to confirm such party's residency or such organization's
operations in the City. The registration of all individuals and organizations
whose registration application form and supporting documentation is submitted
in a timely manner and complies with this chapter shall be renewed for an
additional, consecutive three (3) year period. If the City Clerk determines
that a registrant’s renewal registration application form and/or supporting
documentation is incomplete or does not comply with this chapter, the Clerk
shall give written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the
renewal registration application form submitted, specifying the defect(s). The
registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new
registration application form and supporting documentation within thirty (30)
days of receipt of the Clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within
thirty (30) days of the interested party’s receipt of the City Clerk's notice,
the interested party's registration shall be terminated. Any interested party
whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a
first time applicant.
(2006 Code § 36-1-8)
2-6-7:   AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the
City Clerk by certified mail for any of the following reasons: a) a change in
address for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the
name of the contact person; and c) a termination of registration. Upon receipt
of such notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly.
(2006 Code § 36-1-9)
2-6-8:   PUBLIC INSPECTION OF REGISTRIES:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during the City’s normal
business hours.
(2006 Code § 36-1-10)
2-6-9:   NOTICES TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
   A.   Upon registration, interested parties shall be entitled to receive all
notices required under the act, including how to obtain information concerning
the applicable redevelopment project area. The City reserves the right to
charge recipients for the cost of copies and postage/delivery charges for
requested documents.
(2006 Code § 36-1-7)
   B.   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices as well as any
other notices required under the act with respect to the applicable
redevelopment project area:
      1.   Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including
how to obtain this information. Such notice shall be sent by mail within a
reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance or resolution
fixing a time and place for the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment
plan.
      2.   Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes
to a proposed redevelopment plan that does not: a) add additional parcels of
property to the proposed redevelopment project area; b) substantially affect
the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan; c) substantially
change the nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project; or d)
increase the number of low or very low income households to be displaced from
the redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project area, the total displacement of
households will exceed ten (10). Such notice shall be sent by mail not later
than ten (10) days following the City’s adoption by ordinance of such changes.
      3.   Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74.4-5(c) of the act, notice of
amendments to a previously approved redevelopment plan that does not: a) add
additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project area; b)
substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan; c)
substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project; d) increase the
total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan
by more than five percent (5%) after adjustment for inflation from the date the
plan was adopted; e) add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized
list of redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or f)
increase the number of low or very low income households to be displaced from
the redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project area the total displacement of households
will exceed ten (10). Such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10)
days following the City’s adoption by ordinance of any such amendment.
      4.   Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the act for
redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of
residents from ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or that contain
seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice of the
availability of the annual report described by subsection 5/11-74.4-5(d) of the
act, including how to obtain the annual report. Such notice shall be sent by
mail within a reasonable period of time after completion of the certified audit
report.
      5.   Pursuant to subsection 5/11-74-4.6(e) of the act, notice of the
public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area
that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential
units or which will contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential
units. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15)
days before the date of such public meeting and shall include the information
required under subsection 5/11-74.4-6(e) of the act.
(2006 Code § 36-1-11)
2-6-10:   NONINTERFERENCE:
This chapter shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the
ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of
information to which they are entitled under the act.
(2006 Code § 36-1-12)
2-6-11:   AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter may be amended by the City subject to and consistent with the
requirements of the act.
(2006 Code § 36-1-13)
TITLE 3: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT REGULATIONS
Section
3-1-1:   Persons Subject To License Or Permit
3-1-2:   Applications For Licenses And Permits
3-1-3:   Investigations Or Inspections Of Applicants
3-1-4:   Approval Or Denial Of License Or Permit
3-1-5:   Signatures On License
3-1-6:   License And Permit Fees; Amusement Tax
3-1-7:   Term Of License
3-1-8:   Posting License
3-1-9:   Location
3-1-10:   Building And Premises Requirements
3-1-11:   Nuisance Businesses
3-1-12:   Working Conditions
3-1-13:   Inspections And Analyses
3-1-14:   Suspension Or Revocation Of License Or Permit
3-1-15:   Appeals
3-1-1:   PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Whenever a license or permit is required in this Code or in any City ordinance
for the maintenance, operation, or conduct of any business or establishment, or
for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm,
or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or itself, or
through an agent, employee or partner, he or it is held forth as being engaged
in the business, activity or occupation, or if he or it solicits patronage
therefor actively or passively; or if he or it performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business, activity or occupation in the City.
(2006 Code § 7-1-2)
3-1-2:   APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS:
   A.   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Mayor in the absence of provision to the
contrary. Each application shall contain:
      1.   The name and the age of the applicant;
      2.   The permit or license desired;
      3.   The location to be used, if any;
      4.   Zoning district, if any;
      5.   A plan depicting the front facade of the building within which the
business of the applicant shall be conducted;
      6.   A plan depicting the location of the area anticipated to be used to
provide parking for customers and employees of the business anticipated to be
conducted by the applicant;
      7.   If items are to be sold or services are to be rendered, a common
description of the type of items to be sold or the type of services to be
rendered by the applicant in the conduct of the business anticipated to be
conducted by the applicant; and
      8.   The time the business is anticipated to be open to the public.
   B.   Each application shall also contain the number of the certificates of
registration required under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/1 et
seq.), Service Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.), and/or Use Tax Act
(35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.), if applicable. Each application shall contain such
additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the City
officials in the issuing of the license or permit applied for.
(2006 Code § 7-1-1)
3-1-3:   INVESTIGATIONS OR INSPECTIONS OF APPLICANTS:
   A.   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where an
investigation or inspection is required by ordinance before the issuance of
such permit or license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed
reasonably necessary or appropriate, the Mayor, within forty eight (48) hours,
shall refer the application to the appropriate official(s) for the making of
such investigation or inspection.
   B.   The official(s) to whom the application has been referred shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving
such application or a copy thereof.
   C.   The Chief of Police or the County Health Department shall make or cause
to be made an inspection regarding such permits and licenses as relate to the
care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the spread of
disease, and the protection of health. (The Zoning Administrator shall make or
cause to be made any inspections which relate to compliance with the zoning
title and other related regulations.) All other investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the Chief of Police or by some other
officer designated by the Mayor.
(2006 Code § 7-1-4)
3-1-4:   APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   If it shall appear to the Mayor that the matters and circumstances
relating to an application require further information before a proper
determination can be made, such application shall be returned for the inclusion
of such additional information as may be specified necessary and appropriate.
   B.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the Mayor shall determine
that the matters concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he may
disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the
Mayor shall promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved
and that no license or permit will be issued.
   C.   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and the related investigative reports, the Mayor shall determine
that the application is satisfactory, he shall approve the application.
Thereupon, the Mayor shall promptly notify the applicant that his application
is approved and the license or permit may be issued.
(2006 Code § 7-1-4)
3-1-5:   SIGNATURES ON LICENSE:
Every license shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk under the
Corporate Seal, and no license shall be valid until signed and countersigned as
aforesaid, nor shall any person be deemed to be licensed until the same shall
have been issued to him in due form.
(2006 Code § 7-1-3)
3-1-6:   LICENSE AND PERMIT FEES; AMUSEMENT TAX:
   A.   Payment In Advance; Proration: In the absence of provision to the
contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance
at the time application therefor is made to the Mayor in the amounts prescribed
by the Corporate Authorities. When an applicant has not engaged in the business
or activity until after the expiration of the current license year, the license
fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction
thereof during which the business or activity has been or will be conducted.
   B.   Disposition Of Funds; No Refunds: Except as otherwise provided, all
license and permit fees shall become a part of the Corporate Fund. In no event
shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or permit fee, or part
thereof, by reason of death or departure of the licensee or permittee; nor
shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the license or
discontinuance of the operation or conduct of the licensed establishment,
business or activity.
   C.   Fees And Tax Established:
      1.   Business License Fees: All applicants for a business license shall
pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first year and eighty
dollars ($80.00) per year for renewal of the license by the same applicant
thereafter.
      2.   Amusement Tax: A three percent (3%) tax shall be assessed of all
gross amusement receipts.
   D.   Business License Late Payment Penalty: A flat charge of ten dollars
($10.00) plus five percent (5%) of the license fee for the first month and one
percent (1%) of the license fee for each month thereafter, not to exceed ten
percent (10%) shall be imposed if a required annual license is not issued prior
to the start of a new business year.
(2006 Code § 7-1-5; amd. Ord. 696, 7-17-2018; Ord. 737, 10-20-2020)
3-1-7:   TERM OF LICENSE:
   A.   All annual licenses except liquor licenses shall be operative and the
license year for the City shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall
terminate on April 30 of the following year, where no provision to the contrary
is made.
   B.   The Clerk shall notify all licensees of the City of the time of
expiration of the license held by the licensee (if an annual), three (3) weeks
prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, however, that a failure to make
such notification or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse
the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a renewal thereof,
nor shall it be a defense in an action based upon operation without a license.
(2006 Code § 7-1-6)
3-1-8:   POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the City
to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business.
(2006 Code § 7-1-15)
3-1-9:   LOCATION:
   A.   Requirements And Restrictions: No license for the operation of a
business or establishment in the City shall be construed to permit the
operation of a licensed business or establishment in more than one location in
the City. A separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed
establishment. For the purpose of this Code, the existence of a single location
shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or
accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or
parcel; shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner; and shall be
an establishment with the same classification.
(2006 Code § 7-1-9)
   B.   Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or
occupation, or the location of any permitted act, may be changed; provided,
that ten (10) days’ notice thereof is given to the Clerk, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary; provided further, however, that there is compliance
with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City.
(2006 Code § 7-1-8)
3-1-10:   BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the City and the State of Illinois. No such license or permit
shall be issued for the conduct of any business or performance of any act which
would involve a violation of this Code and/or other applicable regulations of
the City. Any building to be used by the business to be conducted by the
applicant must have at least the following characteristics:
   A.   Not less than three hundred (300) square feet of usable interior space;
   B.   Be furnished with electricity in conformance with applicable codes;
   C.   Be furnished with potable water service in conformance with applicable
codes;
   D.   Not be a temporary structure such as a tent, trailer, mobile home or
camper.
(2006 Code § 7-1-7)
3-1-11:   NUISANCE BUSINESSES:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: No business or establishment, whether licensed or
not, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact, and
no building, vehicle or structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health.
(2006 Code § 7-1-10.1)
   B.   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
      1.   No building or structure utilized, constructed or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe
or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatsoever, which would be
dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the City.
(2006 Code § 7-1-10.2)
   C.   Refuse Disposal:
      1.   Containers:
         a.   Required:
            (1)   The occupant of every building, structure or premises used or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall provide and
maintain in good condition and repair a sufficient number of refuse containers
for the temporary storage of all refuse accumulating between collections.
            (2)   All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any
building or structure must be kept in standard refuse containers.
         b.   Specifications: The standard refuse container required by this
subsection C1 shall be a receptacle of not less than twenty (20) nor more than
thirty two (32) gallons' capacity, constructed of impervious material and
sturdy construction with a tightfitting cover, and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling.
      2.   Removal Of Refuse:
         a.   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure
or premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation to
cause to be removed, at his own cost and expense, at least once each week, all
refuse produced therein.
         b.   Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, café,
or retail food establishment where more than thirty two (32) gallons of refuse
is normally produced weekly shall cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary
refuse containers and shall cause all substances deposited in such containers
to be removed daily from his premises and to be disposed of at his own expense.
(2006 Code § 7-1-10.3)
   D.   Use Of Sidewalk: A business properly licensed by the City pursuant to
this Code may utilize the public sidewalk immediately in front of the licensed
premises of the business for the display of goods or services of the business
licensed pursuant to this chapter, but only under the following conditions:
      1.   There shall be no cooking on the sidewalk or public way;
      2.   Items displayed on the public sidewalk or right-of-way shall not be
larger than six feet (6') tall or three feet (3') wide;
      3.   No items shall be left on the sidewalk or public right-of-way
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.;
      4.   No items displayed on the sidewalk or public right-of-way shall
unreasonably obstruct pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk.
(2006 Code § 7-1-10.4)
3-1-12:   WORKING CONDITIONS:
   A.   General Health And Sanitation Requirements:
      1.   No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory,
workshop or other place where persons are employed shall cause or permit such
place or any room or part thereof to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in
respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
(2006 Code § 7-1-11.1)
      2.   All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition,
free from effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other nuisance(s); also
as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors,
dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise
which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for male and
female employees shall be provided, and such facilities shall be properly
ventilated.
(2006 Code § 7-1-11.2)
   B.   Heat:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop to maintain a
temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty two degrees
Fahrenheit (62°F) without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere
with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business
conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than
sixty two degrees Fahrenheit (62°F) is necessary or expedient for the work or
manufacturing processes of such business.
      2.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any office, store, or other place of
employment to maintain a temperature therein of not less than sixty two degrees
Fahrenheit (62°F), without such undue restriction of ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. from October 1 of each year
until June 1 of the succeeding year (Sundays and legal holidays excepted).
(2006 Code § 7-1-11.3)
   C.   Prepared Foods: Any business licensed or regulated by this Code which
shall sell or offer for sale any prepared food products shall also comply with
all of the licensing or regulation requirements of the Jersey County Health
Department and shall at all times maintain and display a current permit for
such purposes as issued by the Jersey County Health Department Food Service.
(2006 Code § 7-1-11.5)
   D.   Inspections: The Mayor or the Chief of Police shall visit or cause to
be visited all places of employment in the City as often as they shall deem
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section, and to have
such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health and safety of
the employees.
(2006 Code § 7-1-11.4)
3-1-13:   INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   Inspections: Whenever inspections of the premises for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or
required by ordinance or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the
provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the City, or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the
premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any
officer or employee of the City who is duly authorized to make such inspection
at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
   B.   Analyses: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance
or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the City requesting the same, sufficient samples of such
material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
   C.   Failure To Permit Inspections And Analyses: In addition to any other
penalty which may be provided, the Mayor may revoke the license of any owner or
operator of a licensed business in the City who refuses to permit any duly
authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to take adequate
sample(s) of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee
while in the performance of his duties; provided, however, that no license
shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee
has been refused permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the City
after having first presented a warrant authorizing such entry.
(2006 Code § 7-1-12)
3-1-14:   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   A.   Summary Suspension:
      1.   When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment,
whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the Mayor shall
be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the
premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a period not to
exceed ten (10) days.
(2006 Code § 7-1-13.1)
      2.   Within eight (8) days after he has so acted, the Mayor shall
schedule a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license or
permit should be further suspended or revoked.
(2006 Code § 7-1-13.2)
   B.   Revocation Of Licenses And Permits:
      1.   Grounds: Licenses and permits issued in the City, unless otherwise
provided, may be revoked by the Mayor after notice and hearing as provided in
subsections B3a and B3b of this section for any of the following causes:
         a.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
         b.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of code provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit,
or the premises occupied;
         c.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of an
ordinance violation involving moral turpitude;
         d.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any tax, fine or
penalty owed to the City;
         e.   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized officer or employee in the performance of his duties in
making such inspections, as provided in section 3-1-13 of this chapter.
      2.   Additional Sanctions: Such revocation, if ordered, shall not
preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable Code regulations of the City.
(2006 Code § 7-1-13.3)
      3.   Hearing:
         a.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall
be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(2006 Code § 7-1-13.4)
         b.   At the hearing, the attorney for the City shall present the
complaint and shall represent the City. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
(2006 Code § 7-1-13.5)
3-1-15:   APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor regarding the denial of an
application for a business license as provided in section
3-1-4 of this chapter or in connection with the revocation of a license or
permit as provided in section
3-1-14 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Clerk, within ten (10) days after
notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license or permit, a
written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal.
The Mayor shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal,
and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee or
permittee in the same manner as provided in section 
3-1-14 of this chapter. The decision of the City Council on such appeal shall
be final.
(2006 Code § 7-1-14)
CHAPTER 2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
3-2-1:   Definitions
3-2-2:   License Required
3-2-3:   Ineligibility For License
3-2-4:   Application For License
3-2-5:   Insurance Requirements
3-2-6:   Classification Of Licenses; Fees
3-2-7:   Term Of License; Payment Of Fee In Advance; Contents Of License;
Change In Manager
3-2-8:   Display Of License
3-2-9:   Nature Of License
3-2-10:   Location Requirements
3-2-11:   Days And Hours Of Sales; Presence On Premises
3-2-12:   Happy Hours
3-2-13:   Sanitary Conditions
3-2-14:   Conditions Of Sales; Conduct Of Business
3-2-15:   Persons Under Twenty One
3-2-16:   Additional Prohibitions
3-2-17:   Annexing License Holders
3-2-18:   Books And Records
3-2-19:   Examination Of Applicant And Licensee
3-2-20:   Right Of Entry
3-2-21:   Violations And Penalties
3-2-22:   Appeals
3-2-1:   DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases defined in this
section are used in this chapter in the sense given them in the following
definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. The term does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by human beings. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent
(0.5%) or less of alcohol by volume.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CATERER RETAILER: A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either
on site or off site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an
incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold
at a package price agreed upon under contract.
CLOSE: To shut up so as to prevent entrance or access by any person; and the
entire suspension of business.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members, through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants and
employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members and
their guests; provided, that such club files with the Mayor at the time of its
application for a license under this chapter, two (2) copies of a list of names
and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the
election of any additional member, his name and address; and provided further,
that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual
meeting and that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid,
or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or its members or guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of
such salary as may be fixed and voted at the annual meeting by the members or
by the board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of
the club.
CORPORATION: Any corporation, domestic or foreign, qualified to do business in
the State of Illinois under the “Business Corporation Act” of Illinois (805
ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.)
DISTILLED SPIRITS: See definition of Spirits.
EVENT: A single theme.
HOTEL:  All public dining rooms, banquet rooms, meeting rooms, room service
areas, mini-bars, and other locations within or adjacent to a hotel in which
alcoholic liquors are stored, offered for sale, or sold at retail shall be
considered part of the hotel’s licensed premises if those locations within or
adjacent to the hotel are owned and managed by the hotel operator. As part of
the hotel’s licensed premises, each and all of those locations within or
adjacent to the hotel shall be maintained and managed pursuant to a single
retailer’s license issued by the State Commission to the hotel operator,
regardless of the number of local retailer licenses mandated by the local unit
of government having jurisdiction over the hotel. Public dining rooms and other
locations within or adjacent to a hotel that are owned or managed by a person
other than the hotel operator and are licensed by the local unit of government
having jurisdiction over the hotel to a person other than the hotel operator
are not considered part of the hotel’s licensed premises for purposes of this
chapter and, as such, must be maintained and operated under separate retailer’s
licenses.
MANAGER OR AGENT: Any individual employed by any licensed place of business,
provided said individual possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee. Satisfactory evidence of such employment will be furnished the
commission in the form and manner as the commission shall from time to time
prescribe.
MAYOR: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, Chapter 235, entitled “Liquor”, and all references to Liquor
Control Commissioner shall refer to the Mayor unless otherwise provided.
MEAL: Food that is prepared and served on the licensed premises and excludes
the serving of snacks.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE: Any public place where packaged liquors are offered for
sale in the original, unopened container for consumption away from the
premises.
PARTNER: Any individual who is a member of a copartnership. “Copartnership”
means an association of two (2) or more persons to carry on as co-owners of a
business for profit.
PREMISES/PLACE OF BUSINESS: The place or location where alcoholic beverages are
manufactured, stored, displayed, offered for sale or where drinks containing
alcoholic beverages are mixed, concocted and served for consumption. Not
included are sidewalks, streets, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any such
place or location.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served in a
room or rooms designated and used exclusively for the private party, function
or event.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any premises enclosed or unenclosed or partly enclosed and partly
unenclosed wherein any service or goods, chattels or merchandise are offered
for sale to the public or any such premises used as a clubhouse, club room or
meeting place. The terms “public place” and “public premises” shall be
interchangeable for the purposes of this chapter.
RESIDENT: Any person (other than a corporation) who has resided and maintained
a bona fide residence in the State of Illinois for at least one year and in the
City for at least ninety (90) days prior to making application for such
license.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually are
served and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. To be a RESTAURANT, at
least fifty percent (50%) of the gross revenue generated from the premises must
be generated from the sale of food.
RETAILER: A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person,
whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or nonprofit organization.
SPECIAL EVENTS RETAILER: An educational, fraternal, political, civic,
religious, or nonprofit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or
wine, or both, only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated
by a special event retail license.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TO SELL: To keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of “alcohol” or “spirits” as defined in this
section.
(2006 Code § 21-1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
3-2-2:   LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall sell, keep or offer for sale at retail, or conduct any
place for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor within the limits and
territory of the City without having a license to do so, issued by the Mayor of
the City in the manner hereinafter provided, and a valid license for such
purpose issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commissioner of the State of
Illinois.
   B.   A similar valid license issued by the Mayor of the City is hereby
required for and with respect to each building, location and premises, within
the aforesaid territory of the City, at or upon which alcoholic liquor is to be
sold or kept or offered for sale at retail.
(2006 Code § 21-2-1)
3-2-3:   INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section, no
license of any kind issued by the State Commission or any local commission
shall be issued to:
      1.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides;
      2.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or
State law, unless the Commission determines that such person will not be
impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice after
considering matters set forth in such person’s application and the Commission’s
investigation;
      3.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution
or keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that
involves keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution
that involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution;
      4.   A person who has been convicted of pandering;
      5.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause;
      6.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
      7.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the political
subdivision;
      8.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
residence within the political subdivision;
      9.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated
or organized in the State, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign
limited liability company which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act
of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to transact business in the State.
The Commission shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under
this article proof prepared from the Secretary of State’s website that the
corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified
under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act
to transact business in the State;
      10.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
      11.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this Act or has forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation, unless the Commission
determines, in accordance with this chapter, that the person will not be
impaired by the conviction in engaging in the licensed practice;
      12.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
      13.   Any law enforcing public official, Mayor, Alderman, or member of
the City Council of Grafton; and no such official shall have a direct interest
in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a
license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that are not
located within the City and if the issuance of such license is approved by the
State Liquor Control Commission;
      14.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;
      15.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed
by any of subsections (a) (3) through (a) (11) of Section 28-1 of, or as
proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the Criminal Code of 1961 or the
Criminal Code of 2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;
      16.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act or the Illinois Pull Tabs and
Jar Games Act;
      17.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or
consumption on his licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts;
      18.   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a
manufacturer of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any
legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person
licensed in this State as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes
of this subsection, a person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a
“manufacturer of beer” shall also mean a brewer and a non-resident dealer who
is also a manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or
any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer;
      19.   A person who is licensed in this State as a distributor or
importing distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise licensed in this State as a distributor or
importing distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest,
directly or indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any
licensing authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other
form of business enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or after the
effective date of this amendatory Act of the 98th General Assembly, no more
than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer
whose shares are publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934. For the purposes of this subsection, brewer
and a non-resident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust or any
subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
   B.   A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation
if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or
State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to
the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each
director, officer, employee, or controlling shareholder whose actions directly
contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The Commission shall
determine if all provisions of this subsection have been met before any action
on the corporation’s license is initiated.
(2006 Code § 21-2-4; amd. Ord. 758, 9-20-2022)
3-2-4:   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to individuals,
firms, and corporations to sell at retail and to keep and offer for sale at
retail alcoholic liquors within the limits and territory of the City upon the
conditions and in the manner provided by this chapter and by the act of the
General Assembly of Illinois, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in
writing, signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk, with the seal of
his office affixed thereto.
   B.   Prior to issuance of a license, the applicant must submit to the Mayor
an application in triplicate, in writing and under oath, stating the following:
      1.   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the
date of incorporation, the object for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers, directors and the name of the person who will be
managing the establishment for which the license is sought, and if a majority
in interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominee, the address and name of such person.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      4.   The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in the
business of that character or in the case of a corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued.
      5.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
      6.   Whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar
other license on premises other than described in the application and the
disposition of such application.
      7.   That the applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
the aforesaid act of the General Assembly or in this chapter or resolution and
amendments thereto.
      8.   Whether a previous license issued to the applicant by any state, or
subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government has been revoked and the
reasons therefor.
      9.   That he will not violate any of the laws of the State of Illinois or
of the United States, or any of the provisions of this chapter or resolution
and amendments thereto in the conduct of his place of business.
   C.   1.   In the case of a partnership or corporation, the information and
statements required by this section shall be furnished as to each partner, and
with respect to a corporation, the information and statements required by this
section shall be furnished as to the president of the corporation, the
secretary of the corporation, the directors of the corporation, and with
respect to the person who is to manage the establishment for which a license is
sought.
      2.   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed and sworn to by
at least one member of such partnership, firm, association or club, or by the
president and secretary of such corporation.
   D.   One copy of the application shall be retained by the Mayor and one copy
given to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall endorse on the copies
his approval or disapproval of the application and may make further comments
regarding the application. The copies shall be returned to the Mayor, and the
endorsement and comments of the Chief of Police shall be considered by him as
an aid in deciding whether the license should be issued or refused.
(2006 Code § 21-2-2)
3-2-5:   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with the
application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Illinois, certifying that the applicant has the coverages up to
the full amount of potential liability as established by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes from time to time.
(2006 Code § 21-2-9)
3-2-6:   CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
   A.   Classifications: Licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall be
as follows:
      1.   Class A: A Class A license entitles the licensee to sell alcoholic
liquor, including beer, at retail for consumption either on the premises by the
drink or pitcher or off of the premises where sold in the original package.
      2.   Class B: A Class B license entitles the licensee to make retail
sales of alcoholic liquor, including beer, for consumption on the premises open
less than four (4) months per calendar year.
      3.   Class C: A Class C license entitles the licensee to make retail
sales of beer and wine for consumption on premises where sold, or in original
packages or containers for consumption off said premises.
      4.   Class D: A Class D license entitles the licensee to sell beer and
alcoholic liquor, at retail, for consumption off the premises where sold.
      5.   Class E: A Class E license entitles the licensee to make retail
sales of beer and wine or allows for the consumption of alcohol on City
property for “special events” approved by the City Council not to exceed ninety
(90) days in one calendar year.
   B.   Fees And Number: The annual license fees and the number of specific
licenses authorized to be issued shall be as follows:
 
Class Of License Annual Fee Number Authorized
Class A          $1,050.00  14
Class B          500.00     1
Class C          900.00     6
Class D          900.00     3
Class E          N/C        No limit
 
(2006 Code § 21-2-6; amd. Ord. 565A, 2-12-2008; Ord. 651, 10-20-15; Ord. 652,
10-21-2015; Ord. 689, 3-20-2018; Ord. 720, 4-16-2019; Ord. 732, 6-16-2020)
3-2-7:   TERM OF LICENSE; PAYMENT OF FEE IN ADVANCE; CONTENTS OF LICENSE;
CHANGE IN MANAGER:
   A.   Term Of License: Retail liquor licenses issued under this chapter shall
be valid for a twelve (12) month period upon the payment of the license fee as
herein set forth unless sooner revoked or suspended. The twelve (12) month
period shall be from May 1 to April 30 of the following year.
   B.   Payment Of Fee In Advance: The license fee shall be payable in advance
by the applicant for a license at the time the application for a license is
submitted to the Mayor as herein provided. In the event the license is denied,
the license fee shall be returned to the applicant. The fees shall be deposited
in the Municipal General Fund. The application for a license shall be filed
with the City Clerk.
   C.   Contents Of License: Licenses shall state thereon the names of the
licensees and the address and description of the premises for which they are
granted and the dates of their issuance and expiration.
   D.   Change Of Manager: With respect to a corporation operating an
establishment for which a liquor license has been issued, should the manager of
said establishment change after the issuance of said liquor license, the
corporation must submit the new manager’s name which shall be submitted within
thirty (30) days. Continuation of the license will be contingent upon a
background check of the new manager as set out in this chapter, and all fees
shall be waived should the license be changed only as a result of a change of
managers. If, for some reason, the manager is not acceptable, the licensee
shall have thirty (30) days to submit a new name before revocation. Failure to
provide new information shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
license.
(2006 Code § 21-2-5)
3-2-8:   DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee under this chapter shall cause his license to be framed and hung
in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(2006 Code § 21-2-10)
3-2-9:   NATURE OF LICENSE:
A license issued under this chapter shall be purely a personal privilege, good
for not to exceed one year after issued unless sooner revoked as in this
chapter authorized and provided, and shall not constitute property nor shall it
be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution; nor shall it be alienable
or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided, that executors and administrators of any estate of the deceased
licensee and the trustees of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the court having jurisdiction of
such estate and may exercise the privileges of such deceased, insolvent, or
bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or
bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
(2006 Code § 21-2-7)
3-2-10:   LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
For location requirements, see 235 ILCS 5/6-11.
3-2-11:   DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES; PRESENCE ON PREMISES:
   A.   Days And Closing Hours:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to give or sell or offer for
sale or gift or in any way provide any alcoholic liquors, spirits, beer, or
wine in the City during the following hours:
Monday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Tuesday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Wednesday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Thursday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Friday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Saturday, from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Sunday, from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      2.   The times referred to in subsection A1 of this section shall refer
to Daylight Savings Time when the same is in effect in the City and upon
cessation of Daylight Savings Time, shall be Central Standard Time.
      3.   All patrons or customers shall leave the premises at the specified
closing time and shall not remain on the premises thereafter.
   B.   Closed Hours; Presence On Premises Prohibited:
      1.   The periods of time the sale of liquor is prohibited until the time
that liquor may again be sold shall be known as the “"closed hours”.
      2.   No patron shall remain or be permitted to remain or be admitted to
any licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after the sale of alcoholic
liquors is prohibited hereinabove for the remainder of the “closed hours”
described herein.
      3.   Consumption of liquor is prohibited, without exception, more than
thirty (30) minutes after the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this
section for the remainder of the “closed hours” described herein.
      4.   The doors of each licensed premises shall be locked, and no person
not in the employ of the licensee shall be admitted to or upon the premises
during the times when patrons are prohibited from being on the licensed
premises.
(2006 Code § 21-3-1)
   C.   Election Days: All licensees may sell alcoholic liquor at retail, by
the drink or in the original package for consumption either on or off the
premises licensed on the day of any national, State, County or Municipal
election, including primary elections during the hours the polls are open
within the political area in which such election is being held and on Sundays;
subject to all the remaining terms, conditions and opening hours and closing
hours as set forth in this section.
(2006 Code § 21-3-10)
3-2-12:   HAPPY HOURS:
   A.   Happy Hours Prohibited:
      1.   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged
for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use
establishment which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises
more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at
retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such
establishment a separate schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that
establishment.
      2.   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
         a.   Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to
one person for consumption by that one person, except conducting product
sampling or selling or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe;
         b.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
         c.   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection
A3g;
         d.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
         e.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or
contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of
alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises;
or
         f.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under this subsection 2.
      3.   Nothing in subsection A2 shall be construed to prohibit a licensee
from:
         a.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
         b.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
         c.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         d.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show;
         e.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
         f.   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to
buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner, or selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two (2) or more
persons at one time;
         g.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled; or
         h.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment
package where the licensee is separately licensed by a municipal ordinance that
restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an
adjacent stadium; restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours
before the event and one (1) hour after the event; restricts alcoholic liquor
sales to beer and wine; requires tickets for admission to the establishment;
and prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the
sale of admission tickets for single events only.
      4.   A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the retailer’s license.
   B.   Permitted Happy Hours And Meal Packages, Party Packages, And
Entertainment Packages:
      1.   Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein
defined are used in this section in the sense given them in the following
definitions:
DEDICATED EVENT SPACE: A room or rooms or other clearly delineated space within
a retail licensee’s premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of party
package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture, stanchions
and ropes, or other room dividers may be used to clearly delineate a dedicated
event space.
MEAL PACKAGE: A food and beverage package, which may or may not include
entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the
food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination
thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating
within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery, or distillery.
PARTY PACKAGE: A private party, function, or event for a specific social or
business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a defined
number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where
attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a dedicated
event space.
      2.   A retail licensee may:
         a.   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;
         b.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
         c.   Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail
licensee:
            (1)   Offers food in the dedicated event space;
            (2)   Limits the party package to no more than three (3) hours;
            (3)   Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any other such
wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be
granted access to the dedicated event space; and
            (4)   Excludes individuals not participating in the party package
from the dedicated event space;
         d.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         e.   Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
         f.   Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
         g.   Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are
customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits;
         h.   Advertise events permitted under this section;
         i.   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment
package where the licensee is separately licensed by a municipal ordinance that
restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an
adjacent stadium; restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two (2) hours
before the event and one hour after the event; restricts alcoholic liquor sales
to beer and wine; requires tickets for admission to the establishment; and
prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an event and permits the sale
of admission tickets for single events only; and
         j.   Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time
period only if:
            (1)   The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed
during the time that it is discounted;
            (2)   The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor
is discounted does not exceed four (4) hours per day and fifteen (15) hours per
week; however, this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be
divided by the licensee in any manner;
            (3)   The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and the licensed premises; closing hour; and
            (4)   Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor
during a specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee’s
publicly available website at least seven (7) days prior to the specified time.
      3.   A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the retailer’s license. The State Commission may not enforce any
trade practice policy or other rule that was not adopted in accordance with the
Illinois Administrative Procedure Act.
(2006 Code § 21-3-2)
3-2-13:   SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or
for the storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the codes
regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or sale of food
for human consumption.
(2006 Code § 21-3-13)
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any person who is afflicted with or who is a
carrier of any communicable or sexually transmitted disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease
to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of liquor.
(2006 Code § 21-3-14)
   C.   Health Permit: Every licensee shall have, at all times, a valid
operating permit from the County Health Department which regulates health
standards.
(2006 Code § 21-3-15)
3-2-14:   CONDITIONS OF SALES; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited: No licensee, nor any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person. No person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic
liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(2006 Code § 21-3-19)
   B.   Misbranding: Any person who shall knowingly possess, sell or in any way
dispose of any alcoholic liquor under any other than the proper name or brand
known to the trade as designating the kind and quality of the contents of the
package or other containers of the alcoholic liquor, or who shall cause any
such act to be done, shall forfeit the alcoholic liquor and the packages and
containers to the State and shall be subject to the punishment and penalties
provided for violation of this Code.
(2006 Code § 21-4-5)
   C.   Cup To Go: The licensee shall not knowingly permit any person to leave
his premises with open liquor or in a “cup to go”.
(2006 Code § 21-3-7)
   D.   Gambling: It is unlawful for any person to have or keep for public use,
or let for gain, within the City, any ball or pin alley, shooting gallery, or
any billiard, pool, or other table or instrument used for a similar purpose,
without a license for such purpose. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any
person to have or keep for public use, or let for gain, within the City, any
electronic gaming device without a license for such purpose except in the
following instances:
      1.   When conducting or participating in the game commonly known as
Bingo, when conducted in accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act (230
ILCS 25/1 et seq.);
      2.   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal organization, or licensed veterans establishment, when conducted in
accordance with the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.)
(2006 Code § 21-3-17)
   E.   Disorderly House: Any person licensed under this chapter shall not
suffer or permit any disorder, drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, unlawful
games, or riotous or disorderly conduct in any house or premises kept or
occupied by him for the sale of liquor.
(2006 Code § 21-3-18)
   F.   Lewd Entertainment:
      1.   No licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall permit or allow
any lewd or lascivious act or any topless and/or bottomless employee and/or
employees (“topless” being defined as naked and substantially without clothing
or covering of the body from the waist to the neckline and “bottomless” being
defined as naked and substantially without clothing or covering of the body
from the waist downward), or entertainment to be performed within the licensed
premises by an entertainer employed therein, or by any employee or guest. Nor
shall any licensee, his agent, servant or employee permit or allow any employee
or guest or any other person whomever to solicit or encourage the purchasing of
any alcoholic liquor or beverage of any description, or the giving of any
gratuity or gift by any patron or guest to or for the benefit of such employee
or guest.
      2.   The following kinds of conduct on premises in the City licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited:
         a.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts.
         b.   The actual or simulated exhibition, touching, caressing, or
fondling of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
         c.   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks,
pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals.
         d.   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon
the licensed premises who exposes to view any portion of his or her breasts,
buttocks, genitals, vulva, or anus.
         e.   The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which are prohibited by the regulations quoted above.
(2006 Code § 21-3-12)
3-2-15:   PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE:
   A.   Employment: It shall be unlawful for any minor to draw, pour or mix any
alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises, and it shall be unlawful for
any minor to sell, serve, or deliver alcoholic liquor in a licensed retail
premises, except under the following conditions:
      1.   The minor has attained the age of eighteen (18) years;
      2.   The minor is a bona fide employee of the licensed retail premises;
and
      3.   If other than only packaged liquor is sold, the licensee of the
licensed retail premises or the manager or another employee of the licensed
premises who is over twenty one (21) years of age must be present on the
licensed retail premises with the minor.
(2006 Code § 21-3-20)
   B.   Sales To; Presence On Premises:
      1.   No licensee under this chapter shall sell, give away or deliver or
allow the same to be done, any alcoholic liquor or malt or vinous beverage to
any minor or to any intoxicated person. No minor shall patronize, frequent or
loiter in any establishment deriving its principal business from the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
      2.   No licensee under this chapter, or his agent or employee, shall
suffer or permit any minor to remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is
located; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any minor
who is accompanied by his parent or guardian, or to any licensed premises which
derives its principal business from the sale of service or of commodities other
than alcoholic liquor. This subsection B2 shall not apply to premises that have
been issued a Class D license.
      3.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a minor who is
a lawful employee of a licensed retail premises under the provisions of
subsection B1 of this section during the time such a minor is actually engaged
in such employment and to the extent necessary in connection therewith.
(2006 Code § 21-3-21)
   C.   Possession:
      1.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall at any time have
any alcoholic liquor in his possession. The provisions of this subsection C1
shall not apply to a minor who is a lawful employee of a licensed retail
premises under the provisions of subsection B1 of this section the time such
minor is actually engaged in such employment and to the extent necessary in
connection therewith.
(2006 Code § 21-3-23)
      2.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who has any
alcoholic beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public
place, or in any place open to the public is guilty of violating this Code.
This subsection C2 does not apply to possession by a person under the age of
twenty one (21) years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance
of the order of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.
(2006 Code § 21-3-33)
   D.   Purchase: Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a
gift of such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.
(2006 Code § 21-24)
   E.   Consumption: The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years is forbidden.
(2006 Code § 21-3-26)
   F.   Identification Requirements; Misrepresentation Of Age:
      1.   Identification Required:
         a.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or have reason
to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the age of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such
sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
         b.   Proof that the defendant/licensee or his employees or agent
demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this subsection F1 is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
(2006 Code § 21-3-25)
      2.   Transfer Or Use Of False Identification Card Prohibited:
         a.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card;
use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 21-3-26)
         b.   Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives
or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years evidence of
age and identification of any other person is guilty of violating this Code.
(2006 Code § 21-3-31)
         c.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any
alcoholic beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent,
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of
violating this Code.
(2006 Code § 21-3-32)
      3.   Misrepresenting Age: Any minor who misrepresents his age for the
purpose of purchasing or receiving alcoholic liquor in any place in the City
where liquor is sold, or in any manner makes any attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor in the City shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in
this chapter.
(2006 Code § 21-3-22)
   G.   Residential Drinking:
      1.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or
her residence, any other private property under his control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under his control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under the age of
twenty one (21), in a manner that constitutes a violation of this section. A
parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or her residence,
any other private property under his control, or any vehicle, conveyance, or
watercraft under his control to be used in violation of this section if he
knowingly authorizes or permits consumption of alcoholic liquor by underage
invitees. Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of a ordinance
violation and the person’s sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to,
a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the giving of alcoholic liquor to a
person under the age of twenty one (21) years in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service in observation of a religious holiday.
      2.   For the purposes of this subsection where the residence or other
property has an owner and a tenant or lessee, the trier of fact may infer that
the residence or other property is occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(2006 Code § 21-3-34)
   H.   Rental Hotel Or Motel Rooms For Drinking: Any person who rents a hotel
or motel room from the proprietor or agent thereof for the purpose of or with
the knowledge that such room shall be used for the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by persons under the age of twenty one (21) years shall be guilty of
violating this Code.
(2006 Code § 21-3-35)
   I.   Exemptions: The possession and dispensing or consumption by an
underaged person of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service
or ceremony, or the consumption by an underaged person under the direct
supervision and approval of the parent or parents of such underaged person in
the privacy of a home is not prohibited by this chapter.
(2006 Code § 21-3-28)
3-2-16:   ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any person to do or
commit any of the following acts within the City:
      1.   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any public street, alley, sidewalk,
or other public way without special permission granted by the Mayor.
      2.   Drink any alcoholic liquors in any public park, except with the
permission of the Mayor.
      3.   Drink any alcoholic liquors on any private property without
permission of an owner thereof.
      4.   Appear on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
place, including parks and recreation areas, in an intoxicated condition.
(2006 Code § 21-3-11)
   B.   Peddling Liquor: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
City.
(2006 Code § 21-3-16)
3-2-17:   ANNEXING LICENSE HOLDERS:
The restrictions contained in this chapter shall in no way affect taverns and
other business(es) holding retail liquor licenses, duly licensed by the County,
which are located in the territory annexed to the City. Licenses may be issued
to them or renewed by the duly constituted authorities upon annexation;
provided, that thereafter, all of the restrictions and contingencies contained
herein shall apply.
(2006 Code § 21-2-8)
3-2-18:   BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   A.   Record Of Licenses: The Mayor shall keep a complete record of all
licenses issued by him and shall supply the Clerk, Treasurer and Chief of
Police a copy of the same. Upon issuance or revocation of a license, the Mayor
shall give written notice to these same officers within forty eight (48) hours.
(2006 Code § 21-2-11)
   B.   Books And Records Of Licensee: It shall be the duty of every retail
licensee to make books and records available upon reasonable notice for the
purpose of investigation and control by the Mayor. Such books and records need
not be maintained on the licensed premises, but must be maintained in the State
of Illinois.
(2006 Code § 21-3-30)
3-2-19:   EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT AND LICENSEE:
The Mayor shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined, under oath,
any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any licensee upon
whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner
hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for
his information in the performance of his duties; and for such purpose to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose
of obtaining any of the information desired by the Mayor under this section, he
may authorize his agent to act on his behalf.
(2006 Code § 21-2-3)
3-2-20:   RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant admittance to the premises for which a
license has been issued at any time upon the verbal request of the Chief of
Police, any police officer, or the Liquor Control Commissioner for the purpose
of making an inspection of such premises or any part thereof.
(2006 Code § 21-3-29)
3-2-21:   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Powers And Duties Of Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions and
duties with respect to licenses granted under this chapter:
      1.   In addition to and not limited by the specific penalties set out for
violations of specific provisions of this chapter, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may suspend for thirty (30) days or revoke any liquor license
issued under this chapter for violation of any State law pertaining to the sale
of alcoholic liquors by any licensee, his agent, servant or employee.
      2.   To suspend or revoke any liquor license if the licensee makes any
false statement or misrepresentation in the application for a license.
      3.   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the
State Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine
the premises of the licensee in connection therewith;
      4.   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not for Profit Corporation Act (805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.) or a
foreign corporation functioning as a club in the State under a certificate of
authority issued under that act has violated this chapter by selling or
offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer’s license;
      5.   To receive complaints from any citizen within his jurisdiction that
any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rules or regulations adopted
pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
      6.   To levy fines in accordance with subsection F2 of this section.
(2006 Code § 21-4-8)
   B.   Owner Permitting Violations: If the owner of the licensed premises or
any person from whom the licensee derives the right to possession of such
premises, or the agent of such owner, or person shall knowingly permit the
licensee to use said licensed premises in violation of the terms of this
chapter, said owner, agent or other person shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this chapter to the same extent as said licensee and be subject to
the same punishment.
(2006 Code § 21-4-1)
   C.   Responsibility Of Owner For Employee:
      1.   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
(2006 Code § 21-4-2)
      2.   Whenever any officer, director, manager, or other employee in a
position of authority of any licensee under this chapter shall be convicted of
any violation of this chapter while engaged in the course of his employment or
while upon the premises described by the license, the license may be revoked
and the fees paid thereon forfeited, both as to the holder of the license and
as to the premises, as if said licensee had himself been convicted.
(2006 Code § 21-4-4)
   D.   Abatement Of Place Used In Violation: Every lot, parcel or tract of
land, and every building, structure, tent, railroad car, boat, wagon, vehicle,
establishment or place whatsoever, together with all furniture, fixtures,
ornaments and machinery located thereon, wherein there shall be conducted any
unlawful sale of any alcoholic liquor, or whereon or wherein there shall be
kept, stored, concealed or allowed any alcoholic liquor intended for illegal
sale or to be sold, disposed of or in any other manner used in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and shall be abated as provided by the laws of the State for the abatement of
public nuisances.
(2006 Code § 21-4-6)
   E.   Complaint By Residents:
      1.   Any five (5) residents of the City shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Control Commissioner, stating that a licensee under
this chapter has been or is violating the provisions of this chapter or any
amendments hereto, or of any of the statutes of the State of Illinois, enacted
with reference to the control of liquor. Such complaint shall be made in
writing and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining.
      2.   The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule or
regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which
such belief is based. If the Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation, and that from the facts alleged,
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing,
and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing
and of the particular charges in the complaint.
(2006 Code § 21-4-9)
   F.   Revocation Or Suspension Of License; Notice And Hearing:
      1.   Revocation Or Suspension:
         a.   Whenever any licensee shall be convicted of any violation of this
chapter, the license of said licensee may, in the discretion of the Mayor, be
revoked and forfeited and all fees paid thereon shall be forfeited, and the
bond given by said licensee to secure such licensee's faithful compliance with
the terms of this chapter shall be forfeited, and it shall thereafter be
unlawful and shall constitute a further violation of this chapter for said
licensee to continue to operate under such license.
(2006 Code § 21-4-3)
         b.   The Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license
issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of the Illinois Liquor Act, any valid ordinance adopted by the City,
or any applicable rule or regulation established by the Liquor Control
Commissioner or the State Commission which is not inconsistent with law.
      2.   Fine In Addition To Suspension: In addition to the suspension, the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such
violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month
period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this subsection F2 may be
imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from
such fines shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund of the Municipal
Treasury.
      3.   Notice And Hearing Of Revocation Or Suspension: No such license
shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a
public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with a three (3) day
written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear
and defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public and the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an
official record of the proceedings. If the Liquor Control Commissioner has
reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed
premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he may, upon
the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and
without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than
seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that
period; except, that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of
another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not
be applicable to such other business or businesses.
      4.   Determination By Liquor Control Commissioner: The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall within five (5) days after such hearing, if he or
she determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for
such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the
period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a
copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee.
(2006 Code § 21-4-10)
   G.   Subsequent Violations In A Year: In any case in which a licensee
appeals to the State Commission a suspension or revocation by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner that is the second or subsequent such suspension or
revocation placed on that licensee within the preceding twelve (12) month
period, the licensee shall consider the suspension or revocation to be in
effect until a reversal of the Liquor Control Commissioner's action has been
issued by the State Commission and shall cease all activity otherwise
authorized by the license. The State Commission shall expedite, to the greatest
extent possible, its consideration of any appeal that is an appeal of a second
or subsequent suspension or revocation within the past twelve (12) month
period.
(2006 Code § 21-4-12)
   H.   Use Of Premises For One Year After Revocation: When any license has
been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted for the same premises
for a period of one year thereafter.
(2006 Code § 21-4-7)
3-2-22:   APPEALS:
   A.   Appeals From Order Of Liquor Control Commissioner:
      1.   Except as provided in this section, any order or action of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner levying a fine or refusing to levy a fine on a
licensee, granting or refusing to grant a license, revoking or suspending or
refusing to revoke or suspend a license or refusing for more than thirty (30)
days to grant a hearing upon a complaint to revoke or suspend a license may,
within twenty (20) days after notice of such order or action, be appealed by
any resident of the City under the jurisdiction of the Liquor Control
Commissioner or any person interested, to the State Commission.
      2.   In any case where a licensee appeals to the State Commission from an
order or action of the Liquor Control Commissioner having the effect of
suspending or revoking a license, denying a renewal application, or refusing to
grant a license, the licensee shall resume the operation of the licensed
business pending the decision of the State Commission and the expiration of the
time allowed for an application for rehearing. If an application for rehearing
is filed, the licensee shall continue the operation of the licensed business
until the denial of the application or, if the rehearing is granted, until the
decision on rehearing.
(2006 Code § 21-4-11)
   B.   Appeal Limitations For Subsequent Violations: Any appeal of the
decision and findings of the Liquor Control Commissioner in subsection 3-2-21G
of this chapter shall be limited to a review of the official record of the
proceedings of the Liquor Control Commissioner. The official record shall be a
“certified official record” of the proceedings taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter. A copy of this record
shall be filed by the Liquor Control Commissioner within five (5) days after
notice of the filing of such appeal is received by the City from the State
Commission.
(2006 Code § 21-4-13)
CHAPTER 3: RAFFLES
Section
3-3-1:   Definitions
3-3-2:   Administration Of Provisions
3-3-3:   License Required
3-3-4:   Ineligibility For License
3-3-5:   Application For License
3-3-6:   Manager's Bond
3-3-7:   Authority To Issue License; Restrictions
3-3-8:   Nontransferability Of License
3-3-9:   Conduct Of Raffles
3-3-10:   Prizes; Issuance Of Chances; Number Of Raffles
3-3-11:   Recordkeeping
3-3-1:   DEFINITIONS:
   A.   The definitions contained in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1 are
hereby adopted by reference as if fully set out herein.
(2006 Code § 7-5-1; amd. 2018 Code)
   B.   Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein
defined are used in this chapter in the sense given them in the following
definitions:
   NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   RAFFLE: A form of “lottery”, as defined in section 28-2, subparagraph (b) of
the Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), conducted by an organization
licensed under this chapter in which:
      1.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
presented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers, or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance.
      2.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
(2006 Code § 7-5-1)
3-3-2:   ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
The Mayor is hereby charged with the administration of the appropriate
provisions of this chapter, and may appoint persons to assist in the exercise
of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided, including, but
not limited to, the members of his staff, the City Attorney, the City Clerk,
and the Chief of Police.
(2006 Code § 7-5-2)
3-3-3:   LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person or organization shall conduct or partake in the selling of
raffle chances within the limits and territory of the City without having a
license to do so issued by the Mayor in a manner hereinafter provided and a
valid license for such purpose as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
fraternal, educational or veterans organizations that operate without profit to
their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of
five (5) years immediately before making application for a license and which
have had, during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a nonprofit fundraising
organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole
purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an
illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   B.   The types of organizations mentioned in subsection A of this section
shall be defined pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes and incorporated
herein.
   C.   No person or organization shall be issued more than one license in a
period of one week.
(2006 Code § 7-5-3)
3-3-4:   INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
The following are ineligible for any raffle license:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   D.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B or
C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed.
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not.
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a “raffle” as
defined in this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-5-6)
3-3-5:   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall submit to the City
Clerk an application, in triplicate, in writing and under oath stating the
following:
   A.   The name and address of the organization.
   B.   The type of organization that is conducting the raffle, i.e.,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans or other.
   C.   The length of time the organization has continually existed immediately
before making application for a license.
   D.   The applicant shall give the aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle.
   E.   The applicant will give the maximum retail value of each prize awarded
by a licensee in a single raffle.
   F.   The amount that the organization plans to charge for each raffle chance
issued or sold.
   G.   The time and location where the raffle is to be held.
   H.   The purpose for which the proceeds of the raffle will be used.
   I.   The name and address of the person conducting and performing the
raffle, and his relationship with the organization.
   J.   The last date which the applicant has applied for a raffle license.
   K.   The area in which the organization plans to sell or issue its raffle
chances.
   L.   Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony.
(2006 Code § 7-5-4)
3-3-6:   MANAGER’S BOND:
The manager of a raffle game shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the performance of his duties. The Mayor or his
designated representative is authorized to waive requirement for bond by
including a waiver provision in the license issued; provided, that the license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by majority vote of the
members of the licensed organization. The terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than
thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
(2006 Code § 7-5-3)
3-3-7:   AUTHORITY TO ISSUE LICENSES; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The Mayor is authorized to grant and issue licenses to eligible
organizations to conduct raffles and to participate in the sale of raffle
tickets within the limits and territory of the City upon the conditions and in
the manner provided by this chapter and by the act of the General Assembly of
Illinois, and not otherwise. Such license shall be in writing, signed by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk with the seal of his office affixed
thereto.
(2006 Code § 7-5-4)
   B.   All licenses issued by the Mayor or City Clerk are subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances
without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   The license and application for a license shall specify the area or
areas within the licensing authority in which raffle chances will be sold or
issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time of determination in winning chances, and the location or locations with
which winning chances will be determined.
      3.   The application shall contain a sworn statement attesting to the not
for profit character of the prospective licensee organization signed by the
presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
      4.   The Mayor shall act upon a license application within thirty (30)
days from the date of application.
      5.   The application for license shall be prepared in accordance with
this chapter.
      6.   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in
this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-5-5)
3-3-8:   NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable.
(2006 Code § 7-5-3)
3-3-9:   CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
   A.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   D.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine a winning chance
or chances in a raffle only from an organization which has also been licensed
under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act (230 ILCS 150.01 et seq.)
   E.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   F.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area
where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent
or guardian.
   G.   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the governing body of any county or municipality under the
provisions of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-5-7)
3-3-10:   PRIZES; ISSUANCE OF CHANCES; NUMBER OF RAFFLES:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days.
   E.   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one raffle
and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-5-9)
3-3-11:   RECORDKEEPING:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from the gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for the gross
receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be
the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the City its gross
receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net
proceeds itemized as required by this section.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and the organization shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(2006 Code § 7-5-8)
CHAPTER 4: SOLICITORS
Section
3-4-1:   Definitions
3-4-2:   Registration Requirements
3-4-3:   Policy On Soliciting
3-4-4:   Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-4-5:   Compliance By Solicitors
3-4-6:   Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-4-7:   Time Limit On Soliciting
3-4-8:   Charitable Soliciting On Public Highways
3-4-1:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used in this chapter
shall be construed to have the meanings ascribed thereto in this section:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for
any kind of consideration whatsoever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project.
(2006 Code § 7-2-1)
3-4-2:   REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Certificate Of Registration Required; Exemptions: Every person desiring
to engage in SOLICITING, as herein defined, from persons within the City is
hereby required to make written application for a certificate of registration
as hereinafter provided. All resident charitable, nonprofit organizations in
the City which have been in existence for six (6) months or longer shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-2-2)
   B.   Ineligibility For Certificate: No certificate of registration shall be
issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under
the laws of the State of Illinois or any other State or Federal law of the
United States within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any
person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter; nor to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder
has previously been revoked as herein provided.
   C.   Application For Certificate:
      1.   Applications for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the City Chief of Police and filed with the Chief. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application, as follows:
         a.   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also, business address if other than residence
address; also, social security number.
         b.   Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if
other than present address.
         c.   Age of applicant and marital status; and if married, the name of
the spouse.
         d.   Physical description of the applicant.
         e.   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or
association with whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length
of time of such employment or representation.
         f.   Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if
other than the present employer.
         g.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter
of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage.
         h.   Period of time for which the certificate is applied.
         i.   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application
for a certificate under this chapter, if any.
         j.   Has a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this chapter ever been revoked?
         k.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or the regulations of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting?
         l.   Has the applicant ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or Federal
law of the United States?
         m.   The last three (3) municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application in the City and the
address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
         n.   Such additional information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary to process the application.
      2.   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
      3.   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate
record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of applications.
      4.   Applications for certificates issued shall be numbered in
consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued and any renewal
thereof shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon
which it was issued.
(2006 Code § 7-2-3)
   D.   Registration Fees: Upon making an application for a certificate, the
applicant shall pay a license fee, as follows:
      1.   Daily license: Ten dollars ($10.00) per person per day.
      2.   Annual license: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per person per year.
(2006 Code § 7-2-11)
   E.   Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: The Chief of Police, after
consideration of the application and all information obtained relative thereto,
shall deny the application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications
for such certificate as herein required, and that the issuance of a certificate
of registration to the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and
purpose of this chapter. Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police upon
the application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found
to be fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued
forthwith. The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
   F.   Revocation Of Certificate: Any certificate of registration issued
hereunder shall be revoked by the Chief of Police if the holder of the
certificate is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, or
has made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms
of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall
be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or
by certified (return receipt requested) U.S. mail, addressed to his or her
residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of
such notice, the certificate of registration shall become null and void.
(2006 Code § 7-2-4)
3-4-3:   POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is declared to be the policy of the City that the occupant or occupants of
the residences in the City shall make the determination of whether solicitors
shall be or shall not be invited to their respective residences.
(2006 Code § 7-2-5)
3-4-4:   NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
   A.   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the manner provided in subsection B of this section.
   B.   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x
4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant and containing the
applicable words, as follows:
   ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED
   or
   NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   C.   The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting the same, at the cost thereof.
   D.   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(2006 Code § 7-2-6)
3-4-5:   COMPLIANCE BY SOLICITORS:
   A.   It is the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the
City upon which a “residence”, as herein defined, is located, to first examine
the notice provided in section 3-4-4 of this chapter, if any is attached, and
be governed by the statement contained on the notice.
   B.   If the notice states “ONLY REGISTERED SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the
solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of registration as herein provided
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice
states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”, then the solicitor, whether registered or not,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   C.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(2006 Code § 7-2-7)
3-4-6:   UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to
go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant
of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in SOLICITING, as herein defined, in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section 3-4-
4 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-2-8)
3-4-7:   TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in SOLICITING, as
herein defined, prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00)
P.M. on any day of the week, including Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or
on a State or National holiday.
(2006 Code § 7-2-9)
3-4-8:   CHARITABLE SOLICITING ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS:
Charitable organizations shall be allowed to solicit upon public highways under
the following terms and conditions:
   A.   The charitable organization must be one that is registered with the
Attorney General for the State of Illinois as a charitable organization as
provided by “An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds for
Charitable Purposes, Providing for Violations Thereof, and Making an
Appropriation Therefor”, approved July 26, 1963, as amended.
   B.   Solicit only at intersections where all traffic from all directions is
required to come to a full stop.
   C.   Be engaged in a Statewide fundraising activity.
   D.   Be liable for any injury to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   E.   Any person so engaged in such solicitation shall be at least sixteen
(16) years of age and shall wear a high visibility vest.
   F.   Solicit only during daylight hours.
   G.   Any one charitable organization shall be limited to conducting no more
than two (2) solicitations per calendar year.
(2006 Code § 7-2-10)
CHAPTER 5: PEDDLERS
Section
3-5-1:   Definition
3-5-2:   Licensing Requirements
3-5-3:   Days And Hours Of Peddling
3-5-4:   Unwanted Peddling
3-5-5:   Nuisance Peddlers; Abatement
3-5-6:   Prohibited Acts
3-5-1:   DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the word PEDDLE means the selling, bartering, or
exchanging, or the offering for sale, barter or exchange, of any tangible
personal property upon or along the streets, highways, or public places of the
City or from house to house, whether at one place thereon or from place to
place, from any wagon, truck, pushcart, or other vehicle or from moveable
receptacles of any kind, but shall not include the delivery of any item
previously ordered or the sale of items along delivery routes where the
purchaser has previously requested the seller to stop and exhibit his items.
Nor shall PEDDLE be taken to include the solicitation of orders by sample where
the goods are not delivered at the time the order is taken.
(2006 Code § 7-3-2)
3-5-2:   LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to engage in the business of hawker or peddler of any merchandise,
article or thing without having first secured a license therefor.
(2006 Code § 7-3-1)
   B.   Application For License: A person desiring a license may obtain the
same by making application with the City Clerk and providing the following
information:
      1.   Name and physical description of the applicant.
      2.   Permanent home and address and local address if operating from such
an address.
      3.   A brief description of the business and of the goods to be sold.
      4.   Name and address of the employer, if any.
      5.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      6.   Evidence that the agent is acting on behalf of the corporation he
represents.
      7.   Statement of the applicant's criminal record other than a traffic
record.
      8.   The last three (3) municipalities where the applicant carried on
business immediately preceding the date of application to the City and the
address from which such business was conducted in those municipalities.
(2006 Code § 7-3-3)
   C.   Photographs Required: Two (2) photographs of the applicant and such of
its employees as will be used in the peddling or merchandising, taken within
sixty (60) days immediately prior to the filing of the application, which
pictures shall be two inches by two inches (2" x 2"), showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant or his agent(s) and/or employee(s) in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
(2006 Code § 7-3-7)
   D.   Investigation Of Applicant; Denial Of License: Upon receipt of each
application, it shall be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall investigate
the business and moral character of the applicant. If the facts show the
applicant unfit to receive the license, then it shall be denied.
(2006 Code § 7-3-4)
   E.   License Fees: The license fees per person to be charged for licenses to
peddle in the City, each payable in advance, are hereby fixed and established
as follows:
      1.   Daily license: Ten dollars ($10.00) per person per day.
      2.   Annual license: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per person per year.
(2006 Code § 7-3-11)
3-5-3:   DAYS AND HOURS OF PEDDLING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to engage in peddling, as
herein defined, prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after sunset.
(2006 Code § 7-3-5)
3-5-4:   UNWANTED PEDDLING:
Nothing contained in this chapter, nor the issuance of any license hereunder,
shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence for the
purpose of peddling if such licensee, his agents or employees, are directed to
depart from said private residence by the owner or person in charge thereof.
(2006 Code § 7-3-8)
3-5-5:   NUISANCE PEDDLERS; ABATEMENT:
   A.   The practice of going in and upon private residences, business
establishments or offices in the City by peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants
and transient vendors of merchandise without having been requested or invited
to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private
residences and business establishments or offices for the purpose of disposing
of and/or peddling or hawking of merchandise is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is punishable as a violation of this Code.
(2006 Code § 7-3-9)
   B.   The City Police Department is hereby required and directed to suppress
the same and to abate any such nuisance as described in subsection A of this
section.
(2006 Code § 7-3-10)
3-5-6:   PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Fraud; Peddling Prohibited Merchandise: No licensed peddler or hawker
shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through
himself or through an employee while acting as a peddler, in the City, or shall
barter, sell or peddle any goods or merchandise or wares other than those
specified in his application for a license.
(2006 Code § 7-3-6)
   B.   Peddling In Public Square: No person shall peddle in a public square.
(2006 Code § 7-3-9)
CHAPTER 6: JUNK DEALERS
Section
3-6-1:   Definitions
3-6-2:   License Required
3-6-3:   Ineligibility For License
3-6-4:   Application For License
3-6-5:   License Fees
3-6-6
:   Contents Of License
3-6-7:   Site Requirements
3-6-8:   Minors
3-6-1:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
JUNK: Scrap and old iron, steel, chain, brass, copper, magnesium, aluminum,
tin, lead or other base metals, scrap lumber, old rope, old bags, rags,
wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber and
glass, and empty bottles of different kinds or sizes when the number of each
kind or size is less than one gross, any wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicle,
engine, or machinery received, stored or held for more than ninety (90) days,
and all articles and things discarded or no longer used as a manufactured
article composed of or consisting of any one or more of the materials or
articles herein mentioned.
JUNK DEALER: Every person, firm, partnership, or corporation that shall engage
in the business of buying, selling, bartering or exchanging, or shall collect,
receive, store or hold in possession for sale, barter or exchange, any of the
things in and by this section defined as “junk”.
JUNKYARD: The premises on which a junk dealer is engaged in the business of
buying, selling, bartering, exchanging, or collecting, receiving, storing or
holding in possession for sale, barter, or exchange, any of the things in and
by this section defined as “junk”.
(2006 Code § 7-4-1)
3-6-2:   LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, conduct or operate a
junkyard within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a
license to do so as herein provided. A separate license shall be secured for
each junkyard located on noncontiguous lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land.
(2006 Code § 7-4-3)
3-6-3:   INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
Any applicant for a license to keep, maintain, conduct or operate a junkyard
shall be disqualified for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Not a person of good character.
   B.   Falsification of an application for a license hereunder.
   C.   License for a junkyard theretofore issued to the applicant has been
revoked during the preceding twenty four (24) months.
   D.   Failure to meet any one of the minimum physical requirements for a
junkyard as specified in section 3-6-7 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-4-5)
3-6-4:   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Before any license under the provisions of this chapter is issued, any person
desiring to operate a junkyard in the City shall first make a verified
application in writing to the City Clerk in the absence of provision to the
contrary, stating thereon the full name of the applicant, his residence
address, the trade name of the applicant, the legal description of the premises
where the junkyard is to be located, the size and approximate location of each
entrance thereto and exit therefrom, whether or not the premises where the
junkyard is to be located is enclosed on its perimeter with a solid,
nontransparent wall or fence of a minimum height of seven feet (7'), measured
from ground level, excepting the entrances and exits, and whether or not the
public streets and alleys adjacent to the premises where the junkyard is to be
located have junk thereon. If the applicant is a firm or partnership, the names
and residence addresses of all the partners and in the case of a corporation,
the names and residence addresses of the president and secretary shall be
stated in the application.
(2006 Code § 7-4-4)
3-6-5:   LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for each junkyard shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00), payable in advance with the filing of the application for license,
and shall not be subject to pro rata reduction for a portion of the year,
either because of the application for or because of revocation of a license;
provided, however, that only one annual license fee shall be payable for
licenses which may be issued whenever the applicant desires to keep, maintain,
conduct or operate junkyards on lots, blocks, tracts, or parcels of land which
are situated on directly opposite sides of and abut upon each side of a public
street or alley. Where such place of business is not located in the City, but
the operator carries on the business of buying or collecting or bartering for
the items heretofore enumerated within the City, the annual fee shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each junk dealer. The fee is payable as provided
in this Code.
(2006 Code § 7-4-7)
3-6-6:   CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any and all licenses issued hereunder shall state that such license is
issued in the name of the junk dealer solely for the purpose of keeping,
maintaining, conducting and operating a junkyard, the expiration date thereof,
the legal description of the premises where the junkyard is to be located, that
the license shall be used and the privileges thereof exercised only at the
described premises, and that such license is nonassignable and nontransferable.
   B.   Such license shall further provide that it is issued subject to all the
provisions of this chapter; that upon the first conviction for a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the fine, such junkyard
shall remain closed for a period of thirty (30) days; that upon the second
conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, such
license shall become null and void, and the licensee shall forfeit all sums
paid for such license, and that the licensee, by the acceptance of such
license, expressly agrees to all the terms and conditions thereof, and to the
terms and provisions of this section and all amendments hereto.
(2006 Code § 7-4-6)
3-6-7:   SITE REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum physical requirements at all times for each junkyard shall be as
follows:
   A.   The premises where the junkyard is located shall not have more than two
(2) entrances thereto and two (2) exits therefrom, each of which shall not
exceed fifteen feet (15') in width at the perimeter of the premises.
   B.   The premises where the junkyard is located shall be enclosed on its
perimeter with a solid, nontransparent, vertical wall or fence of a minimum
height of eight feet (8') measured from ground level, excepting for the
entrances and exits permitted by subsection A of this section.
   C.   The aforesaid solid, nontransparent wall or fence and the gates or
doors, if any, at the aforesaid entrances and exits shall not contain any sign,
poster or advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, excepting one sign of the
licensee thereon not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in size.
   D.   The public streets and alleys adjacent to the junkyard shall not have
junk thereon.
(2006 Code § 7-4-2)
3-6-8:   MINORS:
No licensee hereunder shall purchase or receive any article whatsoever from any
minor without the written consent of the minor's parents or guardians.
(2006 Code § 7-4-8)
CHAPTER 7: AUCTIONS AND GARAGE SALES
Section
3-7-1:   Definitions
3-7-2
:   Permit Required; Application
3-7-3:   Permit Fee
3-7-4:   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit; Nontransferability And Display Of Permit
3-7-5:   Revocation Of Permit; Appeals
3-7-6:   Number Of Sales And Continuous Hours
3-7-7:   Property Permitted To Be Sold
3-7-8:   Advertising Signs
3-7-9:   Evidence Of Sale
3-7-10:   Exemptions From Provisions
3-7-1:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings given in this section:
GARAGE SALE: All general sales, open to the public, conducted on or from a
residential, business or commercial premises, for the purpose of disposing of
personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled “garage”,
“yard”, “lawn”, “attic”, “porch”, “backyard”, “patio”, “flea market”, “auction”
or “rummage sale”. This definition shall not include situations where no more
than three (3) specific items are held out for the sale and all advertisements
of such sale specifically naming those items to be sold.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Property which is owned, maintained or utilized by an
individual or members of his or her residence, or a business and acquired in
the normal course of living in, maintaining or operating a business or
residence. The term does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale
or obtained on consignment.
(2006 Code § 7-7-6)
3-7-2:       PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct an auction, yard sale or garage
sale within the City limits without first obtaining a permit from the City
Clerk or designee, located at City Hall. Application for such permit shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state the dates, times and location
of the proposed sale and the name of the person, firm or corporation
responsible for the sale activity.
(2006 Code § 7-7-2)
3-7-3:   PERMIT FEE:
Upon issuance of a permit for an auction, yard sale or garage sale, the
applicant shall remit a fee of two dollars ($2.00) to the City Finance Director
or her designee. This fee shall be nonrefundable, unless the applicant gives
written notification to the City Finance Director prior to the beginning of the
proposed auction, yard sale or garage sale, stating the reason that the sale
could not or would not be held.
(2006 Code § 7-7-4)
3-7-4:   ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY AND DISPLAY OF
PERMIT:
Upon receipt of an application for an auction, yard sale or garage sale permit,
such investigation as shall be deemed necessary in regard thereto shall be
made. If the City Finance Director is satisfied that the proposed sale is
within the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall be issued to the
responsible person, firm or corporation. The permit shall be nontransferable
and displayed in a prominent place located on the premises of the sale. If an
application is rejected, it may be appealed to the City Council.
(2006 Code § 7-7-3)
3-7-5:   REVOCATION OF PERMIT; APPEALS:
The Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, or his designee, shall have
the power to revoke any and all permits that have been issued or granted as
herein provided. A revocation of a permit may be appealed to the City Council.
(2006 Code § 7-7-5)
3-7-6:   NUMBER OF SALES AND CONTINUOUS HOURS:
No person, firm or corporation within the City limits shall sponsor or conduct
an auction, yard sale or garage sale at a property zoned either business,
residential or commercial more than two (2) times per calendar year. The
duration of any business, residential or commercial auction, yard sale or
garage sale shall not be more than seventy two (72) continuous hours of
duration. In no event, shall there be more than two (2) auctions, yard sales or
garage sales on any one site per that calendar year. No goods, merchandise or
setup material shall be exhibited beyond the seventy two (72) hour time limit.
(2006 Code § 7-7-1)
3-7-7:   PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD:
It shall be unlawful for any individual, person, firm or corporation to sell or
offer for sale, under authority granted by this chapter, property other than
personal property.
(2006 Code § 7-7-7)
3-7-8:   ADVERTISING SIGNS:
Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a garage
sale:
   A.   Two (2) signs, of not more than three (3) square feet, shall be
permitted to be displayed on the property of the location of the garage sale.
   B.   Two (2) signs, of not more than three (3) square feet each, are
permitted not of the location of the garage sale; provided, that permission to
erect such signs is received from the property owners upon whose property such
signs are to be placed.
   C.   No sign shall be exhibited for more than forty eight (48) hours prior
to the day such sale is to commence.
   D.   Signs must be removed at the close of the garage sale activity.
(2006 Code § 7-7-8)
Cross-reference:
   See also subsection 8-11D-2D of this Code
3-7-9:   EVIDENCE OF SALE:
The display of more than three (3) items for sale upon any business,
residential or commercial premises, or the advertising of such a sale upon the
premises or in other locations within the corporate City limits, shall create a
rebuttal presumption that such person is conducting a garage sale.
(2006 Code § 7-7-9)
3-7-10:   EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect the following:
   A.   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers or duties as a public
official.
   C.   Any sale conducted by a merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations adopted by the City, or under the
protection of the nonconforming use section thereof, or any other sale
conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor wherein such sale would be
conducted from property zoned business, residential or commercial and not
otherwise prohibited in other ordinances.
   D.   Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
government institution or organization when the proceeds for the sale are used
directly for the institution’s or organization’s charitable purpose and the
goods or articles are not to be sold on a consignment basis.
(2006 Code § 7-7-10)
CHAPTER 8: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
3-8-1:   Purpose, Findings And Rationale
3-8-2:   Definitions
3-8-3:   Classifications Of Businesses
3-8-4:   License Required
3-8-5:   Application For License
3-8-6:   License Fees
3-8-7:   Issuance Or Denial Of License; Contents And Display
3-8-8:   Expiration Of License; Renewals
3-8-9:   Nontransferability Of License
3-8-10:   Hours Of Operation
3-8-11:   Location
3-8-12:   Loitering, Exterior Lighting, Visibility And Monitoring Requirements
3-8-13:   Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos
3-8-14:   Prohibited Activities
3-8-15:   Inspections
3-8-16:   Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-8-17:   Hearing On Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License; Appeals
3-8-18:   Proving Violation Or Business Licensee Liability
3-8-19:   Failure Of City To Meet Deadlines
3-8-20:   Application To Existing Businesses
3-8-21:   Penalties And Enforcement
3-8-1:   PURPOSE, FINDINGS AND RATIONALE:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses within the City. The provisions of this chapter have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or
reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material.
   B.   Findings And Rationale: Based on evidence of the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to
the City Council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions
incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 124
S.Ct. 2219 (June 7, 2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S.
425 (2002); Pap’s A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v.
Playtime Theatres, Inc., U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426
U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California
v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and based upon reports concerning secondary
effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but
not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden
Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979,
1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Los
Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington -
2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003;
Amarillo, Texas - 1977; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; and the report
of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the City Council finds:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are
associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not
limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of
disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug
trafficking, negative impacts on property values, urban blight, litter, and
sexual assault and exploitation.
      2.   Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land
uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and
should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses to minimize the
secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary
concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area.
      3.   Each of the foregoing secondary effects constitutes a harm which the
City has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This
substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the
City's rationale of this chapter, exists independent of any comparative
analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses.
Additionally, the City’s interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses
extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future
sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the City. The City Council
finds that the cases and information relied on in formulating this chapter are
reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects.
(2006 Code § 7-6-1)
3-8-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section
shall have the meanings herein respectively ascribed to them unless a different
meaning is clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which, as one
of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphases upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A “principal
purpose” means that the commercial establishment:
   A.   Has a substantial portion of its displayed merchandise which consists
of said items; or
   B.   Has a substantial portion of the wholesale value of its displayed
merchandise which consists of said items; or
   C.   Has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed
merchandise which consists of said items; or
   D.   Derives a substantial portion of its revenues from the sale or rental,
for any form of consideration, of said items; or
   E.   Maintains a substantial section of its interior business space for the
sale or rental of said items.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features persons who appear seminude.
ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live
performances which are characterized by the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; and which advertises the availability
of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by
means of any on or off premises advertising, including, but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for
a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five
(5) persons for any form of consideration.
CHARACTERIZED BY: Describing the essential character or quality of an item. As
applied in this chapter, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented
business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R
by the Motion Picture Association of America.
EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an
employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. “Employee” does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Mayor of the City of Grafton, Illinois.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
HEARING BODY: The City Council of the City of Grafton, Illinois.
INFLUENTIAL INTEREST: Any of the following:
   A.   The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control
the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or
legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business;
   B.   Ownership of a financial interest of thirty percent (30%) or more of a
business or of any class of voting securities of a business; or
   C.   Holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary,
treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which
operates the sexually oriented business.
LICENSED DAYCARE CENTER: A facility licensed by the State of Illinois, whether
situated within the City or not, that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under
fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than
twenty four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is
operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In case
of an employee, the term shall mean the person in whose name the sexually
oriented business employee license has been issued.
MUNICIPALITY - BODY: The City Council of the City of Grafton, Illinois.
MUNICIPALITY - TYPE: City of Grafton, Illinois.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple and areola.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO OPERATE: To cause to function or to put or keep in a state
of doing business. “Operator” means any person on the premises of a sexually
oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise
overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to
be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or
not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
PERSON: Individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity.
PREMISES: The real property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but
not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a
business license pursuant to section 3-8-5 of this chapter.
REGULARLY: The consistent and repeated doing of the act so described.
SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: A place where persons regularly appear in a state of
seminudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons
appearing in a state of seminudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   C.   In a structure:
      1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a seminude person is available for viewing;
and
      2.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class.
SEMINUDE OR STATE OF SEMINUDITY: The showing of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of
the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This
definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but
shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts
exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL DEVICE: Any three-dimensional (3-D) object designed and marketed for
stimulation of the male or female human genital organ or anus or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices
such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include
devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases
or for preventing pregnancy.
SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP: A commercial establishment that regularly features sexual
devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy,
drugstore, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to
providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition
be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access
to any portion of their premises by reason of age.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, purports to offer, for any form of
consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the persons is seminude.
SEXUAL ORIENTED BUSINESS: An “adult bookstore or adult video store”, an “adult
cabaret”, an “adult motel”, an “adult motion picture theater”, a “seminude
model studio”, or a “sexual encounter center”.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic
region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola; and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or
   B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described in subsection A of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL: At least thirty five percent (35%) of the item(s) so modified.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the
following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
VIEWING ROOM: The room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette,
or other video reproduction.
(2006 Code § 7-6-2)
3-8-3:   CLASSIFICATIONS OF BUSINESSES:
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows:
   A.   Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
   B.   Adult cabarets.
   C.   Adult motels.
   D.   Adult motion picture theaters.
   E.   Seminude model studios.
   F.   Sexual device shops.
   G.   Sexual encounter centers.
(2006 Code § 7-6-3)
3-8-4:   LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business in the City without a valid sexually oriented business license.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be an EMPLOYEE, as defined in
this chapter, of a sexually oriented business in the City without a valid
sexually oriented business employee license.
(2006 Code § 7-6-4)
3-8-5:   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the
Mayor a completed application made on a form provided by the Mayor. The
application shall be signed as required by subsection C of this section and
shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it
contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information
and/or items required in subsections A1 through A7 of this section, accompanied
by the appropriate fee identified in section 3-8-6 of this chapter.
      1.   The applicant's full true name and any other names used by the
applicant in the preceding five (5) years.
      2.   Current business address or another mailing address of the
applicant.
      3.   Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of
a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by
a governmental agency.
      4.   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of
the sexually oriented business.
      5.   If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the
name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to
receive service of process.
      6.   A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has
pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, and if so,
each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from
confinement, where applicable.
      7.   A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an
applicant has had an influential interest has, in the previous five (5) years
(and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         b.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking.
The information provided pursuant to subsections A1 through A7 of this section
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the Office of the Mayor within ten (10) working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
   B.   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is
located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). Applicants who are
required to comply with sections
3-8-13 and
3-8-14 of this chapter shall submit a diagram indicating that the interior
configuration meets the requirements of those sections.
   C.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each person with an influential interest in the business shall sign
the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified
under section
3-8-7 of this chapter, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   D.   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the Mayor
on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be
required, and only to the extent required, by court order.
(2006 Code § 7-6-4)
3-8-6:   LICENSE FEES:
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business
licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows:
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the initial fee for a sexually oriented
business license and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for annual renewal;
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the initial sexually oriented business
employee license and seventy five dollars ($75.00) for annual renewal.
(2006 Code § 7-6-6)
3-8-7:   ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; CONTENTS AND DISPLAY:
   A.   Business License: Upon the filing of a completed application under
section 3-8-5 of this chapter for a sexually oriented business license, the
Mayor shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant, which
temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the City to deny or
grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing date of a
completed sexually oriented business license application, the Mayor shall issue
a license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny
the application. The Mayor shall issue a license unless:
      1.   An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant has failed to provide information as required by
section 3-8-5 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form.
      3.   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
      4.   The SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, as defined herein, is not in
compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or is
not in compliance with locational requirements of this chapter or the
locational requirements of any other part of this Code.
      5.   Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         b.   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      6.   An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere
to a specified criminal activity.
   B.   Employee License: Upon the filing of a completed application under
section 3-8-5 of this chapter for a sexually oriented business employee
license, the Mayor shall immediately issue a temporary license to the
applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the
City Council to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the
filing date of a completed sexually oriented business employee license
application, the Mayor shall either issue a license or issue a written notice
of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The Mayor shall approve the
issuance of a license unless:
      1.   The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The applicant has failed to provide information as required by
section 3-8-5 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered
a question or request for information on the application form.
      3.   The license application fee required by this chapter has not been
paid.
      4.   Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
         a.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
         b.   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
      5.   The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo
contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter.
   C.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the
licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually
oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time.
A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his
or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or
performing.
(2006 Code § 7-6-5)
3-8-8:   EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
Each license shall remain valid for a period of one calendar year from the date
of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed
only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in sections
3-8-5 and
3-8-6 of this chapter. Application for renewal should be made pursuant to the
procedures set forth in section
3-8-5 of this chapter at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date, and
when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration
of the license will not be affected.
(2006 Code § 7-6-8)
3-8-9:   NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a
licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license
at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented
business license application.
(2006 Code § 7-6-12)
3-8-10:   HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day.
(2006 Code § 7-6-13)
3-8-11:   LOCATION:
   A.   Sexually oriented businesses shall not be required to obtain a
conditional use permit or special use permit.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business in the City, unless said sexually oriented business
is at least:
      1.   One thousand feet (1,000') from any parcel occupied by another
sexually oriented business or by a business licensed by the State of Illinois
to sell alcohol at the premises; and
      2.   One thousand feet (1,000') from any parcel occupied by a house of
worship, licensed daycare center, public or private elementary or secondary
school, public park, or any residence.
   C.   For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a
straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest part of any structure, including signs and roof
overhangs, used in conjunction with the sexually oriented business to the
closest point on a property boundary or right-of-way associated with any of the
land use(s) identified in subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
(2006 Code § 7-6-21)
3-8-12:   LOITERING, EXTERIOR LIGHTING, VISIBILITY AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   1.   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented
business to:
         a.   Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property;
         b.   Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras
and monitors; and
         c.   Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual
inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering.
      2.   If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at
all times that the premises is open for business. The monitors shall be
installed within an operator's station.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
   C.   No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other
barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment
from being visible from a public right-of-way.
(2006 Code § 7-6-15)
3-8-13:   EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS:
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a
film, videocassette, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis
on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's
stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors
installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all
portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms
shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The Mayor may waive the foregoing diagram
for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or
open for business.
      4.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed
premises.
      5.   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
         a.   That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person.
         b.   That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
         c.   That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited.
         d.   That violators will be required to leave the premises.
         e.   That violations of subsections A5a, A5b, A5c and A5d of this
section are unlawful.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations
articulated in A5a, A5b, A5c and A5d of this section.
      7.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of
the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding
restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An
operator’s station shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area.
If the premises has two (2) or more operator's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the operator’s stations. The view
required in this subsection A7 must be by direct line of sight from the
operator’s station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that
any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in this subsection A7 remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or
enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
(2006 Code § 7-6-14)
3-8-14:   PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to knowingly
violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any
other person to violate the following regulations:
      1.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or
any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented
business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity
is expressive in nature.
      2.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition
unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, remains at least six feet
(6') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least eighteen inches (18")
from the floor in a room of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet.
      3.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee who
regularly appears seminude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or
intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of
a sexually oriented business.
      4.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell, use,
or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
   B.   A sign in a form to be prescribed by the Mayor and summarizing the
provisions of subsections A1, A2, A3 and A4 of this section shall be posted
near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to patrons upon entry.
(2006 Code § 7-6-18)
3-8-15:   INSPECTIONS:
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall
permit the Mayor and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an
occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where
patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific
regulations of this chapter, during those times when the sexually oriented
business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be
narrowly construed by the City to authorize reasonable inspections of the
licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or
excessive pattern of inspections. The provisions of this section do not apply
to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for
use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
(2006 Code § 7-6-7)
3-8-16:   SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Suspension:
      1.   The City shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a
sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days
if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this chapter
or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this chapter.
      2.   The City shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a
sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly
violated this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-6-9)
   B.   Revocation:
      1.   The City shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as
applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this chapter or has knowingly
allowed an employee to violate this chapter and the licensee’s license has been
suspended within the previous twelve (12) month period.
      2.   The City shall issue written intent to revoke a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as
applicable, if:
         a.   The licensee has knowingly given false information in the
application for the sexually oriented business license.
         b.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
         c.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
prostitution on the premises;
         d.   The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally
suspended or revoked; or
         e.   The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed
any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises.
      3.   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the revocation of the license; provided, that if any conviction
which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on
appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for
revocation purposes.
      4.   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 3-
8-17 of this chapter, the City Council revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one year
from the date revocation becomes effective.
(2006 Code § 7-6-10)
3-8-17:   HEARING ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEALS:
   A.   When the Mayor issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or
revoke a license, the Mayor shall immediately send such notice, which shall
include the specific grounds under this chapter for such action, to the
applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The
notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing
address on file with the Mayor for the respondent. The notice shall specify a
date, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date
the notice is issued, on which the City Council shall conduct a hearing on the
Mayor’s intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license.
   B.   At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to prevent
all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present
evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross examine any of the
Mayor’s witnesses. The Mayor shall also be represented by counsel and shall
bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the
license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) days, unless extended at
the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and
proper administration of justice. The City Council shall issue a written
decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this chapter,
to the respondent within five (5) days after the hearing.
   C.   If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the
decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth day after it is
rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of
the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the
City Council’s decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of the license, the City Council shall, contemporaneously with the
issuance of the decision, order the Mayor to immediately withdraw the intent to
deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by
certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the Mayor
shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant.
   D.   If any court action challenging the City Council’s decision is
initiated, the City Council shall prepare and transmit to the court a
transcript of the hearing within ten (10) days after receiving written notice
of the filing of the court action. The City Council shall consent to expedited
briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited
schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the
proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that
is in operation as of the effective date hereof: Upon the filing of any court
action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the City’s
enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the City shall
immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license
shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented
business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and
will expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on the respondent’s appeal or
other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the City’s enforcement.
(2006 Code § 7-6-11)
3-8-18:   PROVING VIOLATION OR BUSINESS LICENSEE LIABILITY:
This chapter does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state
is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state
is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this chapter.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an
act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of
that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business
license for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of
license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or
general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the
operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to
occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to
whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act.
(2006 Code § 7-6-19)
3-8-19:   FAILURE OF CITY TO MEET DEADLINES:
In the event that a City official is required to take an action or do a thing
pursuant to this chapter within a prescribed time, and fails to take such
action or do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not
prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If
the act required of the City official under this chapter, and not completed in
the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval
by the City of an applicant’s or licensee's application for a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee’s license (including
a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee
allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the
City’s action has passed.
(2006 Code § 7-6-20)
3-8-20:   APPLICATION TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business
employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation
or employment for a period of ninety (90) days following the effective date
hereof. By the end of said ninety (90) days, all sexually oriented businesses
and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the
requirements of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 7-6-17)
3-8-21:   PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and the violator shall be fined as such.
   B.   The City’s legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil
proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter to prosecute,
restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction,
shall be brought in the name of the City; provided, however, that nothing in
this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such
criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions
of this chapter or any of the laws or ordinances in force in the City or to
exempt anyone violating this chapter or any part of the said laws from any
penalty which may be incurred.
(2006 Code § 7-6-16)
CHAPTER 9: CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES
Section
3-9-1:   Definitions
3-9-2:   Granting Of Authority
3-9-3:   Nonexclusive Franchise
3-9-4:   Conditions Of Street/Public Way Occupancy
3-9-5:   Indemnification And Insurance
3-9-6:   Franchise Fee
3-9-7:   Costs, Fees And Expenses
3-9-8
:   Term Of Franchise
3-9-9:   Service Standards
3-9-10:   Report Requirements
3-9-11:   Assignment Or Transfer Of Franchise
3-9-12:   Franchise Subject To Police Power
3-9-13:   Other Required Permits And Licenses
3-9-14:   Modifications Of Provisions
3-9-15:   Violations And Enforcement
3-9-1:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BASIC SUBSCRIBER SERVICE: Television service including, but not limited to,
mandatory carriage signals and such other television service as the Federal
Communications Commission (“FCC”) may mandate or the company may include, but
excluding ancillary uses and optional premium services which are sold
separately from basic service.
CABLE SYSTEM: A community antenna television system designed to receive,
transmit, amplify and distribute television, radio and satellite signals, and
electronic communications, and/or designed for such other uses (the “ancillary
uses”) which are compatible therewith, as determined from time to time by the
company, including, but not limited to, the transmission of voice and data.
GROSS REVENUE: Any and all compensation actually received by the company (gross
revenue being based upon receipts, not billings) from the transmission within
the City of television signals and FCC mandated nonbroadcast services. GROSS
REVENUE does not include deposits until such time as the company legally is
entitled to retain the same; installation, disconnection and reinstallation
charges; and revenues from auxiliary services, ancillary uses, advertising,
leased channels, and programming supplied on a per program or per channel
charge basis. "Gross revenue" shall be net of all refunds or credits made to
subscribers and any taxes imposed upon or with respect to the services
furnished by the company.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who pays the applicable rates to receive basic
subscriber service from the company.
TELEVISION: Transmission of impulses for the creation of picture and sound on a
television set, whether by digital or electrical signals or other transmission.
(2006 Code § 8-1-3)
3-9-2:   GRANTING OF AUTHORITY:
   A.   The City grants to the company a nonexclusive right, privilege and
franchise to construct, maintain, and operate antennas, cables, wires, lines
and other facilities in, under, over, along, across and upon the streets,
lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, and any easement or right-of-way now or
hereafter held or dedicated for use by the City or the general public for the
purpose of constructing, maintaining and operating a cable system.
   B.   The City grants to the company the further right, privilege and
authority to lease, rent or obtain, in any lawful manner, the use of towers,
poles, lines, cables, underground conduits and other equipment and facilities
from any holder of public licenses or franchises within the City. The poles
used by the company shall be those erected and maintained by local utility
companies when practical, if mutually satisfactory rental agreements can be
obtained.
(2006 Code § 8-1-1)
3-9-3:   NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
   A.   The right, privilege and franchise granted hereby is not exclusive, and
the City retains the right to grant to others rights similar to those granted
herein, on such terms as the City may determine, and as may be permitted by
applicable law, with due consideration of the interests of the public and the
company, but in no event on terms which are more favorable to the other
operator than the terms hereof.
   B.   To induce the company to construct, own and operate the cable system,
the City agrees that it will not, directly or indirectly, construct, own or
operate a cable system, except and only to the extent that the City has any
express right to acquire this franchise and the company's cable system under
applicable law. In the absence of any such express right, the City shall have
no right, directly or indirectly, to construct, own or operate a cable system.
(2006 Code § 8-1-2)
3-9-4:   CONDITIONS OF STREET/PUBLIC WAY OCCUPANCY:
   A.   All of the company's equipment and facilities shall be located,
installed and maintained so as to cause minimal interference with the use of
streets, and to assure that the functioning and appearance of the property, and
the convenience and safety of the public shall not be adversely affected
thereby. The cable system shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
accordance with applicable governmental regulations and good engineering
practices.
   B.   In case of disturbance by the company of any street, sidewalk or paved
area, the company shall, at its expense, in a manner reasonably approved by the
City, restore such area to a condition reasonably similar to the condition
existing prior to the disturbance.
   C.   In case of fire, earthquake, flood or other similar event, the City may
temporarily remove any of the cable system, with advance notice being given to
the company as promptly as possible. The company shall not be entitled to
payment for damage caused thereby, unless the City acted with gross negligence
or wilful misconduct.
   D.   If the City alters, changes, or makes any improvements on or about any
street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, the City shall give the company
reasonable advance notice, and the company shall, at its expense, relocate its
facilities and equipment or take such other action as may be reasonably
necessary to accommodate the public improvements.
   E.   The company shall temporarily remove, reroute or move its equipment and
facilities to accommodate public or private works, construction, movement of
buildings, extra large truckloads, etc., but the company shall be entitled to
reasonable notice prior to such event and reasonable costs from any party
causing such relocation other than the City.
   F.   Before beginning any construction or installation of equipment or
facilities which would materially disrupt the use of public ways, the company
shall provide the City with reasonable prior notice of the work to be
performed, and the location of and period of time involved in the undertaking.
The City shall have the right to inspect such work.
   G.   The company shall compensate property owners for or restore all damages
caused by the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system. The
company shall be primarily responsible for all such damages even though it may
have an agreement with a construction company.
   H.   Upon request, the company shall provide a diagram showing the location
of the cable system.
(2006 Code § 8-1-4)
3-9-5:   INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Indemnification:
      1.   The company shall indemnify, protect and hold the City harmless from
all claims, suits, liability, loss, expense, or damage of every kind and
description (including court costs and reasonable attorney fees) which accrue,
are suffered or claimed by reason of or relating to the company’s construction,
operation and maintenance for the cable system.
      2.   In order for the City to be indemnified, defended and held harmless,
it shall provide:
         a.   Prompt notice to the company of any claim or proceeding giving
rise to such rights; and
         b.   Full cooperation with respect to the company's participation in,
defense, settlement, resolution or other disposition of such claim or
proceeding.
   B.   Insurance: The company shall, at its expense, maintain insurance as
follows: property damage, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
occurrence, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) aggregate; bodily
injury, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) aggregate. Such insurance shall name the
City as additional insured and shall require thirty (30) days’ notice to the
City of cancellation. The company also shall carry insurance coverage for all
claims under applicable workers' compensation laws. On request, the company
shall deliver certificates of insurance for the above coverage.
(2006 Code § 8-1-5)
3-9-6:   FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   The company shall pay, within sixty (60) days of the end of each
calendar year, a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%) of all gross revenues
for basic subscriber service collected during the year.
   B.   The company shall submit with each payment a computation of the fee,
and shall provide to the City additional information as may be requested and
required to review and determine this fee obligation.
   C.   Nothing herein shall waive, limit or otherwise affect the right of the
City to adopt ordinances, enforce existing ordinances or to collect other fees
and taxes permitted by law.
(2006 Code § 8-1-6)
3-9-7:   COSTS, FEES AND EXPENSES:
The company shall reimburse the City for costs, fees and expenses reasonably
incurred for the following:
   A.   Protection, removal or relocation of the cable system, if the company
has failed to perform its obligations hereunder.
   B.   Restoring any damage or condition resulting from construction,
maintenance or other work performed by the company.
   C.   Awarding or renewing this franchise; provided, that the City will give
the company advance notice of any anticipated extraordinary charges.
   D.   Enforcing this chapter.
(2006 Code § 8-1-7)
3-9-8:    TERM OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   The initial term of this franchise shall be ten (10) years from the
effective date hereof. The company may renew the initial term of this franchise
upon such terms as the City and the company may agree upon. Consent of the City
to renew shall not be withheld unreasonably after public notice and hearing. In
deciding whether to consent to a renewal, the City shall consider those factors
prescribed by applicable law, and 1) whether the company has complied
substantially with the material terms hereof; 2) the extent and quality of the
company’s service; 3) whether the company remains financially, legally and
technically qualified; and 4) whether the company’s renewal would reasonably
meet the future television needs and interests of the City.
   B.   Within forty eight (48) months plus an extension of one hundred eighty
(180) days (6 months) of the signing date of this agreement, the company shall
upgrade the system currently serving the City to a minimum capability of
delivering at least sixty (60) video channels with a minimum of at least forty
five (45) video channels initially activated. Such a rebuild is a material
condition of this franchise agreement. This extension is valid until July 31,
2003.
(2006 Code § 8-1-8)
3-9-9:   SERVICE STANDARDS:
   A.   Technical And Operational Standards: The company shall:
      1.   Provide continuous, reliable and good quality television reception
and service.
      2.   Make repairs promptly. Service interruptions shall be for the
shortest time possible, and shall, to the extent practicable, be preceded by
notice to subscribers and occur during periods of minimal viewership.
      3.   Maintain and test the cable system in compliance with the technical
standards of the FCC.
      4.   Maintain replacement equipment and supplies and personnel trained to
perform repairs. In the event of major damage to the cable system, the company
shall make reasonable efforts to supply alternative means of providing service
to as many subscribers as possible while making repairs.
   B.   Subscriber Service Standards:
      1.   The company shall maintain, and notify subscribers of a toll free
telephone number to receive complaints. The company may provide separate
telephone numbers for complaints made after normal business hours, but must be
capable of handling complaints twenty four (24) hours a day.
      2.   The company shall respond to interrupted service not later than
twenty four (24) hours after being notified by a subscriber that service has
been interrupted.
      3.   The company shall maintain records concerning complaints and
disrupted services, including the date and nature of the complaint or
disruptions, the action taken to resolve the same, date of resolution, and
reasons for any delay in investigating and resolving the same. The company
shall make these records available to the City upon request.
      4.   If there is an interruption, caused directly by failure of the
company’s equipment, of any premium channel or not less than four (4) channels
of basic subscriber service, for forty eight (48) consecutive hours or more, an
affected subscriber shall receive, upon request, a pro rata reduction of
charges if the subscriber has notified the company immediately of the
interruption and made a claim for credit within ninety (90) days of its
occurrence. No credit will be given if the interruption is caused by the
subscriber’s equipment or any action taken with respect to the cable system by
someone other than the company’s employees.
      5.   The company is not responsible for damage to, or the operation,
maintenance, service or repair of, any subscriber's television, VCR, receiver
or other equipment.
      6.   Notwithstanding any provision herein, the company will not be liable
for any failure or interruption of service directly or indirectly caused by, or
resulting from, any circumstance beyond its control, and any such circumstance,
during its existence, also shall toll the company's obligations to perform
hereunder.
   C.   Services To Be Provided: The company shall:
      1.   Make basic subscriber service available to all subscribers.
      2.   Provide upon request and without charge, basic subscriber service to
each governmental building, fire station, police station, and public school
building located in the area served by the cable system.
      3.   Make available without charge, in case of any emergency or disaster
and upon the request of the City, a facility for transmitting information
concerning the emergency or disaster by authorized City personnel.
(2006 Code § 8-1-9)
3-9-10:   REPORT REQUIREMENTS:
The company shall, upon request, provide copies of reports submitted to the FCC
relating to the cable system. The City may, on reasonable notice, inspect at
the company’s office, and during reasonable hours, the FCC, public and
technical files maintained by the company with respect to the cable system.
(2006 Code § 8-1-10)
3-9-11:   ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
This chapter shall not be assigned or transferred without the express prior
approval of the City, which approval shall not be withheld unreasonably. An
assignment or a transfer of this chapter shall not be deemed to include any: a)
transfer to an entity affiliated with the company through common control,
ownership or otherwise; b) transfer of a portion or all of the control of the
company or any of its affiliates; c) restructuring or reorganization of the
company or any of its affiliates; and d) granting of security interests in,
liens or encumbrances on, or collateral assignment of, the cable system or the
company’s right hereunder to secure repayment of indebtedness.
(2006 Code § 8-1-11)
3-9-12:   FRANCHISE SUBJECT TO POLICE POWER:
The company shall be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the
City.
(2006 Code § 8-1-12)
3-9-13:   OTHER REQUIRED PERMITS OR LICENSES:
This franchise does not relieve the company from compliance with any ordinance
or regulation which may require the company to obtain other permits or licenses
such as building permits and utility pole agreements.
(2006 Code § 8-1-13)
3-9-14:   MODIFICATIONS OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter may be amended or modified only as expressly agreed upon by the
City and the company.
(2006 Code § 8-1-14)
3-9-15:   VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If the company violates any material provision of this chapter, the
City:
      1.   Shall comply with subsection B of this section; and
      2.   If the procedures set forth in subsection B of this section have not
resolved the dispute, the City may proceed to compel compliance with the
provisions hereof, to collect any sums due hereunder, or to terminate the
franchise granted hereby. Except as expressly provided herein, the company
shall not otherwise be liable to the City. The company shall not be liable for
any incidental or consequential damages.
   B.   1. If the City believes that the company has violated a material
provision of this chapter, it shall notify the company in writing (the
“violation notice”) of the alleged violations and the proposed remedy which is
acceptable to the City, and the company shall have thirty (30) days after its
actual receipt of the violation notice to cure such violations.
      2.   If the company disputes the proposed remedy or the existence of the
violation, or if such default is not cured within such thirty (30) day period,
then the matter shall be referred to a public hearing to be held after public
notice and written notice to the company at least ten (10) days in advance. At
the hearing, the City shall list the alleged violations and proposed remedies
set forth in the violation notice and shall give the company and all other
interested parties an opportunity to be heard with respect thereto.
      3.   Within a reasonable time after the hearing, the City shall determine
whether the company has violated this chapter and shall issue written findings
and conclusions with respect thereto, and the company shall have a reasonable
opportunity of not less than thirty (30) days after the issuance of said
findings and conclusions to remedy the matter. Any such determination shall be
subject to judicial review and a de novo hearing before any court of competent
jurisdiction, and/or judicial review under any applicable State or Federal law.
   C.   Prevention or delay of any performance due to unforeseen circumstances,
acts of nature, or other circumstances beyond the reasonable control of company
shall not be deemed a violation by the company of this franchise.
   D.   It is the intent of the City and the company to avoid a forfeiture of
this franchise. Thus, the company shall not be in default hereunder if it has
delivered a reasonably or functionally equivalent service to that expressly
required hereunder. Moreover, if the City shall propose any remedy under this
section, the company shall be deemed to have satisfied such proposed remedy if
it provides a reasonably or functionally equivalent service to that proposed.
(2006 Code § 8-1-15)
CHAPTER 10: TOURISM AND MARKETING COMMITTEE
Section
3-10-1:   Committee Established; Members
3-10-2:   Organization
3-10-3:   Expenditures
3-10-1:   COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby established a Tourism and Marketing Committee consisting of a
chairman and not less than six (6) additional members to be appointed by the
mayor, by and with the consent of the city council including but not limited to
a Secretary, Chamber Liaison, Visitor Center and Museum Coordinator, Events
Coordinator, Advertising Coordinator and Business Development Coordinator. All
members shall serve for a term of four (4) years or until their successors have
been duly appointed and qualified, except that as to the initial establishment
of the committee, four (4) members shall be appointed for a term of four (4)
years and three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. All
members of the committee shall serve without compensation. In making the
appointments to the committee, the mayor shall designate one appointee to serve
as chain-nan for the duration of his or her term.
(Ord. 736, 10-20-2020)
3-10-2:   ORGANIZATION:
The Tourism and Marketing Committee shall establish its own schedule of
meetings, organize and appoint such subcommittees as may be deemed necessary,
and conduct its business in such a manner as to progressively promote Grafton
as a place to visit, live and establish a business. All elected or appointed
officials of the City of Grafton shall make themselves available to meet with
the committee and shall strive to cooperate with the goals of the committee.
(Ord. 736, 10-20-2020)
3-10-3:   EXPENDITURES:
Any and all expenditure of municipal funds by the Tourism and Marketing
Committee shall be approved within the annual budget and authorized for payment
by the City Council.
(Ord. 736, 10-20-2020)
TITLE 4: HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1: NUISANCES
Section
4-1-1:   Specific Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-2:   Health Nuisances Generally
4-1-1:   SPECIFIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be against the health, peace and
comfort of the City, for any person, firm or corporation within the limits of
the City to permit the following, but the enumeration of the following
nuisances shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   A.   Filth:
      1.   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.
      2.   To keep or suffer to be kept any chicken coop, cow barn, stable,
cellar, vault, drain, privy, sewer or sink upon any premises belonging to or
occupied by any person, or any railroad car, building, yard, grounds, and
premises belonging to or occupied by any person.
   B.   Deposit Of Offensive Materials: To throw or deposit any offal or other
offensive matter or the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake,
pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway.
   C.   Offensive Liquids: To keep nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or substance
or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive, or
putrid, nor permit any such liquid to be discharged, placed, or thrown, or to
flow from or out of any premises into or upon any adjacent premises or any
public street or alley, nor permit the same to be done by any person connected
with the premises.
   D.   Accumulation Of Junk, Trash And Debris:
      1.   To deposit or pile any rags, old rope, paper, iron, brass, copper,
tin, aluminum, used lumber, appliances, construction materials, demolition
debris, ashes, garbage, refuse, plastic, brush, litter, weeds, slush, lead,
glass bottles or broken glass upon any lot, piece or parcel of land or upon any
public or private alley, street or public way within the City.
      2.   To store, dump or permit the accumulation of debris, refuse,
garbage, trash, tires, buckets, cans, wheelbarrows, garbage cans or other
containers in a manner that may harbor mosquitoes, flies, insects, rodents,
nuisance birds or other animal pests that are offensive, injurious or dangerous
to the health of individuals or the public.
   E.   Water Pollution: To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water
of any spring, river, stream, pond, lake, or well, public or private, to the
injury or prejudice of others.
   F.   Noxious Odors: To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals or of the public.
   G.   Dense Smoke: To cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any
fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or any other agency in the City so as to
cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof.
   H.   Offensive Businesses: To establish, maintain, and carry on any
offensive or unwholesome business or establishment detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the City within the limits of the City or within one and
one-half (1-1/2) miles of the City limits.
   I.   Littering: To deposit or allow trash, paper, cardboard, wire, dirt,
rock, stone, glass, brick, lumber, wood or litter of material objects of any
size or description to fall upon the streets of the City from any moving
vehicle, or to be thrown from a moving vehicle, or to throw from a moving
vehicle and to remain thereon.
   J.   Public Ways Encroachments: To obstruct or encroach upon public
highways, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to
burying places.
   K.   Unlawful Advertising: To advertise wares or occupations by painting
notices of the same on, or affixing them to fences or other private property,
or on rocks or other natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in
the highway or other public place, without permission of the proper
authorities.
   L.   Conditions From Underground Wells: To permit any salt water, oil, gas
or other wastes from any well drilled for oil, gas or exploratory purposes to
escape to the surface, or into a mine or coal seam, or into any underground
fresh water supply, or from one underground stratum to another.
   M.   Rodents: To cause or permit any condition or situation to exist that
shall attract, harbor, or encourage the infestation of rodents.
   N.   Scrap Tires: To keep any scrap tires, either mounted or dismounted, in
open view, or so as to allow such tires to accumulate stagnant water so as to
provide a breeding ground for mosquitoes and other pests.
   O.   Expectorating: To expectorate on any public sidewalk or street or other
public building or floor or walk of any public vehicle or hall.
   P.   Bringing Nuisances Into The City: To bring into the City or keep
therein for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any
dead or live animal or any matter, substance, or thing which shall be a
nuisance or which shall occasion a nuisance in the City, or which may or shall
be dangerous or detrimental to health.
   Q.   Common Law Nuisances: To commit any act which is a nuisance according
to the common law of the land or made such by statute of the State.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Corporate Authorities
of the City from declaring what shall be nuisances and abating them within the
City limits.
(2006 Code § 25-1-1)
4-1-2:   HEALTH NUISANCES GENERALLY:
No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises, or part
thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the City if such
use, keeping or maintaining shall be dangerous or detrimental to health.
(2006 Code § 25-1-2)
CHAPTER 2: WEEDS, GRASS AND PLANTS
Section
4-2-1:   Definitions
4-2-2:   Height Limit
4-2-3:   Abatement Provisions
4-2-4:   Lien Provisions
4-2-1:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
UNDEVELOPED AREA: Any area that has not been developed for residential,
business or other uses.
WEEDS: Shall include, but not be limited to, the following: burdock, rag weed
(giant), rag weed (common), thistle, cocklebur, jimson, blue vervain, common
milk weed, wild carrot, poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pigweed, lambsquarter,
wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds (all varieties), poison hemlock, wild
hemp, Johnson grass, grass and all other noxious weeds as defined by the
Statutes of the State of Illinois.
WOODS: Any area covered with dense growing trees and vegetation.
YARD: The grounds immediately surrounding a house that are usually covered with
grass.
(2006 Code § 25-2-1)
4-2-2:   HEIGHT LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers, ornamental plants or plants that are vegetable or
fruit producing, to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in
the City. Any such plants, weeds, or grass exceeding such height are hereby
declared to be a nuisance. (Exception to the above includes any area comprised
of woods and any undeveloped area).
(2006 Code § 25-2-2)
4-2-3:   ABATEMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Notice To Abate:
      1.   The Police Department or any other person so designated by the Mayor
may issue a written notice for removal of weeds or grass. Such weeds or grass
shall be cut by the owner or occupant within five (5) days after such notice
has been duly served.
(2006 Code § 25-2-3)
      2.   Service of the notice provided for herein may be effected by handing
the same to the owner, occupant or lessee of the premises, or to any member of
his household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises
or by mailing such notice by certified mail to the last known residence address
of the owner; provided, that if the premises is unoccupied and the owner's
address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same
upon the premises.
(2006 Code § 25-2-4)
   B.   Abatement By City: If the person so served does not abate the nuisance
within five (5) days, the Police Chief or a designated representative may
proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the
abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by the owner or occupant.
(2006 Code § 25-2-5)
4-2-4:   LIEN PROVISIONS:
The City may perfect a lien against the parcel where the City abates a nuisance
in compliance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.
CHAPTER 3: GARBAGE AND DEBRIS
Section
4-3-1:   Accumulation Prohibited
4-3-2:   Abatement Provisions
4-3-3:   Lien Provisions
4-3-1:   ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall permit any garbage or trash to accumulate on said person’s
premises or private property. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it
shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real estate to refuse or neglect
to remove the garbage or debris.
(2006 Code § 25-3-1)
4-3-2:   ABATEMENT PROVISIONS:
   A.   Notice To Abate:
      1.   The Chief of Police or a designated representative may issue a
written notice for removal of garbage or debris. Such garbage or debris shall
be removed by the owner or occupant within five (5) days after such notice has
been duly served.
(2006 Code § 25-3-2)
      2.   Service of notice provided for herein may be effected by handing of
the same to the owner, occupant, or lessee of the premises, or to any member of
his household of the age of fifteen (15) years or older found on the premises
or by mailing such notice by certified mail to the last known residence address
of the owner; provided, that if the premises is unoccupied and the owner's
address cannot be obtained, then the notice may be served by posting the same
upon the premises.
(2006 Code § 25-3-3)
   B.   Abatement By City: If the person so served does not abate the nuisance
within five (5) days, the Mayor or a designated representative may proceed to
abate the nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such
expense shall be charged and paid by the owner or occupant.
(2006 Code § 25-3-4)
4-3-3:   LIEN PROVISIONS:
The City may perfect a lien against the parcel where the City abates a nuisance
in compliance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.
CHAPTER 4: LITTER CONTROL
Section
4-4-1:   Definitions
4-4-2:   Littering Prohibited
4-4-3:   Specific Types Of Littering
4-4-1:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations shall have the meanings given them in this section:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include
helicopters and lighter than air powered craft and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A container of watertight construction with a
tightfitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within.
Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and convenient
handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter
generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the
regulations promulgated.
CONSTRUCTION SITES: Any private or public property upon which repairs to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing
structures is taking place.
HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of
literature which is not delivered by the United States mail service, including,
but not limited to, those which:
   A.   Advertise for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
   B.   Direct attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
   C.   Direct attention to or advertise any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the
purpose of private gain or profit.
LITTER: Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material which, if
thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
LOADING AND UNLOADING DOCK: Any dock space or area used by any moving vehicle
for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares,
commodities and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river or land.
PRIVATE PREMISES: All property including, but not limited to, vacant land or
any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential,
commercial, business, industrial, institutional or religious purposes, together
with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule,
mailbox, and other structure(s) appurtenant thereto.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses, or fountains and any and all public
parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings.
PUBLIC RECEPTACLES: Any receptacles provided by or authorized by the City.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(2006 Code § 27-5-1)
4-4-2:   LITTERING PROHIBITED:
No person shall deposit any litter within the City except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in any duly
licensed disposal facility.
(2006 Code § 27-5-2)
4-4-3:   SPECIFIC TYPES OF LITTERING:
   A.   Use Of Receptacles:
      1.   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent litter from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public place or private
premises.
(2006 Code § 27-5-3)
      2.   No person shall upset or tamper with a public or private receptacle
designed or used for the deposit of litter or cause or permit its contents to
be deposited or strewn in or upon any public place or private premises.
(2006 Code § 27-5-4)
   B.   Sidewalks And Alleys: Persons owning, occupying or in control of any
public place or private premises shall keep the sidewalks and alleys adjacent
thereto free of litter.
(2006 Code § 27-5-5)
   C.   Private Premises:
      1.   The owner or person in control of any private premises shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter.
      2.   The owner or person in control of private premises shall, if public
receptacles are unavailable, maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or private premises.
(2006 Code § 27-5-6)
   D.   Littering From Vehicles And Aircraft:
      1.   Vehicles:
         a.   No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall
deposit litter upon any public place or private premises.
         b.   No person shall drive or move any loaded or partly loaded truck
or other vehicle within the City unless such vehicle is so constructed or so
loaded as to prevent any part of its load, contents or litter from being blown
or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person
drive or move any vehicle or truck within the City, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any public place or private premises mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
(2006 Code § 27-5-7)
      2.   Aircraft: No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit
any litter within the City.
(2006 Code § 27-5-8)
   E.   Parks: No person shall deposit litter in any park within the City
except in receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or
upon any other public place or private premises. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere in a lawful
manner.
(2006 Code § 27-5-9)
   F.   Handbills:
      1.   Prohibitions:
         a.   Public Places: No person shall deposit or sell any handbill in or
upon any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
public place for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver any handbill to any person willing to accept it.
         b.   Private Premises: No person shall deposit or unlawfully
distribute any handbill in or upon private premises or vehicles, except by
handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the occupant of such
private premises. Provided, however, that in case of private premises or
vehicles which are not posted against the receiving of handbills or similar
material, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do
so, may securely place any such handbill in such a manner as to prevent such
handbill from being deposited by the elements upon any public place or other
private premises; except mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by
Federal postal law or regulations.
         c.   Vehicles: No person shall deposit any handbill in or upon any
vehicle unless the occupant of the vehicle is willing to accept it.
      2.   Cleanup: It shall be the responsibility of any person distributing
handbills to maintain the area which they are utilizing free of any litter
caused by or related to said handbill distribution.
      3.   Exemptions: The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the
distribution upon private premises only of newspapers or political literature;
except, that newspapers and political literature shall be placed in such a
manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or other private premises.
(2006 Code § 27-5-10)
   G.   Posting Notices: No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, or
other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public upon
any public place, except as may be authorized or required by law. No person,
except the owner or tenant shall post any such notice on private property
without the permission of the owner or tenant.
(2006 Code § 27-5-11)
   H.   Construction Sites:
      1.   Each contractor shall be responsible for the job site so that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
public place or other private premises.
      2.   Litter or other debris, including dirt and mud, deposited as the
result of normal construction process upon any public place or private premises
shall be removed by the contractor.
(2006 Code § 27-5-12)
   I.   Loading And Unloading Docks: The person owning, operating, or in
control of a loading or unloading dock shall maintain private receptacles for
collection of litter, and shall, at all times, maintain the dock area free of
litter in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any public place or other private premises.
(2006 Code § 27-5-13)
   J.   Parking Lots:
      1.   Receptacles Required: Any public place or private premises
containing any provision for parking vehicles shall be equipped with litter
receptacles in compliance with this subsection. Such premises shall include,
but not be limited to, such places as shopping centers, outdoor theaters,
drive-in restaurants, gasoline service stations, apartment developments,
parking lots, and any other place where provision is made for vehicles to stop
or park in a designated area for any purpose.
      2.   Number Of Receptacles: All premises having parking lots shall
provide in an easily accessible location a minimum of one refuse container for
every fifty (50) parking spaces.
      3.   Specifications: Litter receptacles shall have tightfitting lids or
tops and shall be weighted or attached to the ground or other fixed structures
as necessary to prevent spillage. A minimum container size of twenty (20)
gallons or seventy five and seven-tenths (75.7) liters shall be used.
      4.   Cleanliness: Premises used for the purpose designated herein shall
be kept in a litter free condition, and all litter shall be removed
periodically from the receptacles.
      5.   Use Of Receptacles: It shall be the duty and obligation of all
persons using parking areas to use such litter receptacles as provided in this
subsection for the purposes intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person
or persons to deposit any litter upon any such parking lot.
(2006 Code § 27-5-14)
CHAPTER 5: OPEN BURNING
Section
4-5-1:   Definitions
4-5-2:   Prohibited Burning Generally
4-5-3:   Permitted Burning
4-5-4:   Permit To Burn
4-5-5:   Variance To Burn Explosive Wastes
4-5-6:   Enforcement
4-5-7:   Penalty
4-5-1:   DEFINITIONS:
All terms which appear in this chapter shall have the definitions as specified
in a standard and acceptable dictionary. When used in this chapter, the
following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
AGRICULTURAL WASTE: Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on a
farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices including such items
as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials, and crop residues but
excluding landscape waste.
CLEAN WOOD BUILDING DEBRIS: The wooden remains of a building. The term excludes
rubber, asphalt and nonwooden materials.
DISASTER: A major disaster declared by the Governor of Illinois or the Mayor of
the City.
DISASTER AREA: An area in which a major disaster has been declared by the
Governor of Illinois or the Mayor of the City.
DOMICILE WASTE: Any refuse generated on single-family domiciliary property as a
result of domiciliary activities. The term excludes landscape waste, garbage
and trade waste.
GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food or food products.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and agricultural
waste. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products of
the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under section 9(b) of the
Environmental Protection Act of the State of Illinois (415 ILCS 5/9(b).
REFUSE: Any discarded matter or any matter which is to be reduced in volume, or
otherwise changed in chemical or physical properties, in order to facilitate
its discard, removal or disposal.
RESTRICTED AREA: The area within the boundaries of the City, plus a zone
extending one mile beyond the boundaries of the City.
TRADE WASTE: Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade, business,
industry, commercial venture, utility or service activity, and any government
or institutional activity, whether or not for profit. The term includes
landscape waste but excludes agricultural waste.
(2006 Code § 27-9-1)
4-5-2:   PROHIBITED BURNING GENERALLY:
No person shall cause or allow open burning, except as provided in this
chapter. OPEN BURNING is defined as the combustion of any matter in such a way
that the products of the combustion are emitted to the open air without
originating in or passing through equipment for which a permit could be issued
under the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
(2006 Code § 27-9-2)
4-5-3:   PERMITTED BURNING:
The following activities are not in violation of this chapter or title II
section 9 of the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/9), unless they cause
air pollution as defined in the act. Nothing in this chapter shall exempt such
activities from the applicable restrictions of this chapter.
   A.   1. The burning of LANDSCAPE WASTE (this term includes tree trimmings,
branches, brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings) on private
property is allowed:
         a.   Only on Wednesdays and Saturdays, from sunrise until sunset;
         b.   On the premises on where such waste is produced;
         c.   When atmospheric conditions will readily dissipate contaminants;
and
         d.   Only if such burning does not create a visibility hazard on
roadways.
      2.   In addition, the burning of LANDSCAPE WASTE may be allowed at sites
approved and provided by the City and supervised by a unit of local government
(police, maintenance department, etc.).
   B.   The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when reasonably
necessary in the judgment of the responsible government official and/or unit of
local government.
   C.   Small open flames for welding acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
and the like.
   D.   The burning of fuels for legitimate campfires, recreational and cooking
purposes, or in indoor fireplaces, in areas where such burning is consistent
with other laws; provided, that no garbage, domicile waste or building waste
shall be burned in such cases.
   E.   Burning off of clean fuel.
(2006 Code § 27-9-5)
4-5-4:   PERMIT TO BURN:
   A.   Permit Required: The City and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
may grant permits for open burning in the following instances:
      1.   For instruction in methods of firefighting, or for testing fire
extinguishing equipment, flares, signals, or experimental incinerators, or for
research in control of fires.
      2.   For the destruction of vegetation on site under circumstances in
which its removal would necessitate significant environmental damage.
      3.   For research or management in prairie or forest ecology.
      4.   In a disaster area for the open burning of clean wooden building
debris, landscape waste and agricultural waste caused by a disaster.
(2006 Code § 27-9-6)
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for burning permits shall be made
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the intended burning, on the form provided
by the City, and shall contain such information as shall be required in
procedures adopted by the City and the EPA. Applications shall include, at a
minimum, data and information sufficient to inform the City and the EPA with
respect to:
      1.   The exact quantities and types of materials to be burned;
      2.   The exact frequency, including the dates and times when such burning
will take place;
      3.   The exact location of the burning site; and
      4.   The reasons why such burning is necessary to the public interest.
(2006 Code § 27-9-7)
   C.    Conditions Of Permit: The City and/or the EPA may impose such
conditions in the permit as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter or the Environmental Protection Act.
(2006 Code § 27-9-8)
   D.   Standards Of Issuance Of Permit: No permit shall be granted unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the City and/or the Environmental
Protection Agency that the open burning: is necessary to the public interest;
will be conducted in such a time, place and manner as to minimize the emission
of air contaminants; will have no serious detrimental effect upon adjacent
properties or the occupants thereof. Provided, that applications for permits to
open burn pursuant to City ordinance and Illinois Compiled Statutes, data and
information sufficient to inform the City and the Environmental Protection
Agency with respect to all pertinent information as outlined in subsection B of
this section and section 237.202, title 35, subtitle B, chapter I, subchapter
i, part 237, subpart B, “Permits” of the Illinois Administrative Code.
(2006 Code § 27-9-9)
   E.   Duration And Renewal Of Permit: Duration shall be specified on the
permit application. No permit shall be valid longer than one year from date of
issuance. Applications for renewal of a permit shall be submitted to the City
and/or the EPA at least fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of the prior
permit.
(2006 Code § 27-9-10)
   F.   Revisions To Permit: The City and/or the EPA may revise any permit
granted pursuant to this chapter or the Environmental Protection Act.
(2006 Code § 27-9-11)
   G.   Revocation Of Permit And Other Sanctions: Violation of any of the
conditions of the permit shall be grounds for revocation of the permit by the
City and/or the EPA, as well as grounds for any other sanctions as provided in
this chapter or the Environmental Protection Act.
(2006 Code § 27-9-12)
4-5-5:   VARIANCE TO BURN EXPLOSIVE WASTES:
Open burning of wastes creating a hazard of explosion, fire or other serious
harm, unless authorized by other provisions of this chapter, shall be permitted
only upon application for, and granting of a variance as provided by the
Environmental Protection Act (415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1, et seq.), the
Pollution Control Boards’ Procedural Rules (35 Illinois Administration Code:
subtitle A, chapter I) and this Code.
(2006 Code § 27-9-3)
4-5-6:   ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the obligation of the City, as well as the EPA, to enforce by the
appropriate means the prohibitions in this chapter.
(2006 Code § 27-9-4)
4-5-7:   PENALTY:
Whoever violates any section of this chapter may be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each
violation and/or each day in violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(2006 Code § 27-9-13)
CHAPTER 6: NOISE CONTROL
Section
4-6-1:   Purpose
4-6-2:   Definitions
4-6-3:   Noise Prohibited Generally; Determination Of Noisy Conditions
4-6-4:   Specific Noises Prohibited
4-6-5:   Exemptions From Provisions
4-6-6:   Enforcement
4-6-7:   Penalties
4-6-1:   PURPOSE:
The City recognizes the importance of tourist trade and activities within our
community, however the City must balance those activities with our residents’
right to a reasonable expectation of their rights to a quiet enjoyment of their
homes. Therefore, this chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the City through
the reduction, control, and prevention of unreasonably loud and raucous sounds,
or any noise that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of persons of ordinary sensitivity. (2006 Code
§ 27-11-1)
4-6-2:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical trauma to persons or property damage demanding immediate attention.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating
physical trauma to persons or property damage, whether actually caused or
threatened by an emergency, or any work by private or public utilities when
restoring utility service.
NOISE SENSITIVE AREA: Includes, but is not limited to, the land on which a
school or church is located and the area within two hundred fifty feet (250')
of a school building or church building.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or
corporation.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley,
or similar place normally accessible to the public that is owned or controlled
by a government entity.
PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property or structures on real property owned by a
government entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not
limited to, parks and other recreational areas.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Any real property which contains a structure or building in
which one or more persons reside; provided, that the structure or building is
properly zoned or is a legal, nonconforming residential use in accordance with
the terms and maps of the City’s zoning regulations.
(2006 Code § 27-11-2)
4-6-3:   NOISE PROHIBITED GENERALLY; DETERMINATION OF NOISY CONDITIONS:
   A.   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, the
following:
      1.   Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise; or
      2.   Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the City; or
      3.   Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in
time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the
neighborhood or vicinity from which said noises emanate, or any noise that
unreasonably interferes with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their
guests, or any noise that shall be found to detrimentally or adversely affect
any persons in any such residences.
   B.   Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and
raucous include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      2.   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
      3.   The time of day or night the sound occurs; by example, some noise is
expected during daylight hours in a community; less noise is expected after ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. in most communities;
      4.   The duration of the sound;
      5.   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;
      6.   Whether the sound is necessary in order to conduct lawful activity;
and
      7.   The offenders' abatement practice after notification of violation.
(2006 Code § 27-11-3)
4-6-4:   SPECIFIC NOISES PROHIBITED:
The following acts are declared to be violations of this chapter:
   A.   Unreasonable Noises: The making of, or knowingly permitting to be made,
any unreasonable loud, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or
vibration in any boarding facility, dwelling, place of business or other
structure, or upon any public street, park or other place or building.
“Unreasonable noise” shall not include the ordinary and usual sounds, noises,
commotion or vibration incidental to lawful activities when conducted in
accordance with the usual and reasonable standards of practice and in full
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and in a manner which will
not disturb the peace and comfort of residents or which will not detrimentally
affect the operators or customers of places of business.
   B.   Nonemergency Signaling Devices: Sounding or permitting sounding any
amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, horn, whistle or similar device,
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than ten
(10) consecutive seconds in an hourly period. The reasonable soundings of such
devices by houses of religious worship, charitable contribution solicitors, or
by the governmental officials for traffic control purposes are exempt from the
operation of this provision.
   C.   Emergency Signaling Devices:
      1.   The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any
emergency signaling device including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm, siren,
whistle, or similar emergency signaling device, except in an emergency, or
except for test purposes as provided in subsection C2 of this section. Local,
State, and Federal officials in the performance of their governmental duties
are exempt from this prohibition.
      2.   Testing of an emergency signaling device shall only occur between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Any testing shall use
only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed five
(5) minutes. Testing of the emergency signaling system shall not occur more
than once in each calendar month.
   D.   Radios, Televisions, Boom Boxes, Etc.:
      1.   The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo,
musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a
manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or
operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and which disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors and
passersby, or is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any person in a commercial, industrial area, residential or public space.
      2.   The use or operation of a radio, vehicles, television, boom box,
stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound
in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or
operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential
or noise sensitive areas, including multi-family or single-family dwellings.
   E.   Vehicles:
      1.   Sound Amplification Systems: The use or operation of any sound
amplification system from a vehicle that produces or reproduces sound in a
manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the occupants of the
vehicle, and which disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of passersby or is
plainly audible at a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from any persons
in a commercial, industrial, residential, or public place.
      2.   Motor Vehicle Operation: Motor vehicles, including motorcycles,
whose mere operation produces a loud and raucous noise and that produces any
noise that is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150').
Every motor vehicle driven or operated within the City shall at all times be
equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and
properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise.
   F.   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers And Public Address Systems:
      1.   The loud and raucous use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier,
public address system, or other device for producing or reproducing sound
(except as may be permitted by the City).
      2.   Within public space, if the sound is plainly audible across the real
property line of the public space from which the sound emanates and is loud and
raucous. This shall not apply to any public performance, gathering, or parade
for which a permit had been obtained from the local government.
   G.   Noise Sensitive Areas: The creation of any loud and raucous noise
adjacent to or within any noise sensitive area which interferes with the
workings of the institution or which unreasonably disturbs a person in these
institutions.
   H.   Outdoor Music: To preserve the rights of the residents of the City to
reasonable peace and tranquility during late-night hours, no outdoor music may
be played by musicians or by electronic means when audible beyond the perimeter
of the premises on which such music is played after eleven o’clock (11:00) PM
and before eight thirty o’clock (8:00) AM on any day of the week.
(2006 Code § 27-11-4; amd. Ord. 712, 11-20-2018)
4-6-5:   EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in this
chapter and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth:
   A.   Repairs Of Utility Structures: Repairs of utility structures which are
damaged, in disrepair, or out of service and where such conditions pose a clear
and immediate danger to life, health, or significant loss of property.
   B.   Emergency Vehicles: Sirens, whistles, horns or bells lawfully used by
emergency vehicles.
   C.   Alarm Systems: Alarm systems activated in case of fire, collision,
civil defense, police activity, or imminent danger.
   D.   Repairs Or Excavations By Government: Repairs or excavations of
bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the City, the State, or the
Federal Government.
   E.   Outdoor School And Playground Activities: Reasonable activities
conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds which are
conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally
used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school sponsored
sporting or entertainment events.
   F.   Other Outdoor Events: Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows,
parades, festivals, and other similar outdoor events; provided, that such
activities are in all respects in compliance with any applicable laws or
regulations, including possible permits required and appropriate zoning.
(2006 Code § 27-11-5)
4-6-6:   ENFORCEMENT:
The Chief of Police, or his designees, will have primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the noise regulations herein. The Police Chief, or his
designees, shall obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning to the offender.
If the offense continues unabated, the complainant and the officer shall sign a
complaint, and the police will cite the offender or establishment. (2006 Code §
27-11-6)
4-6-7:   PENALTIES:
   A.   A violation of the provisions of this chapter is punishable by a fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) but not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00).
   B.   A subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person which
occurred within thirty (30) days of a violation, is punishable by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) but not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   C.   Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter, or in the case of a
continuous violation, each day a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense and may be punishable separately. (2006 Code §
27-11-7)
CHAPTER 7: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
4-7-1:   Definition
4-7-2:   Nuisance Declared
4-7-3:   Notice To Remove
4-7-4:   Exemptions From Provisions
4-7-1:   DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall mean
any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine,
wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or
other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle
is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations.
(2006 Code § 25-4-1)
4-7-2:   NUISANCE DECLARED:
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property in view of
the general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(2006 Code § 25-4-2)
4-7-3:   NOTICE TO REMOVE:
The Police Chief or a designated representative shall notify the owner of the
motor vehicle, informing him that he shall dispose of any inoperable vehicle(s)
under his control. If the owner fails to dispose of said inoperable vehicle(s)
after seven (7) days from the issuance of the notice, the Police Chief or a
designated representative may authorize a towing service to remove and take
possession of the inoperable vehicle or parts thereof.
(2006 Code § 25-4-3)
4-7-4:   EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within a
building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty five (25)
years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a licensed business
engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
(2006 Code § 25-4-4)
CHAPTER 8: CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
4-8-1:   Purpose
4-8-2:   Definitions
4-8-3:   Where Prohibited
4-8-4:   Enforcement
4-8-5:   Penalty
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent harm to the health and safety of
the public and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
prohibiting unauthorized camping and storage of personal property on public
property within the City, which interferes with the right of others to use the
areas for the purposes for which they were intended.
(Ord. 777, passed 3-19-2024)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
   BRIDGE: A structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to
afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other
right-of-way, or to afford passage under or over existing public roads,
railroads, or other rights-of-way.
   CAMP OR CAMPING: To pitch, use, or occupy camp facilities, or to use camp
paraphernalia, or both, for the purpose of habitation. CAMP OR CAMPING does not
include the use of public property or public facilities for recreational use or
for authorized public or private events that involve the use of tents, awnings,
or other structures in connection with such recreational use or authorized
public or private event.
   UNAUTHORIZED ENCAMPMENT: The collection of camp facilities, camp
paraphernalia, and/or personal property used for unauthorized camping in
violation of this chapter.
   CAMP FACILITIES: Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary
shelters, campers, recreational vehicles, or trailers. CAMP FACILITIES do not
include tents, huts, or temporary shelters, when used temporarily in a park for
recreation or play during daylight hours when the park is open to the public.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA: Includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds,
sleeping bags, hammocks, blankets, mattresses, or cooking facilities and
similar equipment.
   PARK: Any publicly owned area controlled by the City or other governmental
entity for park purposes. PARK also includes all associated areas, including
parking lots for parks.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Without limitation, any real property, building, structure,
equipment, sign, shelter, vegetation, greenspace, playground, bench, trail,
picnic shelters, recreational and athletic fields, and public open space,
including all associated areas such as parking lots, controlled or owned by the
City of Grafton or any other governmental agency.
   STORE OR STORING: To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for
safekeeping, or to place or leave in a location, leaving one’s personal
property such as, without limitation, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping
bags, luggage, shopping carts, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more
than one hour.
   STREET: Any highway, lane, road, street (including adjacent shoulders,
medians, and terrace areas), right-of-way, sidewalk, boulevard, alley, and
every way or place in the City open as a matter of right to public pedestrian
and vehicular travel.
(Ord. 777, passed 3-19-2024)
4-8-3: WHERE PROHIBITED:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, or to engage in the activity of
unauthorized camping, or to store personal property, including camp facilities
or camp paraphernalia as defined in this Section of the ordinance, within the
following areas:
   A.   Any street; or
   B.   Any bridge; or
   C.   Any park; or
   D.   Any public property, improved or unimproved; or
   E.   Any public property where camping obstructs or interferes with the
intended public use of the property.
   G.   Any other public property under the control and authority of the City.
(Ord. 777, passed 3-19-2024)
4-8-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   The chief of police, or their designee(s), will have primary responsibility
for the enforcement of the camping regulations herein. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the police chief, or their designee(s), from obtaining voluntary
compliance by way of warning, notice, education, or coordination with other
willing public or private entities and/or community members.
   A.   Prior to issuing any citation pursuant to this chapter, the
investigating officer shall provide a verbal and written warning to cease such
unlawful conduct and a verbal and written referral for possible alternatives to
their present camping practices, such as, (without limitation), transportation,
shelter, and/or contact information to public or private agencies who may be
able to provide services or support. Any public or private entities who wish to
assist the Grafton Police Department (“Department”) in effectively and humanely
transitioning individuals from unauthorized encampments on public property to
an environment consistent with City ordinances should contact the Department
with a description of what services they can provide and effective contact
information. The Department will develop and maintain a policy to include
procedural guidance regarding the implementation of this chapter. The
Department shall consult relevant professional resources and engage interested
community members, service providers, or other willing public or private
entities when designing and implementing this policy. The policy shall be
published and implemented no later than 6 months after the passage of this
chapter. The policy shall provide for the collection of relevant data that
shall be used to review and revise the manual every three (3) years, or as
needed. Said revision shall be made in the same manner the policy is developed.
   B.   Police shall exercise discretion to ensure that individuals are not
cited for violating this chapter due only to a true personal necessity that
requires their present unauthorized camping practices. When possible, the
Department may work directly with community members, service providers or other
willing public or private entities to determine whether a true personal
necessity exists in a particular circumstance. The department shall provide
specific support, guidance and contacts for officers. But it shall be evidence
that no true personal necessity exists if the individual who is camping refuses
to take advantage of proffered alternatives to their present camping practices.
   C.   Upon a determination by law enforcement that an area constitutes an
unauthorized encampment, regardless of whether an individual is cited for a
violation of this chapter, City officials shall have the right to remove any
debris, contraband, or personal property that creates a legitimate health and
safety concern, or that creates an immediate and substantial danger to the
environment. No warning is required prior to such confiscation relating to
health and safety concerns.
   D.   Materials confiscated pursuant to this chapter that are unsanitary or a
danger to the health and safety of any person may be immediately disposed of.
Otherwise, the Department shall provide 24-hour written notice prior to
confiscating property. The Department shall retain personal property
confiscated pursuant to this chapter in a manner consistent with the handling
of other confiscated property and must not dispose of such personal property
fora period of at least 30 calendar days, during which time the owner may
retrieve such property from the Department, pursuant to the procedure outlined
in the policy. Nothing prevents Department members from disposing of property
with the consent of the property owner. When Department members have received
consent to dispose of property, City officials shall assist Department members
when necessary.
(Ord. 777, passed 3-19-2024)
4-8-5: PENALTY:
   The following penalties shall apply for violations to this chapter:
   A.   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be punishable
by a fine of no more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). All fines under this
chapter may be satisfied by cash payment or community service.
   B.   Any person who commits a subsequent violation of this chapter, which
occurred within thirty (30) days of a violation, may be punishable by a fine of
no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). All fines under this chapter may
be satisfied by cash payment or community service.
   C.   Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter or, in the case of a
continuous violation, each day a violation occurs or continues, may constitute
a separate offense and may be punishable separately.
(Ord. 777, passed 3-19-2024)
TITLE 5: POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
5-1-1:   Department Established
5-1-2:   Chief Of Police
5-1-3:   Appointment Of Police Officers
5-1-4:   Duties Of Police
5-1-5:   Compensation
5-1-6:   Witness Fees
5-1-7:   Prohibited Acts By Police Officers
5-1-8:   Duty To Asst Police
5-1-9:   Obstructing Police, Aiding In Escape Prohibited
5-1-10:   Abandoned, Stolen Property
5-1-11:   Mutual Aid Agreement
5-1-12:   Police
5-1-13:   Training
5-1-14:   Rules And Regulations
5-1-1:   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a department of the Municipal government of the
City which shall be known as the Police Department. The Police Department shall
consist of the Chief of Police and of such number of police officers as may be
provided from time to time by the City Council.
(2006 Code § 30-2-1)
5-1-2:   CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment And Removal: There is hereby established
the office of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, and shall not be
subject to removal, except for cause and upon written charges and after an
opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his own defense during a
regular meeting of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 30-2-2)
   B.   Duties: The Chief of Police shall keep records and make reports
concerning the activities of his department as may be required. The Chief shall
be responsible for the performance of the Police Department and of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
(2006 Code § 30-2-3)
5-1-3:   APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS:
Unless otherwise provided, all police officers shall be appointed by the Mayor,
by and with the advice and consent of the City Council. A police officer may be
appointed to office by the Mayor and City Council if he meets the necessary
qualifications, notwithstanding the fact that the police officer is not a
resident of the City when appointed or when he is to serve as such an official.
(2006 Code § 30-2-4)
5-1-4:   DUTIES OF POLICE:
   A.   Generally: Each police officer shall devote his entire time to the
performance of the duties of his office and is hereby charged with the
preservation of the peace, order and safety of the City and with the duty of
protecting the rights of persons and property and of enforcing all laws and all
orders of the City Council. He shall take notice of all nuisances, obstructions
and defects on the highways or other public places, and shall cause the same to
be abated or removed, or immediate notice thereof given to the proper officer
whose duty it may be to take action in relation thereto. When requested by the
Mayor, he shall attend, either in person or by deputy, all meetings of the City
Council, execute all its orders and close the Council Chamber upon the
adjournment of that body. He shall also execute all warrants or other legal
process required to be executed by him under any ordinance of the City or laws
of the State of Illinois.
(2006 Code § 30-2-6)
   B.   Issue Legal Process: All police shall have the power and authority to
execute City warrants or other similar legal process outside the corporate
limits of the City and within such distance therefrom as authorized by law in
all cases when any ordinance of the City Council made pursuant to law shall
prescribe a penalty for the violation of any of its provisions by persons
residing, acting or doing any business within the limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 30-2-9)
   C.   Aid Fire Department: Every police officer shall aid the Fire Department
by giving the alarm in case of fire and in clearing the streets or grounds in
the immediate vicinity of any fire so that the firefighters shall not be
hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties.
(2006 Code § 30-2-11)
5-1-5:   COMPENSATION:
The Police Department shall receive such compensation as may be provided by
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 30-2-5)
5-1-6:   WITNESS FEES:
Any member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any State or
Federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the City is a party, and fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police who shall deposit the same
with the City Treasurer.
(2006 Code § 30-2-15)
5-1-7:   PROHIBITED ACTS BY POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   Failure To Perform: Any member of the Police Department who shall
neglect or refuse to perform any duty required of him by this Code or the rules
and regulations of the department, or who shall be, in the discharge of his
official duties, guilty of any fraud, favoritism, extortion, oppression or
wilful wrong or injustice, shall be subject to removal from office.
(2006 Code § 30-2-12)
   B.   Use Of Alcohol: No member on an active tour of duty or while wearing
the official police officer's badge of the City shall indulge in the use of
intoxicating liquor of any kind, and intoxication at any time shall be
sufficient cause for removal.
(2006 Code § 30-2-14)
5-1-8:   DUTY TO ASSIST POLICE:
Every police officer of the City may, at any time, call upon any able bodied
person(s) above the age of eighteen (18) years to aid him in the arresting,
retaking or holding in custody of any person guilty of having committed any
unlawful act or charged therewith, or to aid such officer in preventing the
commission of any unlawful act.
(2006 Code § 30-2-10)
5-1-9:   OBSTRUCTING POLICE, AIDING IN ESCAPE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to resist or obstruct any
member of the police force in the discharge of his duty or to endeavor to do
so, in any manner, assist any person in the custody of any member of the Police
Department to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody or to attempt to
rescue any such person in custody.
(2006 Code § 30-2-13)
5-1-10:   ABANDONED, STOLEN PROPERTY:
The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all lost and abandoned or stolen
property in the City.
(2006 Code § 30-2-18)
5-1-11:   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT:
The Police Department, with the approval of the City Council, may enter into an
agreement to provide police protection to neighboring municipalities.
(2006 Code § 30-2-7)
5-1-12:   POLICE:
The Mayor may, on special occasions when, in his judgment, public peace and
order of the City shall require, appoint and commission any number of special
police as may be necessary and shall fix in order of their appointment, the
time during which each shall serve all such special police, during such time,
shall possess the powers and exercise the duties of regular police officers;
provided, that their appointment, if for more than ten (10) days, shall be
subject to the consent of the City Council in the manner that other
appointments to office by the Mayor are subject.
(2006 Code § 30-2-8)
5-1-13:   TRAINING:
All police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive
a course of training in the use of weapons by proper authorities as established
by the State of Illinois. All full time and part time officers shall complete a
course on police procedures by the proper authorities as established by the
State of Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board within the
prescribed time period as established by such Board. Upon completion of the
course of training, the officer shall file with the Mayor a certificate
attesting to the completion of the course.
(2006 Code § 30-2-17)
5-1-14:   RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the Police Department as he shall deem
advisable, and such rules, when approved by the Mayor, shall be binding on such
members.
(2006 Code § 30-2-16)
CHAPTER 2: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER PROVISIONS
Section
5-2A-1:   Policy And Procedures
5-2A-2:   Limitations
5-2A-3:   Definitions
5-2A-4:   Emergency Services And Disaster Agency (ESDA)
5-2A-5:   Emergency Services And Disaster Powers Of Mayor; Succession
5-2A-6:   Local Disaster Emergencies
5-2A-7:   Mutual Aid Arrangements
5-2A-8:   Communications
5-2A-9:   Utilization Of City Agency, Facilities And Personnel
5-2A-10:   Assuming The Duties Of Persons In Professions, Trades And
Occupations
5-2A-11:   Nonliability Of City And Private Persons
5-2A-12:   Financing
5-2A-13:   Personnel Oath
5-2A-14:   Compensation
5-2A-15:   Testing Disaster Devices
5-2A-16:   Orders, Rules And Regulations
5-2A-17:   Penalty
5-2A-1:   POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in the City
or in a neighboring municipality of atomic or other means from without, or by
means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood,
earthquake, or other natural or manmade causes, and in order to ensure that the
City will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any such disasters,
preserve the lives and property of the people of the City and protect the
public peace, health and safety in the event of such a disaster, it is found
and declared to be necessary:
      1.   To create a municipal emergency services and disaster agency;
      2.   To confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary power and authority set
forth under article B of this chapter.
      3.   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
political subdivisions with respect to the carrying out of emergency services
and disaster operations.
   B.   Whenever the Mayor determines, after an investigation, that a dangerous
situation or a potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death
to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of the
public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists. The
extraordinary powers may not be exercised until an ordinance shall have been
adopted which shall establish standards for the determination by the Mayor of
when the state of emergency exists and shall provide that the Mayor may not
exercise such extraordinary power and authority except after signing, under
oath, a statement finding that such standards have been met, setting forth
facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the emergency and
declaring that a state of emergency exists. This statement shall be filed with
the City Clerk as soon as practical. A state of emergency shall expire not
later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the Corporate
Authorities after the state of emergency is declared. A subsequent state of
emergency may be declared if necessary.
   C.   It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and the policy
of the City that all emergency management programs of the City be coordinated
to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the Federal and State
governments, including their various departments and agencies, of other
municipalities and localities and private agencies of every type, to the end
that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the nation's
manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may
occur.
(2006 Code § 30-3-1)
5-2A-2:   LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to:
   A.   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute;
except, that actions otherwise authorized by this article or other laws may be
taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to
public health or safety;
   B.   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to,
radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested
to transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster;
   C.   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any
personnel thereof, when on active duty, but State and local emergency
operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available for performance
of functions related to disaster emergencies;
   D.   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the City
Council to exercise any other powers vested in them under the Constitution,
Statutes, or common law of this State, independent of or in conjunction with
any provisions of this article.
(2006 Code § 30-3-2)
5-2A-3:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words and terms shall have the definitions ascribed to them in this
section:
COORDINATOR: The staff assistant to the Mayor with the duty of carrying out the
requirements of this article.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural or technological cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or
paramilitary action, public health emergencies or acts of domestic terrorism.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of the City to develop, plan, analyze,
conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of the City describing the
organization, mission and functions of the government and supporting services
for responding to and recovery from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination of such functions, other than functions
for which military forces are primarily responsible, as may be necessary or
proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting
from any natural or technological cause. These functions including, without
limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation
services, HazMat and technical rescue teams, rescue, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons
defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergency
assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all
other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life or property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any county, city, village, or incorporated town.
(2006 Code § 30-3-3)
5-2A-4:   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY (ESDA):
   A.   Agency And Coordinator Created: There is hereby created an Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency and a Coordinator of the Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency, herein called the "Coordinator", who shall be the head
thereof. The Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council. He shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
   B.   Administrative Personnel: The Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
shall obtain, with City Council approval, such technical, clerical,
stenographic and other administrative personnel, and may make such expenditures
within their appropriation therefor as may be necessary to carry out the
purpose of this article.
   C.   Coordinator:
      1.   The Coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor,
shall be the executive head of the Municipal Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency and shall be responsible, under the direction of the Mayor, for carrying
out the program for emergency services and disaster operations of the City. He
shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency services and
disaster operations within the City and shall maintain liaison and cooperate
with the civil defense and emergency management agencies and organizations of
the County, other counties and municipalities, and of the Federal and State
governments.
      2.   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to
serve by the Coordinator, the Mayor or any persons designated by him shall be
and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
article.
   D.   Emergency Operations Plan:
      1.   The Municipal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall take an
integral part in the development and revision of the local emergency operations
plan.
      2.   In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Municipal
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall interrelate with business, labor,
industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community
leaders.
   E.   Duties: The Municipal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall:
      1.   Determine the requirements of the City for food, clothing and other
necessities in the event of an emergency.
      2.   Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards
promulgated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
      3.   Review and revise the local emergency operations plan as deemed
appropriate.
      4.   Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in
emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
      5.   Establish a register of government and private response resources
available for use in a disaster.
      6.   Prepare, for issuance by the Mayor, ordinances, proclamations and
regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters.
      7.   Cooperate with the Federal, State and County governments and any
public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this article and
in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response and
recovery.
      8.   Initiate and coordinate planning for:
         a.   The establishment of an emergency operating center.
         b.   The implementation of a 911 system.
      9.   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this article.
(2006 Code § 30-3-4)
5-2A-5:   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER POWERS OF MAYOR; SUCCESSION:
   A.   The Mayor shall have the general direction and control of the Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency and shall be responsible for the carrying out of
the provisions of this article.
   B.   In performing his duties under this article, the Mayor is authorized to
cooperate with State and Federal governments and with other municipalities and
political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency services and
disaster operations defined in this article.
   C.   In performing his duties under this article, the Mayor is further
authorized:
      1.   To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and
regulations of the local disaster plan to carry out the provisions of this
article within the limits of the authority conferred upon him.
      2.   To cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan and program for the
emergency management of the City, which plan and program shall be integrated
into and coordinated with disaster plans of the State and Federal governments
and other political subdivisions, and which plan and program may include:
         a.   Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by
disaster.
         b.   Prompt and effective response to disaster.
         c.   Emergency relief.
         d.   Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters.
         e.   Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls,
safety measures for securing permanent structures and other preventive and
preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or their
impact.
         f.   Assistance to local officials in designing local emergency action
plans.
         g.   Authorization and procedures for the erection or other
construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate danger,
damage or loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster.
         h.   Organization of Municipal manpower and chains of command.
         i.   Coordination of local emergency management activities.
         j.   Other necessary matters.
      3.   In accordance with such plan and program for the emergency
management of the City, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to
procure and preposition supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to
institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all
other preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of
emergency services and disaster organizations in advance of actual disaster to
ensure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster
operations.
      4.   Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies
and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in the City as may be
necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the City for the emergency
management phases of preparedness, response, and recovery, and to plan for the
most efficient emergency use thereof.
   D.   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a Municipal building, or
elsewhere for the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency as its office.
(2006 Code § 30-3-5)
   E.   In the event of the death, absence from the City or other disability of
the Mayor preventing him from acting under this article or for any other
Municipal purpose, and until the office is filled in the manner prescribed by
law, the Coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall
succeed to the duties and responsibilities of the Mayor.
(2006 Code § 30-3-18)
5-2A-6:   LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
   A.   A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or City
Council. If declared by the Mayor, it shall not be continued for a period in
excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed
promptly with the City Clerk.
   B.   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate any and all applicable local emergency operations plans and to
authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder.
   C.   During a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the provisions
of any Municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of Municipal
business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any Municipal agency, if
strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation
would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the
emergency, as authorized by “The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act” (20
ILCS 3305/1 et seq.); provided, that if the City Council meets at such time, he
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(2006 Code § 30-3-7)
   D.   When, in the judgment of the Mayor or City Council, as provided in
subsection A of this section, a local disaster emergency requires the
termination or reduction of electrical service, the Mayor or City Council shall
forthwith declare in writing the existence of the emergency condition and order
the termination or reduction.
(2006 Code § 30-3-21)
5-2A-7:   MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS:
   A.   The Coordinator for emergency services and disaster operations may, in
collaboration with other public agencies within his immediate vicinity, develop
or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political
subdivisions, municipal corporations or bodies politic within this State for
reciprocal disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be
dealt with unassisted. The mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless
and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal
corporations or bodies politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided
by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the State
Director. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the State and local
emergency management operations plan and program, and in the event of such
“disaster” as described in section
5-2A-3 of this article, it shall be the duty of each local and department for
emergency services and disaster operations to render assistance in accordance
with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.
(2006 Code § 30-3-9)
   B.   The Mayor and the City Council and the City Clerk are hereby authorized
to execute an agreement for participation in the mutual aid box alarm system, a
copy of said agreement being on file in the Office of the City Clerk and being
made a part hereof.
(2006 Code § 30-3-23; amd. 2018 Code)
5-2A-8:   COMMUNICATIONS:
The local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency shall ascertain what means
exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of disaster emergencies.
The agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these
communications resources or of integrating them into a comprehensive system or
network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several
parts, the agency shall evaluate the possibility of multipurpose use thereof
for general Municipal and local governmental purposes. The agency shall make
recommendations to the Mayor as appropriate.
(2006 Code § 30-3-10)
5-2A-9:   UTILIZATION OF CITY AGENCY, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this article, the Mayor and the Coordinator
of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency are directed to utilize the
services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices
and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable, and the officers
and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon
request, to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
Coordinator and the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency.
(2006 Code § 30-3-16)
5-2A-10:   ASSUMING THE DUTIES OF PERSONS IN PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND
OCCUPATIONS:
If such “disaster” as is described in section 5-2A-3 of this article occurs in
the City and the services of persons who are competent to practice any
profession, trade or occupation are required in the City to cope with the
disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or
registered in the City to practice such profession, trade or occupation may be
insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are licensed elsewhere to
practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another
political subdivision rendering aid in the City pursuant to the order of the
head of that political subdivision and upon the request of the City, or if
otherwise requested so to do by the Mayor or the Coordinator of the City,
during the time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession,
trade or occupation in the City without being licensed or registered in the
City.
(2006 Code § 30-3-12)
5-2A-11:   NONLIABILITY OF CITY AND PRIVATE PERSONS:
   A.   City: Neither the City, the agency or any member thereof or any person
acting at their direction, engaged in any emergency services and disaster
operations or disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply
with this article or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this
article, is liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to
property, as a result of such activity. This subsection does not, however,
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise
be entitled under this article under the Workers’ Compensation Act (820 ILCS
305/1 et seq.) or the Workers Occupational Diseases Act (820 ILCS 310/1 et
seq.), or under any pension law, and this subsection does not affect the right
of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of
Congress.
(2006 Code § 30-3-11)
   B.   Private Persons:
      1.   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity,
together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable
for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such
real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or
for negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
      2.   Any private person, firm or corporation, and employees and agents of
such person, firm or corporation, in the performance of a contract with, and
under the direction of, the City under the provisions of this article, shall
not be civilly liable for causing the death of or injury to any person or
damage to any property except in the event of wilful misconduct.
      3.   Any private person, firm or corporation, and any employee or agency
of such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or advice at the
request of the City, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of or
injury to any person or damage to any property except in the event of wilful
misconduct. The immunities provided in this subsection B3 shall not apply to
any private person, firm or corporation, or to any employee or agent of such
person, firm or corporation, whose act or omission caused, in whole or in part,
such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefor.
(2006 Code § 30-3-17)
5-2A-12:   FINANCING:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   It is the intent of the City Council and declared to be the policy
of the City that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster
emergencies.
      2.   It is the City Council’s intent that the first recourse shall be to
funds regularly appropriated to the agency. If the Mayor finds that the demands
placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are unreasonably
great, and the Governor has proclaimed the City a disaster, he may make
application for funds from the State Disaster Relief Fund. If monies available
from the fund are insufficient, and if the Mayor finds that other sources of
money to cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, he shall
issue a call for an immediate session of the City Council for the purpose of
enacting ordinances as the City Council may deem necessary to transfer and
expend monies appropriated for other purposes, or borrow monies from the United
States government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of
the members of the City Council is capable of convening in session to enact
such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or loan of such monies, the Mayor
is authorized to carry out those decisions until such time as a quorum of the
City Council can convene.
      3.   Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to limit the
Mayor’s authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts, or
payments in aid of disaster prevention, preparedness, response or recovery.
(2006 Code § 30-3-6)
   B.   Appropriations And Levy Of Tax: The City Council may make
appropriations for emergency services and disaster operations in the manner
provided by law for making appropriations for the ordinary expenses of the
City. The City Council may also levy for emergency services and disaster
operations a tax not to exceed five-hundredths of one percent (0.05%) of the
full, fair cash value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue on
all taxable property in the City for the current year. However, the amount
collectible under such a levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents
($0.25) per capita. The annual tax shall be in addition to and in excess of the
amount authorized to be levied for general corporate purposes.
(2006 Code § 30-3-13)
   C.   Services, Gifts, Grants Or Loans: Whenever the Federal or State
government, or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or
corporation shall offer to the City services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency management, the City,
acting through the Mayor or through its City Council, may accept such offer,
and upon such acceptance, the Mayor or the City Council may authorize any
officer of the City to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or
funds on behalf of the City.
(2006 Code § 30-3-14)
5-2A-13:   PERSONNEL OATH:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve
in any capacity in the Municipal Emergency Service and Disaster Agency shall,
before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before the
Coordinator of the Municipal Emergency Services and Disaster Agency before a
person authorized to administer oaths in the City, which oath shall be filed
with the Coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, and which
oath shall be substantially as follows:
I         , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time I am
affiliated with the City, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(2006 Code § 30-3-20)
5-2A-14:   COMPENSATION:
The City Council, by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for the
payment of the salary of the Coordinator and such other office staff and
personnel as may be expressly provided for in the ordinance. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation
from the State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provisions of
that agency.
(2006 Code § 30-3-19)
5-2A-15:   TESTING DISASTER DEVICES:
The testing of disaster devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be held
only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten o'clock (10:00) in the morning.
(2006 Code § 30-3-8)
5-2A-16:   ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The Mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any
amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the provisions of this article in the
Office of the City Clerk. No such rule, regulation or order, or any amendment
thereof, shall be effective until ten (10) days after such filing; provided,
however, that upon the declaration of such a disaster emergency by the Mayor as
is described in section 5-2A-6 of this article, the provision relating to the
effective date of any rule, regulation order or amendment issued pursuant to
this article and during the state of such disaster emergency is abrogated, and
said rule, regulation, order or amendment shall become effective immediately
upon being filed with the City Clerk, accompanied by a certificate stating the
reason for the emergency.
   B.   The Emergency Services and Disaster Agency established pursuant to this
article, and the Coordinator thereof, shall execute and enforce such orders,
rules and regulations as may be made by the Governor under authority of the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act. The local Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency shall have available for inspection at its office all orders,
rules and regulations made by the Governor, or under his authority. The State
Emergency Management Agency shall furnish on its website such orders, rules and
regulations to the agency. Upon the written request of the local agency, copies
thereof will be mailed to the local agency.
(2006 Code § 30-3-15)
5-2A-17:   PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating this article or any order hereunder shall be
punishable as provided by section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(2006 Code § 30-3-22)
ARTICLE B: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
5-2B-1:   Definitions
5-2B-2:   Declaration Of Emergency
5-2B-3:   Notice Of Emergency
5-2B-4:   Curfew
5-2B-5:   Authority Of Mayor To Issue Orders
5-2B-6:   Effect Of Proclamation
5-2B-1:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY:
   A.   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together
without authority of law; or
   B.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate
limits of the City resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the City excepting
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to the civil emergency.
(2006 Code § 30-1-1)
5-2B-2:   DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency as defined in section
5-2B-1 of this chapter exists, the Mayor shall declare the existence by means
of a written declaration, setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency.
(2006 Code § 30-1-2)
5-2B-3:   NOTICE OF EMERGENCY:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Mayor shall notify the
news media situated within the City and shall cause three (3) copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the City:
   A.   The City Hall.
   B.   The Post Office.
   C.   The police station.
(2006 Code § 30-1-6)
5-2B-4:   CURFEW:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he may order a general
curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the City or to the City as a
whole as he deems advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or
night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
(2006 Code § 30-1-3)
5-2B-5:   AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO ISSUE ORDERS:
After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor may also, in the
interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
   A.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted.
   B.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
   C.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   D.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   E.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(2006 Code § 30-1-4)
5-2B-6:   EFFECT OF PROCLAMATION:
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty
eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the
power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each forty
eight (48) hour period during the time the civil emergency exists. The
emergency shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the Corporate Authorities following the aforementioned forty eight
(48) hours.
(2006 Code § 30-1-5)
CHAPTER 3: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
5-3-1:   Short Title
5-3-2:   Definitions
5-3-3:   Number Of Dogs And Cats; Kennels
5-3-4:   Animal Houses And Enclosures
5-3-5:   Nuisance Animals
5-3-6:   Noisy Animals
5-3-7:   Damage To Property
5-3-8:   Excrement Removal
5-3-9:   Cruelty To Animals
5-3-10:   Wild Or Vicious Animals
5-3-11:   Livestock And Fowl
5-3-1:   SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ANIMAL CONTROL CODE.
(2006 Code § 3-1-1)
5-3-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted and
shall be used:
ANIMAL: Any animal, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN: Any police officer or other persons appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the City Council to perform duties enforcing this chapter
or any animal control official appointed and acting under authority of the City
Council.
AT LARGE: Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the property of
its owner and not under the control of a responsible person.
CAT: Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his agent, to
an escapeproof building or other enclosure away from other animals and the
public.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: The Department of Agriculture of the State of
Illinois.
DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or
animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved by
the department.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than three
(3) dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals, over four (4) months of
age, are kept or on which more than two (2) such animals are maintained,
boarded, bred, or cared for in return for remuneration or are kept for the
purpose of sale.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois.
UNOWNED STRAY DOG: Any dog not on the premises of the owner or keeper or under
control by leash or other recognized control methods, and which does not, at
that time and place, bear a current rabies inoculation tag issued pursuant to
the provisions article A of this chapter, by means of which, by reference to
records of current registration certificates, the Animal Control Warden or his
deputies or assistants may determine the name and address of the owner or
keeper thereof, or some other means of identification from which the Animal
Control Warden or his deputies or assistants may directly determine the name
and address of the owner or keeper thereof.
OWNER: A person having a right of property in a dog or other animals or who
keeps or harbors a dog, or who has a dog in his care, or who acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic animal to remain on
or about any premises occupied by him.
POUND: Any facility approved by the Animal Control Warden and licensed as such
by the Department of Agriculture for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and
used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs or
other animals.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A printed form prescribed by the Department of
Agriculture for the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by
the department under the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.)
RESTRAINT: A dog is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this chapter if it is
controlled by a leash, within an enclosed vehicle being driven or parked on the
streets, or within the property limits of his owner or keeper.
SHADE: Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
SHELTER: As it applies to dogs, shall mean a moistureproof structure of
suitable size to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of
durable material with a solid floor raised at least two inches (2") from the
ground and with the entrance covered by a flexible, windproof material. Such
structure shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to
provide insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any person
or which has behaved in such a manner that the person who harbors said animal
knows or should reasonably know that the animal is possessed of tendencies to
attack or bite persons.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake, or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in the wild state.
(2006 Code § 3-1-2)
5-3-3:   NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS; KENNELS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats
in the City for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many
instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which such
areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is,
therefore, declared to be a public nuisance. The terms DOG and CAT shall be
construed as provided in section
5-3-2  of this chapter.
   B.   Number Limited; Exceptions:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than
three (3) dogs or cats within the City, with the exception that a litter of
pups, a litter of kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of
time not exceeding five (5) months from birth.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment
wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or
boarding.
   C.   Kennels (see also section 9-10-9 of this Code): In the areas where
kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be located closer than two hundred feet
(200') to the boundary of the nearest adjacent residential lot.
(2006 Code § 3-1-9)
5-3-4:   ANIMAL HOUSES AND ENCLOSURES:
   A.   Pens, Yards Or Runs: All pens, yards, runs or other structures wherein
any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily cleaned and
kept in good repair.
   B.   Fences: Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall be
securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
(2006 Code § 3-1-4)
5-3-5:   NUISANCE ANIMALS:
The Mayor shall have the power to issue an order prohibiting the keeping of any
animal, fowl or bird which is deemed to be a nuisance or pose a health hazard
to the general public.
(2006 Code § 3-1-8)
5-3-6:   NOISY ANIMALS:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
keep or harbor any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which
habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy persons in
the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   B.   Complaints: Whenever any person shall complain to the Police Department
that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually
cries or howls is being kept by any person in the City, the Police Department
shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint has been received
and that the person should take whatever steps are necessary to alleviate the
howling, yelping or crying.
(2006 Code § 3-1-5)
5-3-7:   DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or cat to permit
such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway, or private lands or premises
without the permission of the owner of such premises and break, bruise, tear
up, crush or injure any lawn, flowerbed, plant, shrub, tree or garden in any
manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
(2006 Code § 3-1-3)
5-3-8:   EXCREMENT REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog or cat to be on
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such
person has in his immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping
excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a
receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such person. This
section shall not apply to a person who has a visual or physical disability.
(2006 Code § 3-1-3)
5-3-9:   CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or
maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture, or abuse or
cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal, or by an act, omission or neglect,
cause or inflict any unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, injury or
death to any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to another;
except, that reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals. Any unwanted animals should be delivered to the County
Animal Control Facility for proper disposal.
   B.   Food, Water And Shelter: It shall be unlawful for any person in charge
of any animal to fail, refuse, or neglect to provide such animal with food,
potable water, shade or shelter, or to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such
animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement weather, or to carry any such animal
in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner.
   C.   Definitions: The terms used in this section shall comply with section
5-3-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 3-1-6)
5-3-10:   WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his
premises any wild or vicious animal as described in this chapter for display or
for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This subsection
shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions, or circuses.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any
wild animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the State of Illinois.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal
within the City. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may be
seized by any police officer or humane officer, and upon establishment to the
satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of
said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to animals under the control of a
law enforcement or military agency nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property; provided, that such animals are restrained by a leash
or chain, cage, fence, or other adequate means from contact with the general
public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied
permission of the owner or occupant.
   D.   The Department of Agriculture shall issue a temporary permit for the
keeping, care, and protection of any infant animal native to this area which
has been deemed to be homeless, then said animal may be kept on a temporary
basis.
(2006 Code § 3-1-7)
5-3-11:   LIVESTOCK AND FOWL:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall keep within the City any cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine,
goats, chickens, ducks, turkeys, geese, rabbits, or other livestock.
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply in areas of the City that are
zoned agricultural in nature nor shall this section apply to livestock brought
into the City for the purpose of being shipped out of the City.
   C.   Powers Of Police Chief: The Police Chief shall have the power to issue
an order prohibiting the keeping of any animal, fowl, or bird which is deemed
to pose a health hazard to the general public.
(2006 Code § 3-1-10)
ARTICLE A: DOGS
Section
5-3A-1:   Definitions
5-3A-2:   Collar And Tag Required
5-3A-3:   Rabies Control
5-3A-4:   Dogs At Large
5-3A-5:   Nuisance Dogs
5-3A-6:   Female Dogs In Heat In View
5-3A-7:   Impoundment And Redemption Provisions
5-3A-8:   Vicious, Dangerous Dogs
5-3A-8-1:   Definitions
5-3A-8-2:   Vicious Dogs
5-3A-8-3:   Owner's Responsibility
5-3A-8-4:   Dog Permitted To Leave Premises
5-3A-8-5:   Injunction
5-3A-8-6:   Liability Of Owner For Attacks Or Injuries
5-3A-8-7:   Right Of Entry; Inspections
5-3A-1:   DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this article shall comply with section
5-3-2 of this chapter unless otherwise provided in this article.
(2006 Code § 3-2-1)
5-3A-2:   COLLAR AND TAG REQUIRED:
Every owner or keeper of a dog, regardless of age, shall cause the dog to wear
a collar or harness and shall affix thereto a metallic or other suitable tag
inscribed with the name, address and phone number, if any, of the owner or
keeper of the dog.
(2006 Code § 3-2-2)
5-3A-3:   RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Inoculation Required: Each calendar year or at such intervals as may
hereafter be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture, every owner or
keeper of a dog four (4) months or more of age shall cause such dog to be
inoculated against rabies. Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a
serially numbered tag evidencing such inoculation to be attached to a collar or
harness worn by the dog.
(2006 Code § 3-2-2)
   B.   Performance Of Inoculation; Certificate And Tag: The inoculation of
dogs required by subsection A of this section shall be performed by a
veterinarian duly licensed to practice his profession in this State. Upon
performing such inoculation, such veterinarian shall issue to the owner or
keeper a certificate showing such fact and shall also deliver to the owner or
keeper a metallic or other suitable tag to be attached to the collar or harness
of the dog, which tag shall also certify to the fact of the inoculation against
rabies. Said tag shall be in such form as shall be determined by the Department
of Agriculture.
(2006 Code §§ 3-2-3, 3-2-5)
   C.   Duration Of Inoculation: The inoculation performed under the provisions
of subsection B of this section shall be effective until the expiration of the
calendar year in which the vaccination was performed or the expiration of such
period of time as may be promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(2006 Code § 3-2-4)
   D.   Exhibition Of Certificate Upon Request: At any reasonable time upon
request of any member of the Police Department or City employee, the owner or
keeper of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit his certificate issued under the
provisions of subsection B of this section, showing the inoculation against
rabies of any dog owned or controlled by him.
(2006 Code § 3-2-6)
5-3A-4:   DOGS AT LARGE:
   A.   The owner or keeper of a dog shall keep the dog under restraint at all
times and shall not permit such dog to be at large, off the premises of the
property of the owner or keeper, unless the dog is under complete control.
(2006 Code § 3-2-7)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any vicious or
dangerous dog as defined in section 5-3-2 of this chapter or of any female dog,
while in heat, to run at large within the limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 3-2-16)
5-3A-5:   NUISANCE DOGS:
Any dog which may, in any manner, continually disturb the quiet of any person
or neighborhood or shall destroy or in any manner injure any animal, plant,
shrub or other property not on the premises of its owner or keeper is hereby
declared to be a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded and may
be redeemed or disposed of in the manner provided for under this article.
(2006 Code § 3-2-15)
5-3A-6:   FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT IN VIEW:
No person in control or possession of a female dog or permitting the same to
remain upon his or her premises shall permit any such female dog, while in
heat, to consort with any other dog or dogs in an indecent manner in any place
of public view, whether upon his own or any other premises.
(2006 Code § 3-2-17)
5-3A-7:   IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROVISIONS:
   A.   City Pound Designated: The City Council does hereby designate the
Jersey County Pound as the City Pound.
(2006 Code § 3-2-14)
   B.   Impoundment Of Dogs:
      1.   a. It shall be the duty of such employees and officers of the Police
Department as shall be designated for that purpose by the Mayor to take up and
impound, any dog found running at large in the City, contrary to any of the
provisions of this chapter or other regulations of the City or State.
(2006 Code § 3-2-8)
         b.   Those persons charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter may
employ any method found practical and humane in capturing and impounding any
dog found running at large.
(2006 Code § 3-2-12)
      2.   When dogs are found running at large or unlicensed and their
ownership is known to the designated employee(s), such dogs may be impounded at
the discretion of such employee(s), but the employee(s) may cite the owner of
such dog to answer charges of violation of this chapter.
      3.   Any dog permitted to run at large within the City is hereby declared
to be a nuisance.
      4.   Any impounded dog which shall not be redeemed within seven (7) days
shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the poundkeeper.
      5.   The City Council may establish a reasonable fee by motion for each
day that a dog is housed in the pound.
(2006 Code § 3-2-8)
   C.   Notice Of Impoundment; Citation: In case of impounding and where the
owner or keeper of such dog is disclosed by any tax or license tag worn by it
or is otherwise known to the officers impounding the same, the designated
official shall make reasonable attempts to contact the owner, informing him of
the impounding of his dog and shall cite the owner or keeper of such dog to
answer charges of violation of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 3-2-9)
   D.   Impoundment Of Dogs Which Have Bitten Persons:
      1.   Any dog which shall have bitten or otherwise injured any person so
as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be immediately taken, impounded and
kept separated from other dogs for ten (10) days.
      2.   If, during that period, such dog develops symptoms of illness, a
veterinarian shall be called to diagnose its condition. If the symptoms
disclosed are such as to indicate the presence of rabies, such dog shall be
destroyed in such a manner, however, as to preserve intact the head, which
shall thereupon be detached and immediately sent to the diagnostic laboratory
of the Department of Agriculture. In case such dog cannot be safely taken up
and impounded, it may be shot, care being taken to preserve the head intact
which shall thereupon be immediately detached and be delivered to the
diagnostic laboratory of the Department of Agriculture.
      3.   If, at the expiration of the ten (10) days, no symptoms of rabies
have developed in such dog so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the owner
upon payment of the redemption fees and charges specified by this section;
provided, however, that in case any dog so impounded for biting a person shall
have previously bitten any person, such dog shall be humanely destroyed by the
poundkeeper. After having been notified that his dog has bitten or otherwise
injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit such animal to be at large unless securely muzzled.
(2006 Code § 3-2-11)
   E.   Redemption Of Impounded Animal: The owner of any animal impounded under
this section may redeem the same by paying all the costs and charges assessed,
if any, that have accrued up to the time of making redemption, and on paying
the same, it shall be the duty of the authorities to release the animal from
the pound and deliver it to its owner, or certify the release thereof to any
County authority having possession of the animal.
(2006 Code § 3-2-13)
   F.   Obstructing Poundmaster: Any person(s) who shall bring any dog into the
City for the purpose of causing the same to be impounded or any person who
shall resist, hinder or molest the poundmaster or dogcatcher or police officer
while engaged upon the duties imposed upon them by this chapter or any person
who shall break into the dog pound and release or deliver any dog therefrom
without having first paid the fees herein specified, or any owner or keeper of
any dog who shall permit any dog to run at large within the corporate limits of
the City, upon conviction of any part of this chapter, shall be fined according
to section
1-4-1 of this Code.
(2006 Code § 3-2-10)
5-3A-8:   VICIOUS, DANGEROUS DOGS:
5-3A-8-1:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section
5-3A-8, the following words shall have the following meanings and definitions:
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner's family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure.
FOUND TO BE VICIOUS DOG:
   A.   That the County Veterinarian, Animal Control Warden, or a law
enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding in
writing that the dog is a VICIOUS DOG as defined in this section and, based on
that finding, the County Veterinarian or the Animal Control Warden has declared
in writing that the dog is a vicious dog; or
   B.   That the Circuit Court has found the dog to be a “vicious dog” as
defined in this section and has entered an order based on that finding.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of the Animal Control Warden.
VICIOUS DOG:
   A.   1.   Any individual dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites on or
attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property.
      2.   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals.
      3.   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks
upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or
with special equipment.
      4.   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation.
      5.   Any individual dog which has been found to be a “dangerous dog” upon
three (3) separate occasions.
   B.   No dog shall be deemed “vicious” if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement
or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is
specific as to breed.
   C.   If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be subject to
enclosure.
(2006 Code § 3-3-1)
5-3A-8-2:   VICIOUS DOGS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an
enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
      1.   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the dog; or
      2.   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a
tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet
(3') in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the
owner or keeper of the dog.
   B.   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the Animal Control Warden or the
police and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by
lethal injection.
   C.   The owner charged with maintaining a vicious or dangerous dog may
request a hearing before the City Council within five (5) days of being
charged.
(2006 Code § 3-3-2)
5-3A-8-3:   OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
Circuit Court in the County within fifteen (15) working days, the dog may be
humanely destroyed. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to
the owner until the Animal Control Warden approves the ENCLOSURE, as defined in
section 5-3A-8-1 of this section 5-3A-8.
   B.   No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.
(2006 Code § 3-3-3)
5-3A-8-4:   DOG PERMITTED TO LEAVE PREMISES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by
permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner
when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   B.   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for persons
with physical disabilities, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt
from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the
dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with this article. It shall be the duty of the owner of such
exempted dog to notify the warden of changes of address. In the case of a
sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the warden advised of the location
where such dog will be stationed. The warden shall provide police and fire
departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly
notify such departments of any address changes reported to him.
(2006 Code § 3-3-4)
5-3A-8-5:   INJUNCTION:
   A.   The Animal Control Warden, the City Attorney, or any citizen of the
City in which a dangerous or vicious dog or other animal exists may file a
complaint to enjoin all persons from maintaining or permitting such, to abate
the same, and to enjoin the owner of such dog or other animal from permitting
same to leave his premises when not under control by leash or other recognized
control methods.
   B.   Upon the filing of a complaint in the Circuit Court, the court, if
satisfied that this nuisance may exist, shall grant a preliminary injunction
with bond in such amount as the court may determine enjoining the defendant
from maintaining such nuisance. If the existence of the nuisance is
established, the owner of such dog or other animal shall be in violation of
this section 5-3A-8, and in addition, the court shall enter an order
restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may order that such
dog or other animal be humanely dispatched.
(2006 Code § 3-3-5)
5-3A-8-6:   LIABILITY OF OWNER FOR ATTACKS OR INJURIES:
If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks or injures any person
who is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be, the
owner of such dog or other animal is liable in damages to such person for the
full amount of the injury sustained.
(2006 Code § 3-3-6)
5-3A-8-7:   RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTIONS:
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section 5-3A-8 and
making inspections hereunder, the Animal Control Warden, or his authorized
representative, or any officer of the law may enter upon private premises to
apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal, or a
dog or other animal thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request
therefor, the owner of such dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog
or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in violation of this section
5-3A-8.
(2006 Code § 3-3-7)
CHAPTER 4: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
5-4-1:   State Criminal Code Adopted
5-4-2:   Definitions
5-4-3:   Aid To An Offense
5-4-1:       STATE CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Illinois Criminal Code, Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 720, as passed,
approved and amended by the Illinois General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the
City. The provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits
of the City; provided, however, the penalties as provided by this Code shall
apply (see section
1-4-1 of this Code).
(2006 Code § 27-1-2)
5-4-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, including articles A through D, the words and
phrases of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 720, sections 5/2-1 through
5/2-11; 5/2-13 through 5/2-16; 5/2-19 and 5/2-20, as approved, adopted and
amended, are hereby adopted by the City, as fully as if set out herein.
(2006 Code § 27-1-1)
5-4-3:   AID TO AN OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
hereby defined.
(2006 Code § 27-2-14)
ARTICLE A: OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY
Section
5-4A-1:   Theft And Related Offenses
5-4A-2:   Damage To Property Generally
5-4A-3:   Criminal Damage To Property
5-4A-4:   Criminal Damage To Fire Department Property
5-4A-5:   Tampering With Or Damage To Utility Facilities
5-4A-6:   Damage To Street Signs
5-4A-7:   Tampering With Public Notices
5-4A-8:   Obstructing Public Ways
5-4A-9:   Depositing Snow And Ice
5-4A-10:   Open Wells And Excavations
5-4A-11:   Trespass
5-4A-12:   Throwing Missiles Or Objects
5-4A-13:   Posting Bills
5-4A-1:   THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
   A.   Petty Theft:
      1.   A person commits a petty theft when the value of the property is
under five hundred dollars ($500.00) and he knowingly:
         a.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner; or
         b.   Obtains by deception, control over property of the owner; or
         c.   Obtains by threat, control over property of the owner; or
         d.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him to believe that the property was stolen; and
            (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property;
            (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit;
            (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property, knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to commit a petty theft.
(2006 Code § 27-3-1)
   B.   False Pretenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any
food, drink, goods, wares, or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter
public places and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and
refuse to pay for same, or to depart without paying for or satisfying the
person from whom he received the food, goods, wares, and/or merchandise.
(2006 Code § 27-2-12)
   C.   Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of Admission Fees: It shall be unlawful
for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the proper admission
fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission
fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in
the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or
amusement.
(2006 Code § 27-2-6)
   D.   Theft Of Recyclables: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect,
obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable item(s) from any receptacle or
collection point where service is provided by an authorized waste hauler
licensed by the City or from any specified recycling center within the City
limits unless said person is acting as an agent for the City or acting as an
agent for a waste hauler licensed by the City.
(2006 Code § 27-2-27)
5-4A-2:   DAMAGE TO PROPERTY GENERALLY:
No person in the City shall deface, destroy, or in any way injure any public
property or any other apparatus of the City.
(2006 Code § 27-2-23)
5-4A-3:   CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
Any of the following acts by a person shall be a violation of this Code:
   A.   To knowingly damage any property of another; or
   B.   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosive, damage property of another;
or
   C.   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another; or
   D.   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another; or
   E.   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another, any stink
bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intend to interfere with
the use by another of the land or building.
(2006 Code § 27-3-2)
5-4A-4:   CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO FIRE DEPARTMENT PROPERTY:
No person shall wilfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with or
destroy or deface any fire hydrant or any fire hose or any fire engine, or
other public or private firefighting equipment or any apparatus appertaining to
such equipment, or to intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper
authorization.
(2006 Code § 27-3-3)
5-4A-5:   TAMPERING WITH OR DAMAGE TO UTILITY FACILITIES:
It shall be unlawful to wilfully, maliciously, or negligently break, deface,
injure or destroy any telephone pole, post or wire, or any electric lightpost,
pole, or electric conductor, wire or lamp or any other thing connected with the
same or belonging thereto, or any water main, gas main, pipe or hydrant or lamp
or lamppost, or anything belonging to or connected therewith or with any of
them.
(2006 Code § 27-3-4)
5-4A-6:   DAMAGE TO STREET SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner or form, to deface,
disfigure, damage or destroy any of the street signs or parts thereof located
in the City.
(2006 Code § 27-3-5)
5-4A-7:   TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly and without lawful authority
alter, destroy, deface, remove or conceal any public notice posted according to
law during the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(2006 Code § 27-3-6)
5-4A-8:   OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk or
public way, except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb
line, if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other
pedestrians.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to impede or interfere with another person's use
of a public way.
(2006 Code § 27-2-9)
5-4A-9:   DEPOSITING SNOW AND ICE:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or against
a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading or unloading areas of a
public transportation system; except, that snow and ice may be windrowed on
curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts.
(2006 Code § 27-2-29)
`5-4A-10:   OPEN WELLS AND EXCAVATIONS:
Any person, corporation or partnership which either owns, or maintains, or
uses, or abandons any open well, cesspool, cistern, quarry, recharging basin,
catch basin, sump, excavation for the erection of any building structure or
excavation created by the razing or removal of any building structure without
covering or surrounding such installation with protective fencing is guilty of
a violation and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. The provisions of this section shall not apply during the
course of repair, construction, removal or filling of any of the structures or
conditions herein described while any worker is present at the location thereof
either performing services thereon or as a watchman to guard such location.
(2006 Code § 27-2-30)
5-4A-11:   TRESPASS:
   A.   Prohibited Generally: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to commit a trespass within the City upon either public or private
property.
(2006 Code § 27-6-1)
   B.   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses: Without constituting any limitation
upon the provisions of subsection A of this section, any of the following acts
by any person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed included among those that
constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said subsection A, and
appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to
prevent or suppress any violation or violations of this section. The aforesaid
enumerated acts so included, being as follows:
      1.   An entry upon the premises of another, or any part thereof,
including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to the premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or occupant thereof; or
      2.   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in the
case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      4.   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to leave any such vehicle,
aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such
right.
(2006 Code § 27-6-2)
5-4A-12:   THROWING MISSILES OR OBJECTS:
   A.   No person in the City shall throw or cast any rock or stone or any
other missile upon or at any building, tree, or other public or private
property, or at any person in any street, avenue, alley or public place.
(2006 Code § 27-2-22)
   B.   Pursuant to the police powers in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1-
1, it shall be unlawful for any person occupying or driving a motor vehicle,
whether moving or not, to shoot, throw, cast, launch or drop any object, liquid
or substance at any person, animal or structure wherein the possibility of
harm, injury or damage may occur as a result of these actions. The driver and/
or all passengers shall be, upon conviction, fined in accordance with the
provisions of this Code and shall be liable for all damage, injury or harm
caused by the activity.
(2006 Code § 27-2-28)
5-4A-13:   POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone, or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, or hydrant, or upon any private wall, door, or gate
without the consent, in writing, of the owner of the wall, door or gate;
provided, however, that this section shall not prevent posting by proper City
and County officials of election signs, polling place signs and other signs or
placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections; except, they may
not be attached to a tree.
(2006 Code § 27-2-15)
ARTICLE B: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS,
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
5-4B-1:   Disorderly Conduct
5-4B-2:   Disturbing The Peace
5-4B-3:   Assemblies
5-4B-4:   Abandoned Containers
5-4B-5:   Games In Streets
5-4B-6:   Begging
5-4B-7:   Storage Of Explosives
5-4B-1:   DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another
and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   B.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Fire
Department a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of the transmission that
there is no reasonable ground for believing that the fire exists;
   C.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in a place where its explosion or release would endanger
human life, knowing at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that the bomb, explosive or a container holding poison
gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive substance is
concealed in the place;
   D.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a threat of
destruction of a school building or school property, or a threat of violence,
death, or bodily harm directed against persons at a school, school function, or
school event, whether or not school is in session;
   E.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to any peace
officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been committed, knowing
at the time of the transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that the offense will be committed, is being committed, or has been
committed;
   F.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting the report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;
   G.   Calls the number “911” or transmits or causes to be transmitted in any
manner to a public safety agency for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency;
   H.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Children and Family Services under Section 4 of the Abused
and Neglected Child Reporting Act;
   I.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report to
the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, the
Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of 2013, the ID/DD Community Care
Act, or the MC/DD Act;
   J.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Police
Department or Fire Department, or any privately owned and operated ambulance
service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-
ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there
is no reasonable ground for believing that the assistance is required;
   K.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under Article II of Public Act 83-1432;
   L.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   M.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection Agency
Act or as an employee of the collection agency, and while attempting to collect
an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed
to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.
(2006 Code § 27-4-1)
5-4B-2:   DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall disturb the peace of any individual or private family, or of
any lawful congregation within the City by any noise or amusement, or by vulgar
or profane language, or by any disorderly or unreasonable conduct.
(2006 Code § 27-2-5)
5-4B-3:   ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   Disturbing Assemblies: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully
interrupt or disturb any funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, any
assembly met for worship or any other assembly met for a lawful purpose by any
offensive behavior or by any disorderly conduct.
(2006 Code § 27-2-3)
   B.   Unlawful Assemblies: It shall be illegal for persons to assemble
unlawfully in the following situations:
      1.   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2)
or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or
      2.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
      3.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law,
for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed
to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
(2006 Code § 27-2-4)
5-4B-4:   ABANDONED CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard in any place
accessible to children any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of
one and one-half (1-1/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door
which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch. The owner,
lessee, or manager of such place who knowingly permits such abandoned or
discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition
shall be guilty of violating this Code.
(2006 Code § 27-2-25)
5-4B-5:   GAMES IN STREETS:
No person shall, upon any City street, fly any kite or play any game of ball or
engage in any amusement or practice having a tendency to injure or annoy any
person passing in the streets or on the sidewalks.
(2006 Code § 27-2-20)
5-4B-6:   BEGGING:
No person shall beg or solicit alms within the City without having obtained
permission in writing from the Mayor.
(2006 Code § 27-2-17)
5-4B-7:   STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Nitroglycerine; Dynamite, Etc.: No person shall have, keep, possess, or
store at or in any place within the City any nitroglycerine, dynamite or giant
powder, or any form or combination of any of them.
   B.   Blasting Powder, Etc.: No person shall keep, possess or store any gun
or blasting powder or any gun or explosive cotton at or in any one place in the
City in any quantity.
(2006 Code § 27-2-21)
ARTICLE C: OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
Section
5-4C-1:   Discharging Firearms
5-4C-1:   DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
Within the City corporate boundaries, it shall be unlawful for any person to
fire or discharge any pistol, rifle, shotgun or other firearm, except in the
following circumstances:
   A.   Any law enforcement official in the execution of his official duties.
   B.   In the lawful defense of persons or property.
(2006 Code § 27-2-19)
CHAPTER 5: MINORS
Section
5-5-1:   Nighttime Curfew
5-5-2:   Halloween Curfew
5-5-3:   Sale Of Tobacco Or Tobacco Products To
5-5-4:   Parental Or Guardian Responsibility For Vandalism
5-5-1:   NIGHTTIME CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: Whenever used in this section, the following words and
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
   CURFEW HOURS: Nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any day until six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. of the following day.
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN:
      1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT: A person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      2.   At least twenty one (21) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN: To:
      1.   Linger or stay; or
      2.   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Offenses:
      1.   A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on
the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
      2.   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew
hours.
      3.   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   C.   Defenses:
      1.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section
that the minor was:
         a.   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         b.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         c.   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         d.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         e.   Involved in an emergency;
         f.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
         g.   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, a civil organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the City, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
         h.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
(2006 Code § 27-2-31)
         i.   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act (750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.), as amended.
(2006 Code § 27-2-31; amd. 2018 Code)
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B3 of this section
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment
during curfew hours and refused to leave.
   D.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
subsection C of this section is present.
(2006 Code § 27-2-31)
5-5-2:   HALLOWEEN CURFEW:
It shall be illegal for any person to engage in Halloween practice, commonly
called “trick or treat”, by calling at the homes or dwelling places within the
City, either masked or unmasked, except on a day designated by the City Council
and no later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
(2006 Code § 27-2-26)
5-5-3:   SALE OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO:
   A.   Tobacco To:
      1.   Definition: For the purpose of this subsection, SMOKELESS TOBACCO is
defined in subsection B1 of this section.
      2.   Sales, Providing To:
         a.   No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall buy any cigar,
cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms.
         b.   No person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish
any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms to any
minor under eighteen (18) years of age.
      3.   Sales From Vending Machines: Tobacco products listed in this
subsection may be sold through a vending machine only in the following
locations:
         a.   Factories, businesses, offices, private clubs, and other places
not open to the general public.
         b.   Places to which minors under eighteen (18) years of age are not
permitted access.
         c.   Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises.
         d.   Places where the vending machine is under the direct supervision
of the owner of the establishment or an employee over eighteen (18) years of
age. The sale of tobacco products from a vending machine under direct
supervision of the owner or an employee of the establishment is considered a
sale of tobacco products by that person. As used in this subsection A3d,
“direct supervision” means that the owner or employee has an unimpeded line of
sight to the vending machine.
         e.   Places where the vending machine can only be operated by the
owner or an employee over age eighteen (18) either directly or through a remote
control device if the device is inaccessible to all customers.
(2006 Code § 27-2-7)
   B.   Smokeless Tobacco:
      1.   Definition: For the purposes of this subsection, the term SMOKELESS
TOBACCO means any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is
intended to be placed in the oral cavity.
      2.   Sales: No person shall sell any smokeless tobacco product to any
person under the age of eighteen (18).
      3.   Distribution: No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed
to any person under the age of eighteen (18), without charge or at a nominal
cost, any smokeless tobacco product.
(2006 Code § 27-2-8)
5-5-4:   PARENTAL OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY FOR VANDALISM:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   ACTS OF VANDALISM AND SIMILAR OFFENSES: Shall include any of the following
acts:
      1.   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently, or knowingly damaging or
destroying or defacing any property within the City, whether such property is
owned by the State, County or governmental body or owned by any private person,
firm, partnership, or association; or
      2.   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly, by means of fire or explosive
device, damaging, debasing, or destroying any property of another person; or
      3.   Maliciously, recklessly, negligently or knowingly starting a fire on
land of another person without his consent; or
      4.   Maliciously, recklessly or knowingly depositing on land or in the
building of another person, without his consent, any stink bomb or any
offensive smelling compound and thereby interfering with the use and occupancy
by another of the land or building; or
      5.   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly, and without authority,
entering into or obtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, or any part thereof, of another person without
his consent.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A foster parent, a person appointed guardian of a person or
given custody of a minor by a circuit court of this State, but does not include
a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor, or appointed
guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act
(705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.)
   MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet
eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: The lawful father and mother of a minor child whether by birth or
adoption.
   PROPERTY: Any real estate including improvements thereon and tangible
personal property.
(2006 Code § 27-7-1)
   B.   Parental And Guardian Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of
an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to
exercise proper parental responsibility and said minor shall be deemed to have
committed the acts described herein with the knowledge and permission of the
parent or guardian in violation of this section upon the occurrence of the
events described in subsections B1, B2 and B3 below:
      1.   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law, or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official
agency resulting from an admission of guilt of a violation of any ordinance,
law, or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a
persons or property; and
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service, with a certificate of personal service returned from the City,
following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanctions; and
      3.   If, at any time within one year following receipt of notice set
forth in subsection B2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be
in violation of any ordinance, law, or statute as described in subsection B1 of
this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any
ordinance, law, or statute as described in subsection B1 of this section.
(2006 Code § 27-7-2)
TITLE 6: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
6-1-1:   State Definitions Adopted
6-1-2:   Application To Animals And Bicycles
6-1-3:   Obedience To Police And Fire Department Officials
6-1-1:   STATE DEFINITIONS ADOPTED:
The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 1, entitled
“Title and Definitions”, as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois
General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the City, and the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 24-1-1)
6-1-2:   APPLICATION TO ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Any person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this Code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
(2006 Code § 24-2-7)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-206 and 5/11-1502
6-1-3:   OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Obedience To Police: Members of the Police Department, Special Police,
and Auxiliary Police assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct
all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title or in emergencies
as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a police officer. Except in cases of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any
person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
(2006 Code § 24-2-1)
   B.   Scene Of Fire: The Fire Department officer in command or any
firefighter designated by him may exercise the powers and authority of a police
officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire
Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as the Fire
Department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the
Police Department.
(2006 Code § 24-2-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-203
CHAPTER 2: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
Section
6-2-1:   Obedience Required; Specifications
6-2-2:   Unauthorized Signs And Signals; Interference With; Advertising On
6-2-3:   Damage To, Interference With Signs Or Signals
6-2-4:   Imitation Signs Or Signals
6-2-5:   Unlawful Possession Of Signs, Signals Or Markers
6-2-1:   OBEDIENCE REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the Corporate
Authorities or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois except upon
direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction
of the Governing Body shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Schedule V - Signs and
Signals, which shall be an integral part of this section.
(2006 Code § 24-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-301 and 5/11-305(a)
6-2-2:   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS; INTERFERENCE WITH; ADVERTISING ON:
   A.   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, nor shall any person or place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any street any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement
of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign
or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.
   B.   No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed, maintained,
allowed to remain, or be displayed upon either public or private property in
such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or
the effectiveness of any traffic control device, sign or signal.
(2006 Code § 24-2-4)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-310
6-2-3:   DAMAGE TO, INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal.
(2006 Code § 24-2-5)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-311
6-2-4:   IMITATION SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the City any sign, signal,
marking or device other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the City
Council or the Illinois Department of Transportation which purports to be or is
an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad
sign or signal in view of any street or highway, and it shall be unlawful to
place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic control
device.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any flashing or rotating
beacon of light in view of any street or highway.
(2006 Code § 24-2-6)
6-2-5:   UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKERS:
Traffic control signals, signs or markers owned by the City shall be possessed
only by the City's employees, police officers, contractors, or their employees
engaged in highway construction, contract or work upon the roadways or public
ways approved by the City. No person shall possess a traffic control signal,
sign or marker owned by the City except as provided in this section without the
prior written authority of the City. It shall be a violation of this chapter
for a person to possess such a traffic control signal, sign or marker without
lawful authority.
(2006 Code § 24-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-313
CHAPTER 3: DRIVING RULES
Section
6-3-1:   State Rules Of The Road Adopted
6-3-2:   Through, One-Way, Stop And Yield Streets
6-3-3:   Speed Restrictions
6-3-4:   Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic
6-3-5:   U-Turns Prohibited
6-3-6:   Reckless, Negligent Or Careless Driving
6-3-7:   Transporting Alcoholic Beverages
6-3-1:   STATE RULES OF THE ROAD ADOPTED:
The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 11, entitled
“Rules of the Road”, as passed, approved and amended by the Illinois General
Assembly, is hereby adopted by the City, and the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the corporate limits of the City except for the following
changes, deletions and omissions:
   A.   Omissions: Omit sections 5/11-207, 5/11-208.1, 5/11-208.2, 5/11-209.1,
5/11-302, 5/11-303, 5/11-310(f), 5/11-313, 5/11-401 to and including 5/11-417,
5/11-500 to and including 5/11-502, 5/11-602, 5/11-603, 5/11-604, 5/11-606(b),
5/11-608, and 5/11-1422.
   B.   Changes And Additions:
      1.   Change 5/11-904(a) to read: “Preferential right-of-way at an
intersection may be indicated by stop or yield signs as authorized by this
Code”.
      2.   Change 5/11-1416(a) to read: “Any person who shall willfully and
unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully
driving and traveling upon or along any highway within this State or who shall
offer for barter or sale, merchandise on said highway so as to interfere with
the effective movement of traffic shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
violation of this Code”.
(2006 Code § 24-4-1)
6-3-2:   THROUGH, ONE-WAY, STOP AND YIELD STREETS:
   A.   Through Streets: The streets and parts of streets of the City
designated by ordinance as “through streets” are hereby declared to be through
streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street
and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic
officer. See Schedule A on file in the Office of the City Clerk for applicable
through and stop streets.
(2006 Code § 24-3-1; amd. 2018 Code)
   B.   One-Way Streets And Alleys: It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle
on any streets or alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance
in any direction other than that so designated. See Schedule B on file in the
Office of the City Clerk for the designated one-way streets and alleys (625
ILCS 5/11-708).
(2006 Code § 24-3-2; amd. 2018 Code)
   C.   Stop Streets: The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop
sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected pursuant to ordinance at
one or more entrances thereto and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the
vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at
such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event,
there shall be compliance with the directions of the police officer. See
Schedule A on file in the Office of the City Clerk for designated stop
intersections (625 ILCS 5/11-904(b)).
(2006 Code § 24-3-3; amd. 2018 Code)
   D.   Yield Right-Of-Way Streets: The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield
sign, in obedience to such sign, shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the
existing conditions and if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as
to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across
or within the intersection. (See Schedule C on file in the Office of the City
Clerk (625 ILCS 5/11-904(c)).
(2006 Code § 24-3-4; amd. 2018 Code)
   E.   Signs Posted: Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through,
stop and yield right-of-way streets, all one-way streets and alleys and all
stop intersections.
(2006 Code § 24-3-5)
6-3-3:   SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   General Speed Restrictions: The speed limits on the various streets
shall be approved by the City Council, but shall not exceed twenty (20) miles
per hour in a school zone and not to exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour on
a residential street; otherwise, thirty (30) miles per hour on an arterial
street unless otherwise posted. Schedule D on file in the Office of the City
Clerk shall list the applicable streets that have specific speed limits
thereon.
(2006 Code § 24-4-2; amd. 2018 Code)
   B.   Special Speed Limit While Passing Schools:
      1.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any
public thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school
during school days when school children are present.
      2.   This subsection shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets and maintained by the City or State wherein the school zone
is located.
   C.   Special Speed Limitations On Elevated Structures:
      1.   No person shall drive a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure
when such structure is signposted.
      2.   Upon the trial of any person charged with the violation of this
subsection, proof of the determination of the maximum speed by the City and the
existence of such signs is conclusive evidence of the maximum speed which can
be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   D.   Duty To Reduce Speed: A vehicle shall be driven upon the streets and
alleys of the City at a speed which is reasonable and proper with regard to
traffic conditions and the use of the street or alley. The fact that the
vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the
driver of the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an
intersection or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrian or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be decreased
as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or
entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care.
(2006 Code § 24-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-601 et seq.
6-3-4:   DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway within the City has been divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for traffic, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety. (2006 Code § 24-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-709
6-3-5:   U-TURNS PROHIBITED:
No driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn on any street or at any intersection
of any streets in the City.
(2006 Code § 24-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-802
6-3-6:   RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the City in a careless,
reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or
property.
(2006 Code § 24-4-8)
   B.   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in the City in a careless
manner so as to interfere with the safe or lawful operation of any other
vehicle or so as to interfere with or to injure, damage, or endanger persons or
property engaged in the lawful use of the street.
(2006 Code § 24-4-2)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-503
6-3-7:   TRANSPORTING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section and in Sections 6-
6.5 and 6-33 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, no driver may transport, carry,
possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon a public way in the City except in the original container and with
the seal unbroken.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection C and in Sections 6-6.5 and 6-33 of
the Liquor Control Act of 1934, no passenger may carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor within any passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a public
way in the City except in the original container and with the seal unbroken.
   C.   This section shall not apply to the passengers in a limousine when it
is being used for purposes for which a limousine is ordinarily used, the
passengers on a chartered bus when it is being used for purposes for which
chartered buses are ordinarily used or on a motor home or mini motor home as
defined in Section 1-145.01 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. However, the driver
of any such vehicle is prohibited from consuming or having any alcoholic liquor
in or about the driver’s area. Any evidence of alcoholic consumption by the
driver shall be prima facie evidence of such driver’s failure to obey this
section. For the purposes of this section, a limousine is a motor vehicle of
the first division with the passenger compartment enclosed by a partition or
dividing window used in the for-hire transportation of passengers and operated
by an individual in possession of a valid State driver’s license of the
appropriate classification pursuant to Section 6-104 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
(2006 Code § 24-4-4)
Cross-reference:
   See also section
3-2-21  of this Code
CHAPTER 4: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
6-4-1:   Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-4-2:   General Parking Restrictions
6-4-3:   Parking For Persons With Disabilities
6-4-4:   Snow Routes
6-4-5:   Truck Parking
6-4-6:   Load Limits
6-4-7:   Towing Illegally Parked Vehicles
6-4-8:   Parking Violations
6-4-9
:   Prima Facie Proof
6-4-1:   PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
   A.   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control devices, no person shall:
      1.   Stop, Stand Or Park A Vehicle:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
         b.   On a sidewalk.
         c.   Within an intersection.
         d.   On a crosswalk.
         e.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
         f.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
         h.   On any railroad tracks. A violation of this subsection A1h shall
result in a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fifty (50)
hours of community service.
         i.   On any controlled access highway.
         j.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
         k.   In any alley that is open and maintained.
         l.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
         m.   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
      2.   Stand Or Park A Vehicle (whether occupied or not, except momentarily
to pick up or discharge passengers):
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway.
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of
the roadway.
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
         f.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing or parking.
      3.   Parking A Vehicle (whether occupied or not, except temporarily for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers):
         a.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;
         b.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
         c.   In yellow zones.
   B.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(2006 Code § 24-6-4)
   C.   Schedules E, F and G on file in the Office of the City Clerk shall list
all applicable no parking zones.
(2006 Code § 24-6-4; amd. 2018 Code)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-1303
6-4-2:   GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Time Limit Parking: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a
period of time in excess of the amount of time designated by law and so posted.
(2006 Code § 24-6-1)
   B.   Parking For Sale, Repair Or Peddling: No person shall park a vehicle
upon any street for the purpose of:
      1.   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
      2.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except when emergency
repairs are necessary; or
      3.   Peddling merchandise.
(2006 Code § 24-6-2)
   C.   Private Property: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any
private property without the consent of the owner of the property.
(2006 Code § 24-6-3)
6-4-3:   PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Designated Parking: Certain parking spaces within the confines of the
City shall be designated for use by vehicles of persons with disabilities only
and will be posted with appropriate signs to that effect.
   B.   Use Of Designated Parking Spaces: The use of designated parking
locations for persons with disabilities, duly posted and signed, shall, to that
effect, be open to any vehicle which bears the appropriate Illinois person with
disabilities registration plate issued by the Secretary of State for the State
of Illinois, or a valid parking permit for persons with disabilities issued by
another governmental agency or which bears a person with disabilities card
furnished in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.1, et.
seq., furnished by the City.
   C.   Application For Registration Plate: The issuance of an Illinois person
with disabilities motor vehicle registration plate shall be made with the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois at any facility provided and
approved for that purpose by the Secretary of State.
   D.   Removal Of Vehicles In Violation; Penalty: Any vehicle parked in
violation of this section in a posted designated space for persons with
disabilities which does not bear an Illinois person with disabilities
registration plate, or a valid person with disabilities parking permit issued
by another governmental agency, or a City person with disabilities registration
card will be ticketed, and the vehicle will be removed in accordance with
departmental policies and in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-1302. The registered owner of the vehicle, as ascertained by the
registration plates of the vehicle, will be presumed to be in control of the
vehicle and will be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00). The same registered
owner will be held liable for the cost of removal of the vehicle and must pay
that cost, plus storage charges, if any, prior to the release of the vehicle.
   E.   Parking Areas For Persons With Disabilities: Those places designated as
“Parking Spaces For Persons With Disabilities” are listed in Schedule H on file
in the Office of the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 24-6-5; amd. 2018 Code)
Statutory reference:
   See 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1 et seq.
6-4-4:   SNOW ROUTES:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on the following designated streets at
any time within eighteen (18) hours after a snowfall of three inches (3") or
more, unless the street has been cleared of snow. Those streets designated as
snow routes to be included in the restrictions herein established shall be as
identified and provided in Schedule I on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 24-6-10; amd. 2018 Code)
6-4-5:   TRUCK PARKING:
No person shall park any vehicle, vehicles or trailer the length of which
exceeds twenty feet (20') or any second division vehicle licensed for an F
classification or higher:
   A.   Upon any street, alley or any public way within the City except for the
purpose and time period reasonably necessary to load and unload the same.
   B.   Upon public or private property within the City with the motor running
for a continuous period in excess of thirty (30) minutes.
(2006 Code § 24-6-2)
6-4-6:   LOAD LIMITS:
   A.   Established: There are hereby established gross load limits on City
streets listed in Schedule J on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The term
“gross load limit” shall mean the total weight of a vehicle and the load it is
carrying. The specified streets and the load limits are listed in Schedule J on
file in the Office of the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 24-6-6; amd. 2018 Code)
   B.   Restrictions: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any street
where the operation is prohibited by this section and where such signs of
prohibition are posted; except, that a vehicle may be driven on such street for
not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose of making
deliveries or picking up loads.
   C.   Exceptions: This section shall not include pickup trucks, trucks
operated by the City for maintenance and repairs on the street or the operation
of a vehicle owned by the U.S. government or State of Illinois while on lawful
business of these agencies.
(2006 Code § 24-6-6)
6-4-7:   TOWING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away,
by commercial towing service, any car, boat, trailer, or other vehicle
illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes
a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct
the movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in
any public street or other public place for a period of twenty four (24) hours.
   B.   Vehicles towed away shall be stored on any City property or in a public
garage or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof
after payment of the expense incurred by the City in removing and storing such
vehicle(s).
(2006 Code § 24-6-7)
6-4-8:   PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Fines: Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting
parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may be parked may settle and compromise the claim against him or her
for such illegal parking by paying the City twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for
each such offense and if not paid within fifteen (15) days the fines shall
double and be turned in for collection. Such payment may be made at City Hall,
and a receipt shall be issued for ail monies so received, and such monies shall
be promptly turned over to the Treasurer to be credited to the General Fund.
The members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to refrain from
instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense involved for at least fifteen
(15) days.
(Ord. 770, 11-21-2023)
   B.   Nonapplicability To Certain Vehicles: Provided, this section shall not
apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of
any place where Police and Fire Department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed or so as to block an emergency entrance in a
hospital. Nor shall this section apply to any person charged with parking a
vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or parking in
such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only;
nor to any person who refuses to remove a vehicle illegally parked at the
request of any member of the Police Department.
   C.   Removal Of Vehicle: Any vehicle illegally parked for a period in excess
of twenty four (24) hours may be removed by a towing service authorized by the
Cit Police Department. In any emergency, any vehicle may be removed by any
means when authorized by the City Police Department.
(2006 Code § 24-6-8)
   D.   City Parking Lots: No person shall park a motor vehicle on a City
parking lot unattended for more than five (5) consecutive days except on those
lots which prohibit overnight parking as provided in Schedule F on file in the
Office of the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 24-6-8; amd. 2018 Code)
   E.   Parking Violation Ticket: Parking violation tickets will be issued by
the City Police Department.
(2006 Code § 24-6-11)
6-4-9:   PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked or operated is registered in
the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was
in control of the vehicle at the time of the violation.
(2006 Code § 24-6-9)
CHAPTER 5: VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND CONDITION
Section
6-5-1:   State Equipment Regulations Adopted
6-5-2:   Noise Control
6-5-3:   Bicycle Equipment
6-5-1:   STATE EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 12, entitled
“Equipment of Vehicles”, as passed, approved, and amended by the Illinois
General Assembly, is hereby adopted by the City, and the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 24-5-1)
6-5-2:   NOISE CONTROL:
   A.   Muffler Required; Cutout Prohibited: No motor vehicle shall be operated
on any street unless such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient
actual working condition; and the use of a cutout is prohibited. No muffler
shall cause an unreasonably loud or excessive noise (625 ILCS 5/12-602).
(2006 Code § 24-5-2)
   B.   Sound Amplification Systems: No driver of any motor vehicle within the
City shall operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system which
can be heard outside the vehicle from seventy five feet (75') or more when the
vehicle is being operated upon a highway, unless such system is being operated
to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.
(2006 Code § 24-5-3)
   C.   Engine Brakes Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for an operator of a
motor truck vehicle to use or operate engine brakes on all public highways or
streets within the corporate limits, unless it is an emergency (625 ILCS 5/12-
602.1).
(2006 Code § 24-5-4)
   D.   Excessive Noise:
      1.   Stopped Vehicle: No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the
motor vehicle is stopped, unreasonably accelerate the engine thereof with the
gears of the vehicle in neutral, thereby causing an unreasonably loud or
excessive noise.
(2006 Code § 24-4-5)
      2.   Wheels: No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when the motor vehicle
is stopped, accelerate the engine with the gears of such vehicle in neutral
and, while so accelerating the engine, shift the gears of the vehicle into a
forward or reverse movement, thereby causing an unreasonably loud noise with
the drive wheels of the vehicle.
(2006 Code § 24-4-6)
      3.   Squealing Tires: No operator of a motor vehicle shall cause the
wheels of such vehicle to spin violently, thereby causing an unreasonably loud
or excessive noise.
(2006 Code § 24-4-7)
      4.   While Driving: No operator of a motor vehicle shall, when operating
the vehicle, accelerate the vehicle or rapidly stop the vehicle causing an
unreasonably loud noise (625 ILCS 5/11-505).
(2006 Code § 24-4-9)
6-5-3:   BICYCLE EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type approved by the Department which shall be visible from all distances from
one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred
feet (500') feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red
reflector.
   B.   A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle any siren. This subsection B does not apply to a bicycle that is a
police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
   C.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle.
(2006 Code § 24-2-8)
CHAPTER 6: SKATEBOARDS AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
6-6-1:   Definitions
6-6-2:   Operation Of Skateboards And Toy Vehicles
6-6-3:   Damaging City Property
6-6-4:   Skateboard Ramps
6-6-5:   Violations; Agreement For Impoundment
6-6-1:   DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different
meaning is intended:
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The City business district.
SKATEBOARD: A device with wheels for riding upon, usually standing, including,
without limitations, skateboards of all types.
TOY VEHICLES: Coasters, scooters, roller skates, or any other nonmotorized
device with wheels or rollers upon which a person may ride. This definition
does not apply, so long as they are used for the purposes for which they are
intended, to wagons, wheelchairs and strollers or other devices designed and
used for the purpose of transporting children, infants, physically challenged,
or incapacitated persons, or to bicycles, or to carts or other devices intended
and used for transporting merchandise or materials.
(2006 Code § 27-10-1)
6-6-2:   OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS AND TOY VEHICLES:
   A.   Streets: No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on a
public street if there is a sidewalk adjacent to such street. If no sidewalk
exists, skateboards may be ridden on the street, provided street riding shall
be done as far to the right side of the road as possible, and in the same
direction as traffic.
(2006 Code § 27-10-2)
   B.   Clinging To Vehicle: No person operating a skateboard, toy vehicle, or
other nonmotorized device shall attach himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
(2006 Code § 27-10-3)
   C.   Yield Right-Of-Way: Any person operating a skateboard or other toy
vehicle must yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian or motor vehicle.
(2006 Code § 27-10-4)
   D.   Private Property:
      1.   No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on the premises
of any business, residence, or other private property in violation of a sign
complying with this subsection.
      2.   Areas in which skateboarding or operation of a toy vehicle is
prohibited must be indicated by one or more signs which are positioned to
provide notice and which contain the words “No Skateboarding” or any other word
or combination of words indicating that skateboarding or operation of a toy
vehicle is prohibited. Letters on the sign must be clearly legible.
(2006 Code § 27-10-5)
   E.   Public Property: No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle
in, upon, or on the grounds of any public property.
(2006 Code § 27-10-6)
   F.   Business District: No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle
within the City’s business district.
(2006 Code § 27-10-7)
6-6-3:   DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY:
No person shall operate a skateboard or toy vehicle on or against any
Municipally owned table, bench, structure, tennis court, parking stop,
retaining wall, fountain, statue, or other improvement which may suffer damage
by such use.
(2006 Code § 27-10-8)
6-6-4:   SKATEBOARD RAMPS:
No person shall use or place a ramp, jump, or any other device used to force a
skateboard or toy vehicle off the pavement onto the grounds of a Municipally
owned parking lot, park or sidewalk.
(2006 Code § 27-10-9)
6-6-5:   VIOLATIONS; AGREEMENT FOR IMPOUNDMENT:
In place of any other penalty provided by law, any person violating this
chapter may, for a first offense, agree to have the skateboard or play vehicle
impounded by the Police Department for one week.
(2006 Code § 27-10-10)
CHAPTER 7: NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES, GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY-TERRAIN
VEHICLES
Section
6-7-1:   Findings
6-7-2:   Definitions
6-7-3:   Age Requirement
6-7-4:   Driver’s License Required
6-7-5:   Insurance Requirements
6-7-6:   Local Permit Requirements
6-7-7:   Required Equipment
6-7-8:   Operation Under The Influence
6-7-9:   Authorization
6-7-1:   FINDINGS:
After full and careful consideration of the volume, speed and character of
traffic on the streets, roads, and alleys of the City, the City Council does
hereby determine and find that the public safety will not be jeopardized by the
authorization of the operation of neighborhood electric vehicles, golf carts,
and utility-terrain vehicles. And further, the City Council does hereby
determine and find that neighborhood electric vehicles may safely travel on or
across the streets, roads, highways and alleys of the City.
(2006 Code § 24-8-1)
6-7-2:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed for the purpose of transporting one
or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in
the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf or maintaining the condition
of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electronically powered four-
wheeled motor vehicle which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more
than twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per
hour, and which conforms to Federal regulations under title 49 CFR part
157.500.
UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electronically powered four-wheeled
motor vehicle or a self-propelled gasoline powered four-wheeled motor vehicle
with an engine displacement under one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic
centimeters which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than
twenty (20) miles per hour and which conforms to the Federal regulations under
title 49 CFR part 157.500.
(2006 Code § 24-8-2)
6-7-3:   AGE REQUIREMENT:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be permitted to operate
neighborhood electric vehicles, golf carts, or utility-terrain vehicles at any
time within the City limits.
(2006 Code § 24-8-6)
6-7-4:   DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, or utility-
terrain vehicle upon any street, road, highway or alley in the City unless he
or she has a valid Illinois driver’s license issued in his or her name by the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
(2006 Code § 24-8-5)
6-7-5:   INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, or utility-
terrain vehicle upon any street, road, highway or alley in the City unless he
or she has complied with the minimum liability insurance requirements imposed
upon a vehicle operator by the Statutes of the State of Illinois and has proof
of such minimum liability insurance coverage on or in his or her possession at
all times while operating said neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, or
utility terrain vehicle.
(2006 Code § 24-8-7)
6-7-6:   LOCAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, or
utility-terrain vehicle may be operated on any street, road, highway or alley
in the City unless such neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart or utility-
terrain vehicle has a valid permit for operation issued by the City. Permits
shall be issued by the Chief of Police.
   B.   Application For Permit: The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare an application form which shall be required as a part of
the process to initiate a request for a permit.
   C.   Permit Fee: Upon submission of a completed application for permit, a
fee of thirty dollars ($30.00), payable to the City, shall be collected by the
Chief of Police before the application is processed. The fee shall be
nonrefundable and shall apply to each neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart,
and utility-terrain vehicle.
   D.   Inspection Of Vehicles: The Chief of Police shall cause an inspection
of each neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, and utility-terrain vehicle
to assure compliance with the various provisions of this chapter.
   E.   Issuance Of Permit: If the Chief of Police or his designee is satisfied
that the application is properly completed, the fee received, and the
inspection discloses compliance with each provision of this chapter, the Chief
of Police shall issue a permit on a form to be determined by the Chief of
Police.
   F.   Display Of Permit: The permit must be permanently affixed to the
neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, and utility-terrain vehicle for which
it is applicable.
   G.   Term Of Permit: Regardless of the day of issuance, a permit shall be
valid for the remainder of the calendar year.
   H.   Renewals: A new application, fee and inspection shall be required for
operation of a neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, and utility-terrain
vehicle with regard to any subsequent calendar year.
(2006 Code § 24-8-8)
6-7-7:   REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
No neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart, or utility-terrain vehicle may be
operated on any streets, roads, highways and alleys in the City unless, at a
minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rear view
mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in front and rear, a slow moving
emblem as required of other vehicles in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-709
on the rear of the neighborhood electric vehicle, golf cart or utility-terrain
vehicle a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillamp that emits a red light visible
from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear, brake lights, and turn
signals. When operated on streets, roads, highways and alleys, neighborhood
electric vehicles, golf carts, and utility-terrain vehicles shall have its
headlight and taillamps lighted as required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/12-201.
(2006 Code § 24-8-3)
6-7-8:   OPERATION UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a neighborhood electric
vehicle, golf cart, or utility-terrain vehicle on a street, road, highway or
alley of the City while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is subject to
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes Section 5/11-500 through 5/11-501.9.
(2006 Code § 24-8-4)
6-7-9:   AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   The operation of neighborhood electric vehicles, golf carts, and
utility-terrain vehicles upon the streets, roads, highways and alleys of the
City is hereby allowed, so long as the operation of the vehicles is in full
compliance with this chapter. The Public Works Department is hereby authorized
and directed to erect appropriate signage in relation to the adoption of this
chapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no neighborhood electric vehicle, golf
cart, or utility-terrain vehicle shall be operated upon or across the highways
of the State of Illinois within the City, those being all of Main Street and
all of Market Street until and unless the operation of neighborhood electric
vehicles, golf carts, and utility-terrain vehicles is specifically authorized
by the Illinois Department of Transportation upon or across those highways.
(2006 Code § 24-8-9)
CHAPTER 8: ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
Section
6-8-1:   Abandonment Prohibited
6-8-2:   Notice To Police Of Abandoned, Lost, Stolen Or Unclaimed Vehicle
6-8-3:   Towing Abandoned Vehicle From Highway
6-8-4:   Police Tows; Reports, Release Of Vehicle, Payment
6-8-5:   Records Searches To Identify Owner
6-8-6:   Identifying And Tracing Vehicle
6-8-7:   Reclamation Of Vehicle
6-8-8:   Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
6-8-9
:   Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles Without Notice
6-8-10:   Disposal Of Hazardous Dilapidated Vehicles
6-8-11:   Collection Of Unpaid Charges
6-8-12:   Police Record For Disposed Vehicles
6-8-13:   Disposition Of Public Sale Proceeds
6-8-14:   Nonliability Of Police And Towing Company
6-8-15
:   Penalty And Costs
6-8-1:   ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the
City is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth under section
6-8-15 of this chapter.
   B.   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in the
City is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned
vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall
be authorized for removal by the City after a waiting period of seven (7) days
or more, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a hazardous
dilapidated motor vehicle under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-3.1. A
violation of this subsection is subject to penalties as set forth under section
6-8-15 of this chapter.
   C.   A towing service may begin to process an unclaimed vehicle as abandoned
by requesting a record search by the Secretary of State up to ten (10) days
after the date of the tow, or any later date acceptable to the Secretary of
State. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of the City or a law enforcement agency.
(2006 Code § 24-7-1)
6-8-2:   NOTICE TO POLICE OF ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLE:
When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into the temporary
possession or custody of a person in the City, not the owner of the vehicle,
such person shall immediately notify the City police when the vehicle is within
the corporate limits of the City or the State Police or the County Sheriff when
the vehicle is outside the corporate limits of the City. Upon receipt of such
notification, the City police will authorize a towing service to remove and
take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle. The towing
service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record
of the tow as set forth in section
6-8-4 of this chapter for law enforcement agencies, until the vehicle is
claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof
or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
(2006 Code § 24-7-2; amd. 2018 Code)
6-8-3:   TOWING ABANDONED VEHICLE FROM HIGHWAY:
   A.   When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban district ten (10)
hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the City
Police Department.
   B.   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway other than
a toll highway, interstate highway, or expressway, outside of an urban district
for twenty four (24) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by the City Police Department.
   C.   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the
highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its
immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to the highway
by a towing service may be authorized by the City Police Department.
(2006 Code § 24-7-3)
6-8-4:   POLICE TOWS; REPORTS, RELEASE OF VEHICLES, PAYMENT:
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided in section
6-8-2 or
6-8-3 of this chapter:
   A.   The authorization, any hold order, and any release shall be in writing,
or confirmed in writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
   B.   The Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license
plate year and number and registration sticker year and number displayed on the
vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed
from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer
authorizing the tow.
   C.   The owner, operator, or other legally entitled person shall be
responsible to the towing service for payment of applicable removal, towing,
storage, and processing charges and collection costs associated with a vehicle
towed or held under order or authorization of the Police Department. If a
vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of the Police Department is
seized and sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing charges
and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service from the proceeds of
the sale. If applicable law provides that the proceeds are to be paid into the
Treasury of the City, then any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing
charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service from the
Treasury of the City. That payment shall not, however, exceed the amount of
proceeds from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner, operator, or
other legally entitled person.
   D.   Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a
vehicle subject to a hold order shall be released to the owner, operator, or
other legally entitled person upon proof of ownership or other entitlement and
upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs.
(2006 Code § 24-7-4)
6-8-5:   RECORDS SEARCHES TO IDENTIFY OWNER:
   A.   When the City Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, the department
will cause the vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be
searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the required
ownership information.
   B.   The City Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of
the State police to be searched by a directed communication to the State police
for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the State police files
are searched with negative results, the information contained in the National
Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the State police. The
information determined from these records searches will be returned to the City
Police Department for the department’s use in sending a notification by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled
persons advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made
and setting forth public sale information. Notification shall be sent no later
than ten (10) business days after the date the Police Department impounds or
authorizes the impounding of a vehicle; provided, that if the department is
unable to determine the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten (10)
business day period after impoundment, then notification shall be sent no later
than two (2) days after the date the identity of the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded
vehicle is determined. Exceptions to a notification by certified mail to the
registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons are set forth
in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-209.
   C.   1.   When ownership information is needed for a towing service to give
notification as required under this chapter, the towing service may cause the
vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched by the
Secretary of State.
      2.   The written request of a towing service, in the form and containing
the information prescribed by the Secretary of State by rule, may be
transmitted to the Secretary of State in person, by U.S. mail or other delivery
service, by facsimile transmission, or by other means the Secretary of State
deems acceptable.
      3.   The Secretary of State shall provide the required information, or a
statement that the information was not found in the vehicle registration
records of the State, by U.S. mail or other delivery service, facsimile
transmission, as requested by the towing service, or by other means acceptable
to the Secretary of State.
   D.   The Secretary of State may prescribe standards and procedures for
submission of requests for record searches and replies via computer link.
(2006 Code § 24-7-5)
   E.   Fees for services provided under this section shall be in amounts
prescribed by the Secretary of State under section 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-821.1. Payment may be made by the towing service using cash, any
commonly accepted credit card, or any other means of payment deemed acceptable
by the Secretary of State.
(2006 Code § 24-7-5; amd. 2018 Code)
6-8-6:   IDENTIFYING AND TRACING VEHICLE:
When the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of
this State or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the City Police Department shall notify the State Police for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the State Police will be
immediately forwarded to the Police Department for notification purposes as set
forth in section
6-8-5 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 24-7-6)
6-8-7:   RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided in
section
6-8-8 of this chapter, the owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled
to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the City Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person
under this section until all towing, storage, and processing charges have been
paid.
(2006 Code § 24-7-7)
6-8-8:   SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicles Seven Years Of Age Or Newer: When an abandoned, lost, stolen
or unclaimed vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person for a period of
thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided in sections
6-8-5 and
6-8-6 of this chapter, the City Police Department or towing service having
possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a
person licensed as an automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor
under chapter 5 of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes or the towing operator which
towed the vehicle.
(2006 Code § 24-7-8; amd. 2018 Code)
   B.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a
conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises
where the vehicle has been impounded.
      2.   At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the City Police Department
or the towing service where the vehicle is impounded shall cause a notice of
the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered
owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons.
      3.   Notice as provided in sections
6-8-5 and
6-8-6 of this chapter and as provided in this subsection shall state the time
and place of sale and shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be
sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled persons to reclaim
the vehicle.
      4.   If an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer
plates, notice under this subsection and section
6-8-9 of this chapter shall be sent to both the dealer and the registered
owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons.
      5.   In those instances where the certified notification specified in
sections
6-8-5 and
6-8-6 of this chapter has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police
Department or towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not
be required.
(2006 Code § 24-7-8)
6-8-9:   DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES WITHOUT NOTICE:
   A.   Vehicle Seven Years Of Age Or Newer: When the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled persons of an
abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot
be determined by any means provided in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as
provided in section
6-8-8 of this chapter without notice to any person whose identity cannot be
determined.
   B.   Vehicle Over Seven Years Of Age: When an abandoned vehicle of more than
seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, or when any
such vehicle is towed at the request or with the consent of the owner or
operator and is subsequently abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage
for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of
the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons and
contacting the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons
by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition and an examination of the State Police stolen vehicle files for
theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period,
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons, the vehicle
may be disposed of in either of the following ways:
      1.   The Police Department will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as
junk or salvage.
      2.   The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner provided in
section
6-8-8 of this chapter; provided, that said section shall not apply to vehicles
towed by order or authorization of the Police Department.
   C.   Antique Vehicle: A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, custom
vehicle, or street rod may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore
it.
(2006 Code § 24-7-9)
6-8-10:   DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED VEHICLES:
Any hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-3.1, whether impounded
at a public facility or on the property of private towing service, shall be
kept in custody for a period of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining
the identity of the registered owner or lienholder and contacting such owner or
lienholder, if known, by regular U.S. mail. At the expiration of the ten (10)
day period, without benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner or lienholder, the Police Department will authorize the
disposal of the vehicle as junk.
(2006 Code § 24-7-10)
6-8-11:   COLLECTION OF UNPAID CHARGES:
In an action to collect towing, storage, and processing charges that remain
unpaid after disposition of a vehicle towed or relocated under this chapter,
the towing service may recover reasonable collection costs.
(2006 Code § 24-7-11)
6-8-12:   POLICE RECORD FOR DISPOSED VEHICLES:
When a vehicle in the custody of the City Police Department is reclaimed by the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, or when the
vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the Police
Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(2006 Code § 24-7-12)
6-8-13:   DISPOSITION OF PUBLIC SALE PROCEEDS:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits is authorized to be towed
away by the Police Department and disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the
proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing,
storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles disposed of or sold
at public sale under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-107(k).
(2006 Code § 24-7-13)
6-8-14:   NONLIABILITY OF POLICE AND TOWING COMPANY:
   A.   The Police Department, or a towing service owner, operator, or employee
shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by
the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative,
lienholder or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle
when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this
chapter.
   B.   A towing service, and any of its officers or employees, that removes or
tows a vehicle as a result of being directed to do so by the Police Department
shall not be held to answer or be liable for injury to, loss of, or damages to
any real or personal property that occurs in the course of the removal or
towing of a vehicle or its contents on a limited access highway in a designated
incident management program that uses fast lane clearance techniques as defined
by the Department of Transportation.
(2006 Code § 24-7-14)
6-8-15:   PENALTY AND COSTS:
   A.   Fine And Costs: Any person who violates section
6-8-1 of this chapter or who aids and abets in that violation shall be subject
to a mandatory fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   B.   Responsibility For Costs:
      1.   When a vehicle is abandoned, it shall be presumed that the last
registered owner is responsible for the abandonment and shall be liable for all
towing, storage, and processing charges and collection costs, less any amounts
realized in the disposal of the vehicle. The last registered owner's liability
for storage fees may not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) days’ storage fees.
      2.   The presumption established under this subsection may be rebutted by
a showing that, prior to the time of the tow:
         a.   A report of vehicle theft was filed with respect to the vehicle;
or
         b.   The vehicle was sold or transferred and the last registered owner
provides the towing service with the correct identity and address of the new
owner at the time of the sale or transfer.
      3.   If the presumption established under this subsection is rebutted,
the person responsible for theft of the vehicle or to whom the vehicle was sold
or transferred is liable for all towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection costs.
(2006 Code § 24-7-15)
TITLE 7: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
7-1-1:   Public Works Department
7-1-2:   Responsibility Of Persons
7-1-3:   Deposits On Public Ways
7-1-4:   Street Closures
7-1-5:   Stormwater Drains
7-1-6:   Obstructing Public Ways
7-1-7:   Merchandise And Advertising On Public Ways
7-1-8:   Posting Bills
7-1-9:   Additional Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-1-1:   PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Department Established; Composition: There is hereby established a
department of the Municipal government which shall be known as the Public Works
Department. It shall embrace the Director and the employees.
(2006 Code § 34-1-1)
   B.   Mayor To Supervise: The Mayor shall exercise a general supervision over
the affairs of the Public Works Department. He shall ascertain the needs and
conditions thereof and shall, from time to time, report the same to the City
Council.
(2006 Code § 34-1-2)
   C.   Director: The Mayor shall appoint a Director of the Public Works
Department, with the advice and consent of the City Council. The term shall
expire at the first regular City Council meeting of the following May.
(2006 Code § 34-1-3)
7-1-2:   RESPONSIBILITY OF PERSONS:
   A.   Open Doors, Gates And Gratings: No person shall open or allow to remain
open, any door, any gate, or the grating of any vault belonging to the premises
occupied by him, on any street, alley or sidewalk in the City for any purpose,
except the taking in and removing of goods; and any person allowing such
grating to remain open shall warn passersby of the danger.
(2006 Code § 34-2-2)
   B.   Repairing Sidewalks, Pavements Or Cellar Doors: Whenever any sidewalk,
pavement, or cellar door on the same becomes worn out or out of repair, or is
torn up or broken and uneven, it shall be the duty of the Street Superintendent
to immediately report such fact to the Mayor or Street and Alley Committee, and
upon verbal or written order from either of them, to give notice to the party
owning the adjoining property to repair such sidewalk or cellar door without
delay.
(2006 Code § 34-2-3)
   C.   Stairway Railings: Steps or stairways leading into any building shall
not extend from the wall of such building onto any pavement or sidewalk.
(2006 Code § 34-2-4)
   D.   Grass Mowing On Property Lines: Property owners and/or their tenants
shall be jointly and separately responsible for mowing the grass or weeds
between the property lines and the adjoining street surfaces. The height of the
grass or weeds shall not exceed six inches (6").
(2006 Code § 34-2-19)
7-1-3:   DEPOSITS ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk, any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
   B.   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory
to delivery; provided, that the usable width is not thereby reduced to less
than four feet (4'); and provided, that no such article being delivered shall
remain on such walk for more than thirty (30) minutes.
(2006 Code § 34-2-8)
7-1-4:   STREET CLOSURES:
Whenever public safety or the improvement or repair of any street, alley or
public place requires it, the Mayor may order any street, alley, or public
place temporarily closed to traffic and the placing of signs indicating that
the street, alley or public place is closed by order of the Mayor. Whenever
such signs are so placed, no person shall ride or drive upon or cross such
street, alley or public place, or in any manner destroy, deface, or remove any
such sign.
(2006 Code § 34-2-5)
7-1-5:   STORMWATER DRAINS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or permit the
construction of any stormwater drain or any drainage pipe in either a natural
or manmade ditch without having first obtained a permit therefor.
      2.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made
to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a statement as to the purpose of
such drainage pipe, the premises to be served and the specification of such
pipe to be installed.
      3.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: Such application shall be referred to
the Street Superintendent, and no such permit shall be issued unless he shall
have found that there would be compliance with this Code by the installation of
such stormwater drain or drainage pipe, and that the installation of such
stormwater drain or drainage pipe would not interfere with, overload, obstruct
or otherwise adversely affect the existing stormwater drainage system within
the City.
   B.   Prohibited Places Of Discharge: It shall be unlawful to construct or
permit the construction of any stormwater drain which discharges water onto any
sidewalk in the City, and it shall be unlawful to construct or permit the
maintenance of any such drain which discharges into any public street or alley
at a height greater than eighteen inches (18") above the ground or pavement.
(2006 Code § 34-2-10)
7-1-6:   OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   The Street Superintendent may move any obstruction on any street or
sidewalk of the City, but before doing so, he shall notify the person
responsible therefor to remove such obstruction within a reasonable time after
being notified.
   B.   Any person engaged in erecting a building or fence or improving any lot
on such street may deposit materials thereon and contiguous thereto such length
of time as may be necessary for the work. The obstruction shall not extend to
more than one-half (½) of the width of the sidewalk, street, or alley adjacent
to such improvement, and the gutter shall always be left free and unobstructed.
At night, such person shall keep an illuminated warning light on such material.
(2006 Code § 34-2-11)
   C.   It shall be unlawful to deposit any material on any street which may be
harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any grass clippings,
or to cause a lawn mower to blow grass clippings onto a street or any other
articles such as glass which may cause injury to any person, animal or
property.
   D.   No person shall place or cause to be placed or erected on any public
ground, or in any public street, alley or sidewalk in the City, any debris,
materials, or obstruction, except as may be permitted by this Code.
   E.   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to exercise a vigilant
supervision over such places and to notify any person found making such deposit
or responsible for same to remove the offending matter at once.
(2006 Code § 34-2-9)
7-1-7:   MERCHANDISE AND ADVERTISING ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street or
other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale,
or to write or make any signs or advertisements on any such pavements, unless
permission is granted by the City Council.
(2006 Code § 34-2-12)
7-1-8:   POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone, or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any tree,
lamppost, utility pole, or hydrant, or upon any private wall, door or gate
without the consent, in writing, of the owner of such curbstone, flagstone,
sidewalk, tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, private wall, door or gate.
(2006 Code § 34-2-14)
7-1-9:   ADDITIONAL PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Undermining: No person shall undermine in any manner any street or any
other ground or real estate situated in the City or belonging to any private
person.
(2006 Code § 34-2-1)
   B.   Signs Over Public Ways: No person shall place any sign, advertisement
or banner over any or across any street, alley or sidewalk in the City, unless
he has written approval of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 34-2-6)
   C.   Signs On Poles And Posts: No person shall nail, tack, paste, paint or
fasten, or cause to be nailed, tacked, painted or fastened, any sign or any
other foreign substance or material onto any telephone, electric light, police
and/or fire alarm pole or post, or any street or traffic sign located on any
sidewalk, street, alley or public grounds or injure or deface any such pole or
post.
(2006 Code § 34-2-15)
   D.   Vehicles On Sidewalks And Bike Paths: No person shall operate or park
any motor vehicle on or over any sidewalk or bike path, except in crossing the
same to go into a yard or parking lot.
(2006 Code § 34-2-7)
   E.   Encroachments: It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building
or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property.
(2006 Code § 34-2-13)
   F.   Injury To New Pavements: It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any
vehicle or animal upon or destroy any newly laid sidewalk pavement while the
same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any
soft, newly laid pavement.
(2006 Code § 34-2-16)
   G.   Burning On Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any
leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets,
sidewalks or alleys in the City.
(2006 Code § 34-2-18)
CHAPTER 2: EXCAVATIONS
Section
7-2-1:   Permit Requirements
7-2-2:   Supervision Of Work
7-2-3:   Liability For Improper Restoration
7-2-4:   Protection Of Excavations
7-2-1:   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to make an
excavation in a City street without first obtaining a permit therefor as
provided in this section.
(2006 Code § 34-4-1)
   B.   Application For Permit: Applications for a permit required by this
section shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the City Clerk to the
City Clerk. The application shall be made by the owner of the property to be
benefited by the excavation or by the duly authorized agent of the owner, and
shall contain a clear and exact description of the property, the purpose for
which the excavation is proposed to be made, the nature and character of the
water or sewer tap if desired and drains, if any, proposed to be put in.
(2006 Code § 34-4-2)
   C.   Deposit Required: At the time of making an application for a permit
required by this section, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk the
sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), which deposit the City shall have
the right to hold for ninety (90) days.
(2006 Code § 34-4-3)
   D.   Issuance Of Permit; Notice To Superintendent: Upon the issuance of a
permit required by this section, it shall be the duty of the person to whom the
permit is granted to present the permit to the Superintendent of Streets and to
notify him of the nature and character of the excavation proposed to be made
and the time proposed for the making thereof.
(2006 Code § 34-4-4)
7-2-2:   SUPERVISION OF WORK:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the City to personally superintend the making
of any excavation subject to this chapter and the backfilling thereof, and the
City's representative shall cause all excavations so made to be backfilled in
the best possible manner and the pavement to be replaced as nearly as possible
to its original condition.
   B.   All workers engaged in the work of making excavations subject to this
chapter and the backfilling thereof, shall at all times be under the direction
and control of the City.
(2006 Code § 34-4-5)
7-2-3:   LIABILITY FOR IMPROPER RESTORATION:
If the property owner to whom a permit was issued pursuant to this chapter does
not properly refill the excavation and place the street in as good condition as
it was originally, the City may then repair the excavation and charge the
property owner for the labor and materials expended thereon.
(2006 Code § 34-4-6)
7-2-4:   PROTECTION OF EXCAVATIONS:
Whenever any person is engaged in making an excavation subject to this chapter,
if the excavation, when left exposed, should be dangerous to persons or
vehicles, the person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall
erect a fence or railing at the excavation or work in such a manner as to
prevent danger to persons, and shall so maintain such fence or railing until
such work is completed or danger removed. It shall also be the duty of such
person to place upon the railing or fence at sunset, suitable and sufficient
red or yellow lights and keep them burning through the night during the
performance of such work.
(2006 Code § 34-4-7)
CHAPTER 3: STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Section
7-3-1:   Sidewalks
7-3-2:   Curbs And Gutters
7-3-3:   Storm Sewers
7-3-1:   SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay or
construct any sidewalk along any property in the City or along any of the
streets, alleys, or public highways thereon, without first filing an
application for a permit with the City Clerk which shall be approved by the
City Council.
   B.   Grade And Other Restrictions: No sidewalk shall be built above or below
the established grade of the City, and in all cases where no grade is
established, any person building a sidewalk shall build the same according to
the instructions of the Street Superintendent and the City Council. No one
shall build a sidewalk unless it consists of new construction. No one shall
remove or destroy a sidewalk without replacing the same with a new sidewalk.
   C.   Costs: If the funds are available and the City Council approves the
request, the property owner shall pay one-half (½) of the cost of the
construction, including engineering fees, and thereafter, the sidewalk shall be
maintained by the City.
   D.   Exemptions: This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2006 Code § 34-5-1)
7-3-2:   CURBS AND GUTTERS:
   A.   Request For Construction Specifications: Any person owning property
within the City who desires to have new curbs and gutters constructed along the
street adjoining his premises shall file a request with the Street
Superintendent, giving the location of the property and the length of the curbs
and gutters requested. All installations shall conform to the requirements of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-80-11 and the Environmental Barriers Act
(410 ILCS 25/1 et seq.)
   B.   Costs: If the funds are available and the City Council approves the
request, the property owner shall pay one-half (½) of the cost of the
construction, including engineering fees, and thereafter, the curbs and gutters
shall be maintained by the City.
   C.   Approval Of Request: The approval of the request for construction of
curbs and gutters by the City Council shall be dependent upon the approval of
funds, priority of projects and continuity of construction for the best benefit
of the City as determined by the City Council.
   D.   Exemptions: This section is not applicable to new subdivisions.
(2006 Code § 34-5-2)
7-3-3:   STORM SEWERS:
   A.   Description: Stormwater sewers shall be any pipe or sewer used for the
carrying of surface drains, groundwaters, roof leaders, or stormwaters,
rainwaters, or other waters other than sanitary sewage.
   B.   Permit Required: Before any connection is made to the public stormwater
sewers, a permit shall be applied for and approved by the Superintendent or his
designated representative.
   C.   Supervision: The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Departments
shall supervise all connections made to the public storm sewer system or
excavations for the purposes of installing or repairing the same.
   D.   Use Of The Sewers: Where a stormwater sewer is accessible in a street,
alley or easement to a building or premises abutting thereon, the surface
drains, groundwaters, roof leaders, or stormwaters shall be discharged into the
stormwater sewer unless otherwise authorized by the City. Under no conditions
shall sanitary sewage or wastes or any substance other than surface waters,
groundwaters, roof waters or stormwaters be permitted to flow into or be
connected to the stormwater sewer, and no sanitary sewer shall be connected to
the stormwater sewer system.
(2006 Code § 34-5-3)
CHAPTER 4: CULVERTS AND DRIVEWAYS
Section
7-4-1:   Culverts
7-4-2:   Driveways
7-4-1:   CULVERTS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install any culvert or
replace any culvert without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 34-6-2)
      2.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit to install or
replace any culvert shall file an application therefor with the City Clerk upon
a form to be provided for that purpose. The application and the permit issued
pursuant thereto shall be on the same form which shall be substantially as
outlined in Appendix B on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 34-6-3; amd. 2018 Code)
      3.   Termination Of Permit: All such permits shall terminate upon the
expiration of one year following the date of issue.
(2006 Code § 34-6-4)
   B.   Culvert Required; Specifications; Installation: Culverts shall be
installed where driveways or walkways cross open ditches. The material used for
the construction of the culverts shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated steel
culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of sixteen (16) gauge, corrugated
aluminum alloy culvert pipe with a minimum wall thickness of sixteen (16)
gauge, asbestos cement storm drain pipe (Class IV), or of such other material
as determined by the Street Department, depending upon the conditions existing.
The culverts shall be of such size, installed at the grade and constructed with
couplings as determined by the Street Superintendent. The person desiring the
culvert shall purchase a culvert as provided herein and shall have it delivered
on the site. The City shall install the culvert.
(2006 Code § 34-6-5)
   C.   Costs:
      1.   Installation: Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at
his own expense, construct and install drainage inlet boxes in such form and
manner as the Street Superintendent determines necessary depending on the
conditions existing.
(2006 Code § 34-6-6)
      2.   Backfill: Any person installing or replacing a culvert shall, at his
own expense, provide and place such backfill material as the Street
Superintendent determines necessary to complete the project.
(2006 Code § 34-6-7)
      3.   Replacement: The expense of replacing any culvert shall be borne by
the person making application for the permit to install the same.
(2006 Code § 34-6-8)
   D.   Obstruction Of Drain Or Storm Sewer: It shall be unlawful to obstruct
any drain or storm sewer in any public street or property.
(2006 Code § 34-6-1)
7-4-2:   DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles
or animals across any sidewalk in the City without having first obtained a
permit therefor.
      2.   Application For Permit: Applications for such permits shall be made
to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by the fee required.
      3.   Restrictions On Issuance: No permit for construction of a driveway
for commercial use, or for the habitual use of other than the owner or occupant
of the premises served shall be issued except upon the order of the Planning
Commission.
(2006 Code § 34-7-1)
   B.   Permit Fee: The fee for all such construction shall be twenty dollars
($20.00).
(2006 Code § 34-7-2)
   C.   Surface Grade And Finish: No driveway shall be so constructed or graded
as to leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The
grade shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining
sidewalk. It shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where
the same crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it
slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion
vary from the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.
(2006 Code § 34-7-3)
   D.   Specifications: Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in
compliance with the specifications required by the Street Superintendent.
(2006 Code § 34-7-4)
   E.   Breaking Curb; Bond Required: Before a permit can be issued to break a
curb in the City for the installation of a driveway or any other purpose, a
bond or cash in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) is required to be
posted with the City Clerk.
(2006 Code § 34-7-5)
   F.   Repair And Maintenance Required: It shall be the duty of the person
maintaining the driveway to keep the same in good repair where it crosses the
sidewalk and free from obstruction and openings.
(2006 Code § 34-7-6)
CHAPTER 5: TREES AND SHRUBS #1
Section
7-5-1:   Definitions
7-5-2:   Parks Committee
7-5-3:   Arborist License And Insurance
7-5-4:   Official Street Tree Species
7-5-5:   Planting Requirements
7-5-6:   Public Tree Care
7-5-7:   Pruning Requirements; Removal Of Dead, Diseased Or Dangerous Trees And
Branches
7-5-8:   Tree Topping Prohibited
7-5-9:   Removal Of Stumps
7-5-10:   Penalty
7-5-1:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the City, or to which the
public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land
lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways
within the City.
(2006 Code § 37-1-1)
7-5-2:   PARKS COMMITTEE:
   A.   Committee Created; Membership; Appointment: There is hereby created and
established a City Parks Committee which shall consist of five (5) members,
citizens and residents of the City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the approval of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 37-1-2)
   B.   Compensation: Members of the Parks Committee shall serve without
compensation.
(2006 Code § 37-1-3)
   C.   Organization: The Mayor shall appoint the chairman of the Parks
Committee. The Parks Committee shall make its own rules and regulations and
keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum
for the transaction of business.
(2006 Code § 37-1-5)
   D.   Duties: It shall be the responsibility of the Committee to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon their
acceptance and approval, shall constitute the Official Comprehensive City Tree
Plan for the City. The board, when requested by the City Council, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
(2006 Code § 37-1-4)
   E.   Interference With Committee Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City board or any of its agents
while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning,
spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private
grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
(2006 Code § 37-1-15)
   F.   Review Of Board By City Council: The City Council shall have the right
to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the City Parks Committee. Any
person may appeal from any ruling or order of the City Parks Committee to the
City Council who may hear the matter and make final decision.
(2006 Code § 37-1-17)
7-5-3:   ARBORIST LICENSE AND INSURANCE:
   A.   License Required; Fee: It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to
engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street
or park trees within the City without first applying for and procuring a
license. The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) annually in advance;
provided, however, that no license shall be required of any public service
company or City employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service
endeavors.
   B.   Insurance Required: Before any license shall be issued, each applicant
shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum
amounts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury and one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage indemnifying the City or
any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described.
(2006 Code § 37-1-16)
7-5-4:   OFFICIAL STREET TREE SPECIES:
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for the City.
No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street
trees without written permission of the Parks Committee.
Small Trees Medium Trees Large Trees
Small Trees          Medium Trees              Large Trees
Apricot              Ash, green                Coffeetree, Kentucky
Crabapple, flowering Hackberry                 Maple, silver
Golden rain tree     Honey locust (thornless)  Maple, sugar
Hawthorne            Linden or basswood        Oak, bur
Pear, bradford       Mulberry, red (fruitless, Sycamore
                     male)
Redbud               Oak, English              Sycamore, London plantree
Soapberry            Oak, red                  Cottonwood (cottonless, male)
Lilac, Japanese tree Pagoda tree, Japanese      
Peach, flowering     Pecan                      
Plum, purple leaf    Birch, river               
Serviceberry         Osage orange (male,        
                     thornless)
                    Persimmon                  
                    Poplar, white              
                    Sassafras                  
 
(2006 Code § 37-1-6)
7-5-5:   PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Spacing: The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the
three (3) species size classes listed in section
7-5-4 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer together than the
following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); medium trees, forty feet (40'); and
large trees, fifty feet (50'); except in special plantings designed or approved
by a landscape architect.
(2006 Code § 37-1-7)
   B.   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from
curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three (3)
species size classes listed in section
7-5-4 of this chapter, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three
feet (3'); and large trees, four feet (4').
(2006 Code § 37-1-8)
   C.   Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs:
      1.   No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty five feet (35')
of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curb lines.
      2.   No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') of any
fireplug.
(2006 Code § 37-1-9)
   D.   Distance From Utilities: No street trees other than those species
listed as small trees in section 7-5-4 of this chapter may be planted under or
within ten (10) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line,
transmission line or other utility.
(2006 Code § 37-1-10)
7-5-6:   PUBLIC TREE CARE:
   A.   The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   B.   The Parks Committee may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree
or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its
nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines,
or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect
or other pest.
   C.   This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners; provided, that the selection and location of said trees is in
accordance with sections
7-5-4 and
7-5-5 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 37-1-11)
7-5-7:   PRUNING REQUIREMENTS; REMOVAL OF DEAD, DISEASED OR DANGEROUS TREES AND
BRANCHES:
   A.   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above the surface of
the street or sidewalk.
   B.   The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or
broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
   C.   The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device
or sign.
(2006 Code § 37-1-13)
7-5-8:   TREE TOPPING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful, as a normal practice, for any person, firm, or City
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property.
TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this section at the determination of the City Tree Board.
(2006 Code § 37-1-12)
7-5-9:   REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground.
(2006 Code § 37-1-14)
7-5-10:   PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction or
a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
(2006 Code § 37-1-18)
CHAPTER 5: TREES AND SHRUBS #2
Section
7-5-1:   Planting And Removal Permits
7-5-2:   Prohibited Acts
7-5-3:   Dangerous Trees
7-5-4:   Utility Poles And Wires
7-5-5:   Gas Pipes
7-5-1:   PLANTING AND REMOVAL PERMITS:
   A.   Planting Permit: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any
public street or parkway or other public place without having first secured a
permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Public
Works Director and shall be referred by him to the City Council. All trees and
shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the
City Council.
(2006 Code § 34-3-1)
   B.   Removal Permit: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or
shrub or portion thereof in any street, parkway or other public place without
having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be
made to the Public Works Director and shall be referred by him to the City
Council before permission shall be granted.
(2006 Code § 34-3-3)
7-5-2:   PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Planting Trees In Right-Of-Way: It shall be unlawful to plant any
bushes, trees, shrubs or other plants on the right-of-way of any public street,
including the space on the right-of-way between the sidewalk and the adjacent
street pavement.
(2006 Code § 34-3-2)
   B.   Injury To Trees And Shrubs: It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or
shrub planted in any public place.
(2006 Code § 34-3-4)
   C.   Posting Advertisements Or Notices: It shall be unlawful to attach any
sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway, or
other public place.
(2006 Code § 34-3-5)
   D.   Attaching Wires Or Rope: It shall be unlawful to attach any wires or
rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place
without the permission of the City Council.
(2006 Code § 34-3-7)
7-5-3:   DANGEROUS TREES:
   A.   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the City at a height less than eight feet (8') or in such a way as to
impede or interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be
trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises or of the premises on which such
tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
   B.   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which
such tree grows or stands.
   C.   The Public Works Director may, at the owner’s expense, trim or remove
any tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall
be remedied.
(2006 Code § 34-3-6)
7-5-4:   UTILITY POLES AND WIRES:
Any person or company given the right to maintain the poles and wires in the
streets, alleys, or other public places in the City shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to
the supervision of the Street Superintendent so that no injury shall be done
either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their conduct.
(2006 Code § 34-3-7)
7-5-5:   GAS PIPES:
Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the City shall, in the
absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes
free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or shrubs.
(2006 Code § 34-3-8)
CHAPTER 6: CITY PARKS
Section
7-6-1:   Designation Of City Parks
7-6-2:   Regulations
7-6-3:   Permit Requirements
7-6-1:   DESIGNATION OF CITY PARKS:
That portion of City owned property commonly known as The Grove Memorial Park,
Riverfront Ball Park, Red Hawk Park, Lighthouse Park and Mason Hollow Park
shall be designated as City parks as used in this chapter.
(2006 Code § 28-2-1)
7-6-2:   REGULATIONS:
   A.   Damage To Park Property: Within the City parks, no person except park
personnel on official business shall:
      1.   Cut, break, injure, destroy, take, or remove any tree, shrub,
timber, plant, or natural object;
      2.   Kill, cause to be killed, or pursue with intent to kill any bird or
animal;
      3.   Wilfully mutilate, injure or destroy any building, bridge, table,
bench, fireplace, guidepost, notice, tablet, fence, monument, or other park
property or appurtenances.
(2006 Code § 28-1-1)
   B.   Littering; Water Pollution:
      1.   No person shall deposit any trash within the City parks except in
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all trash shall be carried away from the parks by the person
responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
      2.   No person shall discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed
in the waters of any fountain, lake, stream, or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or in any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing
into such waters any substance or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may
result in the pollution of the waters.
(2006 Code § 28-1-2)
   C.   Fires:
      1.   No person shall light or use any unenclosed picnic fire within the
City parks. Fires may be built only in fireplaces or on grills constructed for
that purpose in designated areas.
      2.   No person shall “camp” or spend the night in any City park.
      3.   Every person who has lighted or used any fire in a City park shall
extinguish such fire before leaving the park.
(2006 Code § 28-1-3)
   D.   Picnics: No person shall picnic in the City parks except in areas
designated for that purpose. Park personnel are hereby authorized to regulate
the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion or to secure
the maximum use, comfort, and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with
any directions given to achieve this end.
(2006 Code § 28-1-4)
   E.   Erection Of Structures: No person shall build or place any tent,
building, booth, stand, or other structure in or upon any City park or other
recreational facility unless he has obtained a permit to do so from the City.
(2006 Code § 28-1-5)
   F.   Signs: No person shall place within any City park or affix to any
object therein any sign or device designated to advertise any business,
profession, exhibition, event or thing unless he has obtained a permit to do so
from the City.
(2006 Code § 28-1-6)
   G.   Animals: No person shall:
      1.   Bring any dangerous animal into any City park; or
      2.   Permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash; or
      3.   Ride or lead any horse in any City park or recreational area except
upon paths or other ways expressly provided and posted for that purpose.
(2006 Code § 28-1-7)
   H.   Motor Vehicles: No person other than City personnel on official
business shall drive or park any motor vehicle, including snowmobiles and all-
terrain vehicles, in any City park except on a roadway or parking lot.
(2006 Code § 28-1-8)
   I.   Sales; Amusements For Gain: Within the parks of the City, no person
shall, without having first obtained a permit from the City:
      1.   Sell or offer for sale any goods or services; or
      2.   Conduct any amusement for gain or for which a charge is made.
(2006 Code § 28-1-9)
   J.   Group Activities: Whenever any group or organization desires to use
City park facilities for a particular purpose such as picnics, parties,
exhibitions or performances, a representative of the group shall first apply
for and obtain a permit for such activity from the Mayor.
(2006 Code § 28-1-10)
   K.   Hours: The City Council shall establish the hours of operation of the
City parks. No one shall be in any park after the established hour without the
Mayor's permission.
(2006 Code § 28-1-14)
7-6-3:   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application For Permit: Applications for all permits required by this
chapter shall be made in writing to the Mayor not less than seven (7) days
before the proposed date of the activity for which the permit is sought. Each
application shall include the following information:
      1.   A statement briefly describing the nature of the proposed activity;
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
wishing to conduct such activity;
      3.   The date when such activity is to be conducted;
      4.   The hour when such activity will start and terminate;
      5.   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired; and
      6.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(2006 Code § 28-1-11)
   B.   Decision On Application: After due consideration of the information
contained in the permit application, but not later than seven (7) days after
the application has been filed, the Mayor shall determine whether the
application is satisfactory. An application shall be deemed satisfactory if:
      1.   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
      2.   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour requested in the application;
      3.   The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic;
      4.   The proper policing of such activity will not require the diversion
of so great a number of police officers as to prevent normal protection to the
remainder of the City;
      5.   The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property or to incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct; and
      6.   Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(2006 Code § 28-1-12)
   C.   Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
      1.   Notification by regular mail or by telephone shall be made promptly
by the Mayor to every permit applicant of the decision on his application.
      2.   If such decision is favorable, the Mayor shall issue the permit. As
a condition of the issuance of any permit, the Mayor may require that an
indemnity bond be obtained if, in his opinion, such bond is necessary to
protect the City from liability or to protect City property from damage.
      3.   The Mayor shall inform each applicant who has been denied a permit
regarding the reasons for the denial and the procedure for appeals.
      4.   Following a denial by the Mayor, an applicant may appeal the denial
to the City Council at the next regular meeting of the City Council occurring
not less than five (5) days following the date of the denial.
(2006 Code § 28-1-13)
CHAPTER 7: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
7-7-1:   Purpose And Scope
7-7-2:   Definitions
7-7-3:   Permitted Use
7-7-4:   Permit Required
7-7-5:   Collocation Requirements And Conditions
7-7-6:   Application Fees
7-7-7:   Exceptions To Applicability
7-7-8:   Pre-Existing Agreements
7-7-9:   Annual Recurring Rate
7-7-10:   Abandonment
7-7-11:   Dispute Resolution
7-7-12:   Indemnification
7-7-13:   Insurance
7-7-1:      PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   B.   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances
or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
   C.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-2:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i
through Section VI.D.1 .a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified
at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in public
rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include City-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
(6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
equipment associated with wireless communications; and radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. WIRELESS
FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does not include
the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is
collocated; or wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-3:   PERMITTED USE:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to
administrative review, except as provided in section
7-7-5I regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated in rights-of-way in any zoning
district, or outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-4:   PERMIT REQUIRED:
An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the City to collocate a
small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and
permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
   A.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions set forth in section
7-7-5 in this chapter, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge; and
      7.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
   B.   Application Process: The City shall process applications as follows:
      1.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   a.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
         b.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         c.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth (90th) day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
(10th) day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
      3.   a.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
         b.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
         c.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth (120th) day after submission of the complete application or
the tenth (10th) day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the City’s
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
chapter.
      4.   a.   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
         b.   If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions set forth in section
7-7-5 in this chapter require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
         c.   The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
City denies an application.
         d.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City
and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial
shall require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the City’s review period.
         e.   The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
         f.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
      5.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
City and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the City for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by
the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall
enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
   C.   Completeness Of Application:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the City
shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant.
If an application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the
missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails
to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all
documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the City’s permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the City.
      2.   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
   D.   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
      1.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or
      2.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay.
   E.   Consolidated Applications:
      1.   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within
the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion,
to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the
collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
      2.   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
City may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and
treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   F.   Duration of Permits:
      1.   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five
(5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable City codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
      2.   If the Act is repealed, renewals of permits shall be subject to the
applicable City code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of
renewal.
   G.   Means of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information and notices to the City by personal delivery at the
City’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due
or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-5:   COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   C.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies:
      1.   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities
shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for
public safety communications.
      2.   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency’s communications equipment.
      3.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      4.   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      5.   The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous subsection. Failure to remedy
the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   D.   Utilities Poles:
      1.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      2.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      3.   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communications space”,
“communication worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   E.   Applicable Codes And Local Code Provisions: The wireless provider shall
comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
   F.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City, a comprehensive plan
or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-
way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   G.   Alternate Placements:
      1.   Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall not be
required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole,
or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna
systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for
the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility
pole, the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
      2.   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this subsection.
   H.   Height Limitations:
      1.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      2.   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten feet (10') feet in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
         b.   Forty five feet (45') feet above ground level.
   I.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a appropriate permits in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   K.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   L.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
   M.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-6:   APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
   A.   The applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one (1) small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
   B.   The applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
   C.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   D.   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent
with section
7-7-4A4 of this chapter; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   E.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-7:   EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
   B.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   C.   1.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail earner, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility’s wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
      2.   For the purposes of this subsection, “public utility” has the
meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any
requirement to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service; or to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-8:      PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that relate
to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including
the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply
with this chapter.
   B.   A-wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the City before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this subsection.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-9:      ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
   A.   A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a right-
of-way that equals two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; or the actual,
direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on
the City utility pole.
   B.   If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day
after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of
intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-10:   ABANDONMENT:
   A.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
   B.   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
   C.   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
City. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-11:   DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The County Circuit Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all
disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending
resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless
facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City shall
allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-12:   INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless against any and
all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or
arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnity or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the City with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
7-7-13:   INSURANCE:
   A.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the City improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of City
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   B.   The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   C.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the City.
(Ord. 701, 8-21-2018)
TITLE 8: BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
8-1-1:   Building Fees
8-1-2:   Commercial Construction Fees
8-1-1:   BUILDING FEES:
   A.   Established:
      1.   The building fees for the City as of October 19, 2021 are as
follows:
 
Demolition                       $100.00
Building Permit Fees:             
Class A $100.00 - $5,000.00      $100.00
Class B $5,001.00 - $50,000.00   $300.00
Class C $50,001.00 - $100,000.00 $500.00
Class D $100,001.00 and above    $1,000.00
 
      2.   New home building permits are issued based on the estimated
construction costs of the home as stated by the builder.
   B.   Scope: The fees include mobile homes, modular construction and covers
all construction, electrical and plumbing fees.
(2006 Code §§ 6-1-5, 6-2-5; amd. 2018 Code; Ord. 746, 10-19-2021)
8-1-2: COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION FEES:
   A.   Established: The commercial construction fees for the City of Grafton
as of 11/16/2021 are as follows:
 
Demolition and site preparation  $250.00
Commercial construction fees:     
   Class A $0 - $100,000      $500.00
   Class B $100,001 - $500,000$1,000.00
   Class C $500,001 - $1,000,0$1,000.00 plus $1,500.00 per every $100,000.00
                                 over $500,000.00
   Class D $1,000,001 and abov$8,500.00 plus $1,000.00 per every $100,000.00
                                 over $1,000,000.00
 
   B.   Scope: The fees cover all planning and permitting reviews and
inspections. The City Council of the City of Grafton reserves the right to
modify any portion of the Building Codes including the building fees. (Ord.
752, 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 2: RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
8-2-1:   Code Adopted
8-2-2:   Amendments To Code
8-2-3:   Existing Suits
8-2-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B,
C, D, E, I, L and Q”, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Residential Code of the City for regulating and governing the
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family
dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
(3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of said
Residential Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-2-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-1-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-2-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-2-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section R101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Table R301.2(1). Insert: a through j.
Section P2603.6.1. Insert: Thirty (30) and thirty (30).
Section P3103.1. Insert: Six inches (6") and twelve inches (12").
(2006 Code § 6-1-2)
8-2-3:   EXISTING SUITS:
Nothing in this chapter or in the Residential Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
section 8-1-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-1-4)
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING CODE
Section
8-3-1:   Code Adopted
8-3-2:   Amendments To Code
8-3-3:   Existing Suits
8-3-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Building Code, 2018
Edition, including Appendix Chapters L-1 through K-13”, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted, together with all subsequent
amendments, revisions, and later editions, as the Building Code of the City for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and
the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said Building Code
on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-3-2 of this
chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-2-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-3-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-3-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 1612.3. Insert: August 1, 2008.
Section 3410.2. Insert: August 1, 2008.
(2006 Code § 6-2-2)
8-3-3:   EXISTING SUITS:
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
section 8-3-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of
any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-2-4)
CHAPTER 4: EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Section
8-4-1:   Code Adopted
8-4-2:   Amendments To Code
8-4-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Existing Building
Code, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A”, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of
the City for regulating and governing the repair, alteration, change of
occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic
buildings, as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code on file in the Office of
the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and
changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-4-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-3-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-4-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-4-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 1301.2. Insert: August 1, 2008.
(2006 Code § 6-3-2)
CHAPTER 5: MECHANICAL CODE
Section
8-5-1:   Code Adopted
8-5-2:   Amendments To Code
8-5-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Mechanical Code, 2018
Edition, including Appendix Chapters A and B” (see International Mechanical
Code section 101.2.1, 2018 edition), as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City, regulating and
governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems are herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical
Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-
5-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-5-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-5-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-5-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Fee Schedule.
Section 106.5.3. Insert: Percentages in 2 locations.
Section 108.4. Insert: ordinance violation (delete rest of sentence).
Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 and $1,000.00.
(2006 Code § 6-5-2)
CHAPTER 6: FIRE CODE
Section
8-6-1:   Code Adopted
8-6-2:   Amendments To Code
8-6-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Fire Code, 2006
Edition”, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code of the City, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life
and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling
and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of said Fire Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-6-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-6-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-6-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-6-2 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 109.3. Insert: ordinance violation (delete rest of sentence).
Section 111.4. Insert: $100.00 and $1,000.00.
(2006 Code § 6-6-2)
CHAPTER 7: FUEL GAS CODE
Section
8-7-1:   Code Adopted
8-7-2:   Amendments To Code
8-7-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Fuel Gas Code, 2006
Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C and D” as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the City,
for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of said Fuel Gas Code on file in the Office of the City Clerk are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in section
8-7-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-7-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-7-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-7-1 of this title are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Appropriate Schedule.
Section 106.5.3. Insert: Percentages in 2 locations.
Section 108.4. Insert: ordinance violation (delete rest of sentence).
Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 and $1,000.00.
(2006 Code § 6-7-2)
CHAPTER 8: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
8-8-1:   Code Adopted
8-8-2:   Amendments To Code
8-8-1:   CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the Office of the City
Clerk, being marked and designated as “The International Property Maintenance
Code, 2006 Edition”, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City, for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing standards for supplied utilities and facilities and
other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are
safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in
the Office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section
8-8-2 of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 6-4-1; amd. 2018 Code)
8-8-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following sections of the Code adopted in section
8-8-1 of this chapter are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 103.5. Insert: City of Grafton.
Section 302.4. Insert: 8 inches.
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1 to October 1.
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1 to April 1.
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1 to April 1.
(2006 Code § 6-4-2)
CHAPTER 9: DANGEROUS, UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
8-9-1:   Definition
8-9-2:   Nuisance Declared
8-9-3:   Report Of Nuisance Condition
8-9-4:   Time Limit For Repair Or Alteration
8-9-5:   Notice On Building
8-9-6:   Standards for Repair, Vacation Or Demolition
8-9-7:   Duties Of Attorney
8-9-8:   Lien Provisions
8-9-1:   DEFINITION:
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed "dangerous and unsafe buildings":
   A.   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
   B.   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty one percent (31%)
or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or
fifty percent (50%) of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing
or outside walls or covering.
   C.   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   D.   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to
have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
   E.   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, or
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to cause injury to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of those living therein.
   F.   Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who
live or may live therein.
   G.   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means
of communication.
   H.   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure members of the public or property.
   I.   Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the
City.
(2006 Code § 25-5-4)
   J.   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the Building
Code of the City, or any provision of the Fire Code, or any other ordinances of
the City.
(2006 Code § 25-5-4; amd. 2018 Code)
   K.   Those vacant buildings with unguarded openings shall be deemed to
constitute a fire hazard and to be unsafe within the provisions of this Code.
   L.   Those which are uncompleted or abandoned.
(2006 Code § 25-5-4)
8-9-2:   NUISANCE DECLARED:
All dangerous and unsafe buildings within the terms of this chapter are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished
as herein provided.
(2006 Code § 25-5-6)
8-9-3:   REPORT OF NUISANCE CONDITION:
The Building and Zoning Administrator or his designated representative shall
report to the City Council when any building or structure in the City is in a
dangerous condition and constitutes a nuisance. Hereinafter, all references to
Building and Zoning Administrator shall include “his designated
representative”.
(2006 Code § 25-5-1)
8-9-4:   TIME LIMIT FOR REPAIR OR ALTERATION:
The owner of such building shall repair or alter it so as to make it safe
within sixty (60) days from the time the notice is served upon him in the
manner provided by law.
(2006 Code § 25-5-2)
8-9-5:   NOTICE ON BUILDING:
The Building and Zoning Administrator, with the approval of the City Council,
shall place a notice on all dangerous and unsafe buildings, which notice shall
read as follows:
This building has been found to be a dangerous and unsafe building by the City
officials. This notice shall remain on this building until it is repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the
owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building, or person or
persons in whose name or names such building was last assessed, and all other
persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the
County Recorder of Deeds. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such
notice is complied with.
(2006 Code § 25-5-3)
8-9-6:   STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION:
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Building and
Zoning Administrator in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition:
   A.   If the dangerous and unsafe building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants,
it shall be ordered to be vacated.
   B.   If the dangerous and unsafe building can reasonably be repaired so that
it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
ordered repaired.
   C.   In any case where the costs to repair a dangerous and unsafe building
reasonably exceeds the value of the building when repaired, it shall be
demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous and unsafe building is a fire hazard
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this chapter, or any ordinance
of the City, or Statute of the State of Illinois, and is not repaired or
corrected within the time allowed by the notice (sixty (60) days), it shall be
demolished.
(2006 Code § 25-5-5)
8-9-7:   DUTIES OF ATTORNEY:
Pursuant to a resolution passed by the City Council, the City Attorney shall
apply to the Circuit Court for an order authorizing the demolition, repair, or
vacation of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted or abandoned
buildings when there has not been compliance with notices with and when
requested to do so by the Building and Zoning Administrator.
(2006 Code § 25-5-7)
8-9-8:   LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lien Claim; Notice: The cost of repair, demolition, vacation, or
enclosure shall be recoverable from the owner or owners of such real estate and
shall be a lien thereon; provided, that within sixty (60) days after said cost
and expense is incurred, the City or person performing the service by authority
of the City, in his or its own names, shall file notices of lien in the office
of the County Recorder of Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
      1.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
therefor;
      2.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service; and
      3.   The date or dates when said cost and expense was incurred by the
City.
   B.   Release Or Foreclosure Of Lien: Upon payment of said cost and expense
by the owner of or persons interested in said property after notice of lien has
been filed, the lien shall be released by the City or person in whose name(s)
the lien has been filed, and said release may be filed of record as in the case
of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose
as in the case of mortgages or mechanics liens.
(2006 Code § 25-5-8)
CHAPTER 10: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
8-10-1:   Permit Requirements
8-10-2:   Clearance Of Site And Safety Measures Required
8-10-3:   Control And Supervision
8-10-4:   Notice Required
8-10-5:   Default In Performance Of Conditions
8-10-6:   Approval Of Route
8-10-7:   Obstructing Public Ways Or Parks
8-10-8:   Lights And Barricades
8-10-9:   Utility Facilities
8-10-10:   Trees, Plants And Shrubs
8-10-11:   Repairs To Public Property
8-10-12:   Refund Of Deposits
8-10-1:   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause
to be moved any building in, into, through, or from the City without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Planning Commission. Such permit shall be
known as a “house moving permit”.
(2006 Code § 34-8-1)
   B.   Ineligibility For Permit:
      1.   No person shall be issued a permit to move any building or structure
which, in the opinion of the Street Superintendent:
         a.   Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous;
         b.   Is infested with pests or unsanitary;
         c.   If it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation;
         d.   Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition
of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would
cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or
improvements in the district within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') from
the proposed site;
         e.   If the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the City;
         f.   If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location
by any ordinance of the City; or
         g.   If the moving of the building or structure causes unreasonable
damage to the trees, plants and/or shrubs on and along the public streets.
      2.   Provided, however, that if the condition of the building or
structure, in the judgment of the Street Superintendent, admits of practicable
and effective repair, the permit may be issued upon the terms and conditions as
set forth herein.
(2006 Code § 34-8-4)
   C.   Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit shall file with
the City Clerk an application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by
the Street Superintendent for that purpose. Such application shall specify the
following:
      1.   The character and size of the building to be moved;
      2.   The reason for such moving;
      3.   The use, purpose and occupancy for which said building or structure
is to be used;
      4.   The location from which and to which said building is to be moved;
      5.   A plot plan showing the proposed location of the building upon the
property to which said building is to be moved, provided said location is in
the City;
      6.   The streets on, over or through which it is desired to move said
building;
      7.   Whether the building conforms to the zoning regulations or other
applicable regulations in the location to which it is to be moved.
(2006 Code § 34-8-2)
   D.   Investigation: Upon the filing of the application, the Street
Superintendent shall cause the Zoning Administrator, or other authorized
representative of the City, to investigate the building and report to him the
results of such investigation, together with recommended action thereon.
(2006 Code § 34-8-3)
   E.   Estimate Of Cost And Deposit: The applicant shall also deposit with the
City Clerk a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost to the City as estimated
by the Street Superintendent of trimming, moving, removing or replanting of
trees or shrubs, and of moving, removing and displacing any pole or other
structure, supporting any wires, cables or other equipment belonging to the
City or the cutting, displacing or changing the location of any wire, cable or
other equipment upon said poles or structures belonging to the City.
(2006 Code § 34-8-6)
   F.   Liability Insurance:
      1.   Every person moving a building in the City shall file with the City
Clerk a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a
certificate of authority to do insurance business in the State, which policy
shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this subsection.
      2.   In lieu of filing the insurance policy herein referred to, a
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation may be filed. The
certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of this subsection
has been issued, and shall set forth the expiration date of said policy.
      3.   The liability policy required under this subsection shall insure the
person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for
injury to, or death of any person, or damage to any property growing out of the
moving of such building to the amount or limit of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury to or death
of any one person, of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), exclusive of
interest and costs, on account of moving any one building resulting in injury
to or death of more than one person, and of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for damage to property of others, resulting from moving any one
building.
(2006 Code § 34-8-7)
   G.   Bond Or Cash Requirements:
      1.   Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or
lessee of the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with
the Zoning Administrator or other authorized representative of the City, a
corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows:
      2.   That all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation,
alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of the
permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to be
specified in the permit by the Zoning Administrator, or other authorized
representative of the City. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to the
estimated cost of the work proposed to be done, plus ten percent (10%) thereof,
and shall name the City as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney.
      3.   In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or
lessee may post a cash deposit in the amount of said bond.
      4.   An extension of time for the completion may be granted in writing by
the Zoning Administrator or other authorized representative of the City when,
in his discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension shall
release any surety or other security.
(2006 Code § 34-8-8)
   H.   Fees:
      1.   Inspection Fee: An inspection fee in the sum of fifteen dollars
($15.00) shall be paid to the City Clerk upon filing of each application for a
house moving permit.
      2.   Permit Fee: A permit fee in the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be
paid to the City Clerk upon the issuance of each house moving permit.
(2006 Code § 34-8-10)
   I.   Issuance Of Permit: The Street Superintendent shall approve the
issuance of a house moving permit when there has been compliance with all the
necessary requirements and conditions of this chapter. It shall then be the
duty of the City Clerk to issue the permit.
(2006 Code § 34-8-11)
   J.   Terms And Conditions Of Permit: When a house moving permit is granted,
such terms and conditions as may be deemed reasonable and proper may be
imposed, including, but not limited to, the public streets or other public
property in the City on, over, or through which the building or structure shall
be moved, and the requirements of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to
be made to or upon the building or structure, to the end that the relocation
thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to
public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district
to which it is to be moved. Such terms and conditions shall be written upon the
permit or appended in writing thereto.
(2006 Code § 34-8-5)
   K.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit: The Street Superintendent, at any
time, and for sufficient cause, may revoke or suspend any permit granted under
this section.
(2006 Code § 34-8-12)
8-10-2:   CLEARANCE OF SITE AND SAFETY MEASURES REQUIRED:
   A.   Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or
lessee of the property from which the building is to be moved shall file with
the City Clerk a bond or other form of security in favor of the City,
conditioned as follows:
      1.   Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee
or his authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order that
all gas, water and oil pipelines that are to be disconnected from the building
may be securely capped and sealed.
      2.   Immediately after the moving of any building or structure, the
permittee or his authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement
excavations and other holes or openings.
      3.   Within ten (10) days after the moving of any building or structure,
the permittee or his authorized agent shall complete the following work:
         a.   Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the
property.
         b.   Fill with dirt or sand any septic tanks or cesspools located on
the property.
         c.   Fill any openings, excavations or basements remaining on the land
with dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property,
unless otherwise directed by the Street Superintendent.
         d.   Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of
flammable liquids.
         e.   Remove all refuse, debris and waste materials from the property.
   B.   The bond required by this section shall be an amount equal to the cost
of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the Street Superintendent.
   C.   The bond may be in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit,
savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit.
   D.   An extension of time for completion of the work required by this
section may be granted by the Street Superintendent when, in his discretion,
circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension shall release
any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section.
(2006 Code § 34-8-9)
8-10-3:   CONTROL AND SUPERVISION:
Every building which is moved on, over, or through any public street, way or
park in the City shall be under the control of the Street Superintendent, and
every such building shall be moved in a careful manner and the work shall be
prosecuted with diligence and to the satisfaction and approval of the Street
Superintendent. This section in no way relieves the person having charge of the
moving of any building of his obligation to furnish proper supervision.
(2006 Code § 34-8-13)
8-10-4:   NOTICE REQUIRED:
Notice must be given to both the Street Department and the Police Department of
the City by the person or his representative to whom the permit is issued not
less than forty eight (48) hours nor more than seventy two (72) hours before
the actual work of moving a building or structure is to commence.
(2006 Code § 34-8-14)
8-10-5:   DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE OF CONDITIONS:
Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of
any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the
Street Superintendent; said notice to state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to
complete such work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within
the time therein specified, either cause the work to be done, or pay over to
the City Clerk the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the
notice, plus ten percent (10%) of said estimated cost. Upon receipt of notice
from the City Clerk that the permittee has deposited such money, the Street
Superintendent shall cause the required work to be performed and completed. If
the permittee defaults, the City shall have the option in lieu of completing
the work required to demolish the building or structure and to clear, clean and
restore the site or sites.
(2006 Code § 34-8-15)
8-10-6:   APPROVAL OF ROUTE:
The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must be
recommended by the Street Superintendent and the Chief of Police to the City
Council for approval.
(2006 Code § 34-8-6)
8-10-7:   OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS OR PARKS:
No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into, on, over,
through, or from any public streets, ways or parks in the City shall permit
said building to remain in any one location on any such street, way or park for
a period longer than twenty four (24) hours, except by written permission
obtained from the Chief of Police, or to obstruct traffic on any railroad.
(2006 Code § 34-8-17)
8-10-8:   LIGHTS AND BARRICADES:
The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain proper
lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street, way or
park during the hours of darkness.
(2006 Code § 34-8-18)
8-10-9:   UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall
have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to move, remove or displace any
pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any
public utility or of the City, or to cut, displace or change the location of
any wire, cable or other equipment upon said pole or structure, the person to
whom such permit has been granted, or his authorized representative, shall
obtain permission in writing from the owner or owners of such pole, structure
or wires, cables or other equipment thereon, and shall notify such owner or
owners at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the time that the moving of
such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions.
   B.   The person to whom the permit is granted shall not, at the expiration
of said time of notice or at any time, cut, move or in any way disturb such
public utility or City property; and such work shall be done only by the
authorized workers of the utility or the City, whichever is the owner.
   C.   The person to whom the permit is granted shall pay to the public
utility or to the City, as the case may be, any and all costs or expenses for
the removal, rearrangement or replacement of any pole or structural support of
wires, cables or equipment thereon or of any damage to such property.
(2006 Code § 34-8-19)
8-10-10:   TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS:
   A.   In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall
have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant
any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the City, the
person to whom such permit has been granted or his authorized representative
shall notify the Street Superintendent at least seventy two (72) hours prior to
the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such
obstructions.
   B.   The person to whom the permit is granted shall not, at the expiration
of the time of notice, or at any time, trim, move, remove, replant, or
otherwise disturb such trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done
only by the authorized workers of the City unless otherwise approved and so
ordered by the Street Superintendent.
   C.   The person to whom the permit is granted shall pay to the City any and
all costs or expenses for the trimming, moving, removing or replanting of any
trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto.
(2006 Code § 34-8-20)
8-10-11:   REPAIRS TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been
granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public property,
in addition to any other remedies the City may have, the Street Superintendent
may cause such damage to be repaired, and the cost thereof shall be deducted
from the deposit required herein, or he may require the person to whom such a
permit has been granted, or his authorized representative, upon written
notification from the Street Superintendent, to make all necessary repairs to
such streets or property; provided, however, that should the person to whom the
permit has been granted and to whom the notice has been given, or his
authorized representative, fails to make the necessary repairs within the
period of time designated in the written notice, the Street Superintendent may
cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost thereof deducted from the
deposit required herein.
(2006 Code § 34-8-21)
8-10-12:   REFUND OF DEPOSITS:
When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is
completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been
repaired to the satisfaction of the Street Superintendent, and all costs of
repairing damages or performing other work as provided herein have been paid
and the deposit as required by subsection 8-10-1E of this chapter, or such
portion thereof then remaining unused under the provisions of this chapter,
shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit receipt representing the money
so deposited. However, should the cost of repairing damages and/or performing
other work, as in this chapter provided, exceed the total amount of money
deposited, the person to whom the permit was granted shall be held liable for
the amount of damage and/or other costs which are in excess of the amount
deposited. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, upon receipt of the request
from the Street Superintendent, to collect such part of the claim which is in
excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit was granted.
(2006 Code § 34-8-22)
CHAPTER 11: SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
8-11A-1:   Statute Authority; Objectives
8-11A-2:   Jurisdiction
8-11A-3:   Interpretation
8-11A-4:   Disclaimer Of Liability
8-11A-1:   STATUTE AUTHORITY; OBJECTIVES:
In accordance with State law (65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-80-14 through
5/11-80-17; 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq.; 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 440/1 et seq.), this chapter establishes comprehensive
regulations for the control of signs and other street graphics in order to
preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
More specifically, this chapter is intended to assist in achieving the
following objectives:
   A.   To authorize the use of street graphics which are:
      1.   Compatible with their surroundings and the zoning district in which
they are located;
      2.   Expressive of the image the City desires to project;
      3.   Appropriate to the type of establishment or activity to which they
pertain; and
      4.   Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen.
   B.   To foster high quality commercial development, and to enhance the
economic vitality of existing businesses by promoting the reasonable, orderly,
and effective display of street graphics;
   C.   To encourage sound street graphics display practices, and to mitigate
the objectionable effects of competition in respect to the size and placement
of street graphics;
   D.   To enhance the physical appearance of the City by protecting the
manmade and natural beauty of the area;
   E.   To protect pedestrians and motorists from any damage or injury that
might result from the improper construction, placement, or use of street
graphics;
   F.   To protect the public investment in streets and highways by reducing
the obstructions and distractions which might cause traffic accidents;
   G.   To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility
of street graphics with nearby land uses; and
   H.   To protect the physical and mental well-being of the general public by
recognizing and encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the visual
environment.
(2006 Code § 31-1-1)
8-11A-2:   JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 31-1-2)
8-11A-3:   INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in the favor of
the City, and every requirement imposed herein shall be deemed minimal.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter differ from the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted ordinance or regulation, the more stringent requirement
shall prevail.
(2006 Code § 31-1-3)
8-11A-4:   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent or employee of the City shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter.
   B.   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
(2006 Code § 31-1-4)
ARTICLE B: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section
8-11B-1:   Rules Of Word Construction
8-11B-2:   Definitions
8-11B-1:   RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter, the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section
8-11B-2 of this article; terms not defined in section
8-11B-2 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the zoning
regulations of the City; if any term is not defined either in section
8-11B-2 or in the zoning regulations, said term shall have its standard English
dictionary meaning.
   B.   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   C.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   D.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
   E.   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is discretionary.
   F.   The term “the City” shall mean the City of Grafton, Illinois.
   G.   The word “person” means any individual, firm, association, or corporate
body.
   H.   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six
inches (6") or more shall be deemed one foot (1').
   I.   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   J.   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(2006 Code § 31-2-1)
8-11B-2:   DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Building and Zoning Administrator of the City or his duly
authorized representative.
ALTER: To change the size, shape, height, or other similar characteristics of a
street graphic.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly effected in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
AMORTIZATION: The elimination of nonconforming street graphics over time in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
APPEAL: A procedure whereby any person aggrieved by any decision or order of
the Administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of
this chapter may seek relief from the City Council.
AREA OF SPECIAL STREET GRAPHICS CONTROLS: Any portion of the territory of the
City designated by the City Council where, due to the special needs/
characteristics of such area, a special street graphic permit is required to
erect any new street graphic or to alter, enlarge, relocate, or reconstruct any
existing street graphic.
AWNING: Any rooflike structure made of cloth, metal, or other material attached
to a building and erected over a window, doorway, etc., in such a manner as to
permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building when
not in use.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure similar to an awning; except, that it cannot be
raised or retracted to a position against the building.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign which has provision for changing the message
thereon either manually or electronically.
CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER: A legally binding order to effect compliance with this
chapter, issued by the Administrator in accordance with the procedures set
forth herein.
ESTABLISHMENT: Either of the following:
   A.   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that is
the sole occupant of one or more buildings; or
   B.   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that
occupies a portion of a building such that:
      1.   The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other
activities within the building and not a department of the whole; and
      2.   The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the
building or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway that
has direct access to the exterior of the building.
FLUSH MOUNTED SIGN: Any sign attached to or erected against any wall, awning,
canopy, or marquee with the exposed face of said sign in a place approximately
parallel to the plane of the wall, etc.. and not projecting more than eighteen
inches (18"). Such signs shall not be painted directly on any exterior wall.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces
placed in or upon the ground in a permanent manner.
FRONTAGE: The linear extent of the lot abutting a street or public roadway, or
the linear extent of the lot abutting public parking area if the lot has no
street frontage.
LOT: Any tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. The term “lot” may or may not
be synonymous with “lot of record”.
MARQUEE: Any canopy made of durable materials that is a permanent fixture of
the building to which it is attached.
MESSAGE: A communication of identification or advertising information visually
perceived. Said communication may consist of words, abbreviations, numbers,
symbols, pictures, geometric shapes, etc.
MOBILE/PORTABLE MARQUEE: A term commonly used to mean any street graphic not
designed to be permanently attached to a building or part thereof or to be
anchored to the ground. Such street graphics primarily include, but are not
limited to, signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-
supporting and moveable; paper, cardboard, or canvas signs wrapped around
supporting poles; etc.
NONCONFORMING STREET GRAPHIC: Any street graphic which existed on the effective
date hereof (or amendment hereto), but which does not comply with the
regulations set forth therein.
OFF PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN: Any single or double faced street graphic that
is permanently fixed or placed on a particular premises and that is used for
the display of messages or advertising not associated with the establishment
located on said premises. This graphic may be used to advertise a business not
fronting a State highway. This graphic may be a freestanding or flush mounted
sign that conforms to provisions of this chapter.
PEDESTAL SIGN: A small portable sign intended for use as a temporary sign
during business hours only.
PREMISES: A lot, plus all the structures and uses thereon.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is supported by an exterior wall of a building
or suspended beneath any awning, canopy, or marquee with the exposed face of
said sign in a plane approximately perpendicular to the plane of the wall,
etc., and projecting more than eighteen inches (18").
RECONSTRUCT: To re-erect a street graphic after it has been damaged or
destroyed.
RELOCATE: To move a street graphic to another portion of the premises or to
different premises.
REPLACE: To substitute a street graphic for an existing street graphic.
ROOF LINE: The edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the
top line of the building silhouette, on the side of the building where the
street graphic is located.
ROOF MOUNTED SIGN: Any sign erected or maintained on the roof of any building.
SHOPPING CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign identifying a building or group
of buildings that is under single ownership or control, that provides common
off street parking facilities, and that is occupied by two (2) or more retail
sales establishments.
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, that is used
to advertise, identify, display, or attract attention to any object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, or event related to the
premises on which the sign is situated by any means including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, or illumination.
SIGN AREA: The area of the one imaginary square or rectangle that would
completely enclose all parts of a sign including the background.
SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE: The total of the areas of all signs which a particular
establishment is permitted to display under the terms of this chapter.
SPECIAL STREET GRAPHIC PERMIT: A permit issued by the City Council in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter to regulate the design and
placement of street graphics in areas of special controls.
STREET FRONTAGE: See definition of Frontage.
STREET GRAPHIC: Any on premises identification or advertising sign, or any
billboard or off premises advertising sign, visible from the public right-of-
way or from any parking area used by the general public.
STREET GRAPHIC PERMIT: A permit issued by the Administrator to regulate the
erection, expansion, alteration, relocation, or reconstruction of street
graphics in all parts of the City except in areas of special controls.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the requirements of this chapter that are applicable
to a particular street graphic.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign visible from the exterior of a building which is painted
on, affixed to, or suspended immediately behind a window. A "permanent window
sign" is one that is intended to remain on display for thirty (30) days or
more; a "temporary window sign" is one that is intended to remain on display
for a shorter time period.
(2006 Code § 31-2-2)
ARTICLE C: GENERAL SIGN AND STREET GRAPHICS REGULATIONS
Section
8-11C-1:   Prohibited Signs
8-11C-2:   Calculation Of Sign Area
8-11C-3:   Sign Area Allowance
8-11C-4:   Movement Prohibited
8-11C-5:   Illumination
8-11C-6:   Signs Or Street Graphics Not To Be Hazardous
8-11C-7:   Structural And Maintenance Requirements
8-11C-8:   Setback Requirements
8-11C-9:   Signs At Intersections
8-11C-1:   PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Any sign or other street graphic not expressly permitted by this chapter shall
be deemed prohibited in the City.
(2006 Code § 31-3-1)
8-11C-2:   CALCULATION OF SIGN AREA:
The area of every sign shall be calculated as follows:
   A.   If a sign is enclosed by a box or outline, the total area (including
the background) within that outline shall be deemed the sign area.
   B.   If a sign consists of individual letters, parts, or symbols, the area
of the one imaginary square or rectangle which would completely enclose all the
letters, parts, or symbols shall be deemed the sign area.
   C.   In calculating sign area, only one side of any double faced sign shall
be counted.
   D.   The area of signs of unusual shapes, such as globes, cylinders, or
pyramids, shall be computed as one-half (½) of the total of the exposed
surfaces.
(2006 Code § 31-3-2)
8-11C-3:   SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE:
   A.   Computation: Within the limitations and restrictions as further
provided in this chapter, the total of the areas of all signs which a
particular establishment is permitted to display shall be computed according to
the following formula:
One-half (½) square foot of sign area per one foot (1') of linear street
frontage.
Provided, that no establishment in any zoning district shall display more than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of signs maximum.
(2006 Code § 31-3-3)
   B.   Special Situations:
      1.   If any establishment has frontage, it shall be considered separately
for purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
However, the sign area allowances shall not be aggregated so as to allow any
such establishment to display on any one frontage a greater area of signs than
this subsection would otherwise permit.
      2.   The side of an establishment adjacent to an off street parking area
shall not be deemed frontage unless the establishment has no other frontage.
      3.   The applicants may request relief from height, area, aggregate
maximums, and dimensions/limits, if:
         a.   The applicant files for and is granted special use permit
approval.
         b.   The sign is providing some level of public service.
         c.   Written findings are made in City Council’s approval that
concludes: The sign is of sufficient quality, the sign will be maintained, and
that there exists level of public benefit.
All three (3) of these conditions must exist.
(2006 Code § 31-3-3.1)
8-11C-4:   MOVEMENT PROHIBITED:
No sign or other street graphic shall revolve or mechanically move in any
manner.
(2006 Code § 31-3-4)
8-11C-5:   ILLUMINATION:
Illumination of signs and other street graphics is permitted, subject to the
following requirements:
   A.   Only white light is permitted in residential zoning districts and
within two hundred feet (200') thereof.
   B.   No red, yellow, green, or other colored light shall be used at any
location in such manner as to confuse or interfere with vehicular traffic.
   C.   No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other
illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness, or
color; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any message on any
electronically operated changeable copy sign. Beacon lights and illumination by
flame are prohibited.
   D.   The light from any illuminated sign or other street graphic shall be
shaded, shielded, or directed so as to avoid the creation or continuation of
any nuisance of traffic hazard.
   E.   No exposed reflective type bulb, and no strobe light or incandescent
lamp which exceeds fifteen (15) watts, shall be used on the exterior surface of
any sign in such manner as to expose the face of the bulb, light, or lamp to
any public street or to adjacent property.
(2006 Code § 31-3-5)
8-11C-6:   SIGNS OR STREET GRAPHICS NOT TO BE HAZARDOUS:
   A.   No sign or other street graphic shall be erected, relocated, or
maintained so as to prevent free access or egress from any door, window, fire
escape, or driveway.
   B.   No sign or other street graphic shall be erected or maintained in such
a manner that it interferes with, obstructs the view of, or is likely to be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device. Accordingly, no
street graphic shall contain the words “stop”, “go”, “caution”, “dange”,
“warning”, or similar words.
(2006 Code § 31-3-6)
8-11C-7:   STRUCTURAL AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Every sign or other street graphic shall be designed and constructed in
conformity with the applicable provisions of the Building Code, and shall be
free of any exposed extra bracing, angle iron, guywires, cables, etc.
   B.   The electrical component of any illuminated sign or other street
graphic shall conform to the applicable requirements of the Electrical Code.
   C.   Every sign or other street graphic shall be maintained in a neat and
attractive condition by its owner. The street graphic supports shall be kept
painted/treated to prevent rust or deterioration.
(2006 Code § 31-3-7)
8-11C-8:   SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No sign shall be placed within two and one-half feet (2-1/2') of side property
lines.
(2006 Code § 31-3-8)
8-11C-9:   SIGNS AT INTERSECTIONS:
On corner lots, except in the Downtown Business District B-1, in the triangular
portion of land bounded by the street lines that are fifteen feet (15') from
the point of intersection, no sign shall intrude into the air space that is
between two feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the level of the adjacent
street.
(2006 Code § 31-3-9)
ARTICLE D: REGULATIONS BASED ON TYPE OR
LOCATION OF SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS
Section
8-11D-1:   Prohibited Signs And Street Graphics
8-11D-2:   Permitted Signs And Street Graphics
8-11D-3:   Signs And Street Graphics In Residential Districts
8-11D-4:   Signs And Street Graphics In Commercial And Industrial Districts
8-11D-1:   PROHIBITED SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS:
The following street graphics are strictly prohibited everywhere in the City:
   A.   Mobile/portable marquees.
   B.   Signs painted directly on the surface of any exterior wall of any
building; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to a purely
artistic rendering such as a mural.
   C.   Pennants, streamers, ribbons, strings of light bulbs, spinners, and
similar street graphics. City Christmas lights shall be exempt.
   D.   Signs attached to trees, fences, or public utility poles, other than
warning signs issued by public utilities.
   E.   Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports therefor, that
advertise or identify an activity, business, product, or service no longer
conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
(2006 Code § 31-4-1)
8-11D-2:   PERMITTED SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS:
Every sign or other street graphic enumerated below that complies with the
indicated requirements may be erected in any zoning district of the City
without a permit. The area of said sign/street graphics shall not be debited
against the displaying establishment’s sign area allowance.
   A.   Construction Signs: Construction signs identifying the architects,
engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the
construction, and/or announcing the character or purpose of the building, but
not advertising any product. Such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in area, shall be confined to the site of the construction, and shall be
removed within fourteen (14) days after the intended use of the project has
begun.
   B.   Directional And Information Signs: Directional and information signs
erected for the convenience of the public, such as signs identifying entrances,
exits, parking areas, garage sales, no parking areas, restrooms, public
telephones, walkways, and similar features or facilities. Such signs shall not
exceed three (3) square feet in area.
   C.   Flags: Flags Of any country, state, or unit of local government.
   D.   Garage Sale Signs (See also section
3-7-8 of this Code): Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale on
private residential property. Two (2) signs permitted and such signs shall not
exceed three (3) square feet in area, shall be confined to the premises on
which the sale is conducted, and shall not be posted for longer than forty
eight (48) hours prior to the day the sale is to commence and must be removed
at the close of the sale.
   E.   Governmental Or Public Signs: Governmental or public signs such as
traffic control signs, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, signs indicating
the location of underground cables, etc.
   F.   Holiday Decorations: Holiday decorations such as Christmas lights and
ornaments; provided, that such decorations must be removed within a reasonable
time after the holiday. The City’s Christmas lights shall be excluded.
   G.   Home Occupation Signs (See also subsection 9-10-5G of this Code): Home
occupation signs identifying only the name and occupation of the resident. Home
occupation signs shall be nonilluminated and flush mounted, and shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in area.
   H.   House Numbers And/Or Name Of Occupant Signs: House numbers and/or name
of occupant signs located on the lot to which the sign pertains. Such signs
shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area for single-family dwellings nor
six (6) square feet for multiple-family dwellings.
   I.   Institutional Signs: Institutional signs for a public, charitable, or
religious institution. Such signs shall be located on the premises of the
institution, shall not obstruct the vision of motorists, and shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area.
   J.   Integral Signs: Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to
become part of the building and containing such information as date of
erection, name of building, and memorial tributes.
   K.   Interior Signs: Interior signs located in the interior of any building
or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings,
provided such signs are not visible from the exterior of said buildings.
   L.   Property Regulations Signs: Property regulations signs such as no
trespassing, no hunting, no fishing, etc. Such signs shall not exceed three (3)
square feet in area.
   M.   Public Interest Signs: Public interest signs publicizing a charitable
or nonprofit event of general public interest. In the nonurban district and in
any residential district, such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet
in area. Elsewhere, such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
Public interest signs shall be permitted only for thirty (30) days before and
seven (7) days after the event.
   N.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs indicating the sale, rental, or
lease of the premises on which they are located. Such signs on residential
property shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area; on other property, such
signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. Not more than one real estate
sign per street front shall be erected on any lot. Such signs shall be removed
within seven (7) days after the sale, rental or lease. Temporary permits shall
be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals and referred to the City Council for
passage.
   O.   Residential Development Identification Structures: Residential
development identification structures at major entrances designed to identify a
residential subdivision, apartment complex, or planned unit development,
containing no commercial advertising, and not exceeding thirty two (32) square
feet in area.
   P.   Street Banners: Street banners advertising a public entertainment or
event. Such banners may be placed only in locations approved by the
Administrator during the period thirty (30) days before and seven (7) days
after the event. This time frame may be extended by the request to and approval
by the Administrator.
   Q.   Utility Company Signs: Utility company signs that serve as an aid to
public safety or that show the location of public telephones, underground
cables, etc.
   R.   Signs On Vending Machines: Signs on vending machines which describe the
contents of the vending machines.
   S.   Signs On Newspaper Delivery Boxes: Signs on newspaper boxes which
indicate the name of the newspapers delivered therein.
   T.   Signs On Delivery Trucks: Signs on contractor trucks, or other vehicles
when these vehicles are being used in the normal course of business operations.
Permitted signs do not include signs on trucks which are parked consistently
for the primary use as a sign.
   U.   One Pedestal Sign (Portable): One pedestal sign (portable) per
establishment, which shall not exceed five (5) square feet in sign area and
shall not exceed five feet (5') in height, shall be permitted. Pedestal signs
shall be placed in such a way that they do not obstruct pedestrian activity.
(2006 Code § 31-4-2)
8-11D-3:   SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Upon the effective date hereof, no sign or other street graphics except those
listed in section
8-11D-2 of this article shall be erected in any residential district.
(2006 Code § 31-4-3)
8-11D-4:   SIGNS AND STREET GRAPHICS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
No establishment in any commercial district or in the Industrial District shall
display a total area of signs in excess of its sign area allowance.
Additionally, signs in any commercial district or in the Industrial District
shall conform to the following requirements:
   A.   Flush Mounted Signs: For aesthetic and safety reasons, flush mounted
signs are the preferred type of sign in the City. No flush mounted sign shall:
      1.   Project more than eighteen inches (18") from the wall or surface to
which it is attached (if such wall/surface is not vertical, the projection
shall be measured from the closest point of the wall/surface to the sign); or
      2.   Extend more than zero feet (0') above the roof line of the building
to which it is attached.
   B.   Projecting Signs: No establishment in any zoning district shall display
more than one projecting sign on any street front. No projecting sign shall:
      1.   Project more than four feet (4') from the building to which it is
attached; or
      2.   Extend more than zero feet (0') above the roof line of the building
to which it is attached; or
      3.   Project over a street, alley, or driveway, or closer than two feet
(2') to the curb or edge of any vehicular way; or
      4.   Extend below a point eight feet (8') above the ground or pavement;
or
      5.   Extend above a point twelve feet (12') above the ground or pavement;
or
      6.   Exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
   C.   Signs On Awnings, Canopies Or Marquees: Signs mounted flush against any
awning, canopy, or marquee shall be considered flush mounted signs, and shall
comply with regulations of subsection A of this section. Signs suspended
beneath any awning, canopy or marquee shall be considered projecting signs, and
shall comply with the regulations of subsection B of this section.
   D.   Window Signs: Any establishment may display window signs. Permanent
window signs shall cover no more than fifty percent (50%) of any window.
Permanent window signs shall be debited against displaying the establishment’s
sign area allowance, but temporary window signs shall not.
   E.   Shopping Center Identification Signs: A shopping center, as an entity,
may erect an identification sign in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter if the total gross floor area of all the establishments located in the
center exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. A shopping center
identification sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area.
   F.   Freestanding Signs: Not more than one freestanding sign shall be
displayed on any street front of any lot unless the street frontage is greater
than one hundred ten feet (110').
      1.   No part of any freestanding sign shall intrude into or project over
any public right-of-way.
      2.   No freestanding sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet; provided,
that this subsection F2 shall not apply to shopping center identification
signs.
      3.   When attached to a post or other supports, the top edge of a
freestanding sign shall not extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the
ground.
      4.   When an establishment displays more than one freestanding sign, no
sign may be within one hundred feet (100') of another freestanding sign on that
establishment's frontage.
   G.   Roof Mounted Signs: Roof mounted signs are strictly prohibited
everywhere in the City.
   H.   Off Premises Graphics: Off premises graphics must conform with the
provisions for flush mounted signs and freestanding signs, defined in this
chapter.
(2006 Code § 31-4-4)
ARTICLE E: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
Section
8-11E-1:   Appeals
8-11E-2:   Variances
8-11E-3:   Amendments
8-11E-1:   APPEALS:
   A.   Right To Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Administrator in any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any
provision of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Board.
(2006 Code § 31-6-1)
   B.   Filing, Stay Of Proceedings:
      1.   Every appeal shall be made within forty five (45) days of the matter
complained of by filing with the Administrator a written notice specifying the
grounds for appeal. Thereupon, the Administrator shall promptly transmit all
pertinent records to the Zoning Board.
      2.   An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed
unless the Administrator certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal has
been filed with him/her, that for reasons stated in the certificate, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, further action
shall not be stayed unless the Zoning Board or the Circuit Court grants a
restraining order for due cause, and so notifies the Administrator.
(2006 Code § 31-6-2)
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice: The Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on
every appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal notice. At
the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or
by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date and
place of hearing and briefly describing the issue to be decided shall be given
not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
      1.   By certified mail with return receipt to all parties directly
affected by the appeal; and
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City.
(2006 Code § 31-6-3)
   D.   Advisory Report; Decision By City Council: Within a reasonable time
after the public hearing, the Zoning Board shall submit their advisory report
and all pertinent records to the City Council. The City Council shall render a
decision on the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting following
submission of said documents. By simple majority vote of all members then
holding office, the City Council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify or amend the decision or order appealed from to the extent and in
the manner that they deem appropriate.
(2006 Code § 31-6-4)
8-11E-2:   VARIANCES:
   A.   Definition: A VARIANCE is a relaxation of the requirements of this
chapter that are applicable to a particular street graphic.
(2006 Code § 31-6-6)
   B.   Application For Variance: Every application for a variance shall be
filed with the Administrator on a prescribed form. The Administrator shall
promptly transmit said application to the Zoning Board. The application shall
contain sufficient information to allow the Zoning Board to make an informed
recommendation, and shall include, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Location of the street graphic for which the variance is sought;
      3.   Full and detailed explanation of the grounds for the variance
request;
      4.   Specific section(s) of this chapter containing the regulations
which, if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and
      5.   Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may require.
(2006 Code § 31-6-7)
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice: The Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on
each variance request within a reasonable time after the variance application
is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and
testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice
indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing and the nature of the
proposed variance shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to the applicant or to all parties whose
property would be directly affected by the proposed variance; and
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City.
(2006 Code § 31-6-8)
   D.   Advisory Report: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the
Zoning Board shall submit an advisory report on the requested variance to the
City Council. Their advisory report shall be responsive to all of the variance
standards set forth in subsection F of this section.
(2006 Code § 31-6-9)
   E.   Decision By City Council: The City Council shall act on every request
for a street graphic variance at their next regularly scheduled meeting
following submission of the Zoning Board's advisory report. The City Council
may grant a street graphic variance by an ordinance passed by simple majority
vote of all the members then holding office. In a separate statement
accompanying any such ordinance, the City Council shall state their findings of
fact, and indicate their reasons for granting or denying the requested
variance.
(2006 Code § 31-6-10)
   F.   Standards For Granting Variances: The City Council shall not grant any
street graphic variance unless, based upon the evidence presented to them, they
determine that:
      1.   The proposed variance is consistent with the spirit and purpose of
this chapter, and will not cause injury to the area in which the street graphic
is/will be located or be detrimental to the public welfare in any way; and
      2.   Strict application of the requirements of this chapter would result
in great practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant; and
      3.   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from such
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship while protecting the
broader public interest; and
      4.   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his own making; and
      5.   In cases involving “areas of special control,” granting the proposed
variance will not result in the maintenance or erection of a street graphic
that is inharmonious with the special characteristics of such area; and
      6.   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to other street graphics in the vicinity, and therefore, a variance
would be a more appropriate remedy than an amendment.
(2006 Code § 31-6-11)
8-11E-3:   AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Proposed Amendments: The City Council may amend this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of this section. Amendments may be proposed by
the City Council, the Zoning Board, the Administrator, or any party in
interest.
(2006 Code § 31-6-13)
   B.   Filing: Every proposal to amend this chapter shall be filed with the
Administrator on a prescribed form. The Administrator shall promptly transmit
said proposal, together with any comments or recommendation he may wish to
make, to the Zoning Board for a public hearing.
(2006 Code § 31-6-14)
   C.   Public Hearing; Notice: The Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing on
every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said proposal has been
submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the
time, date, and place of the hearing and the nature of the proposed amendment
shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing:
      1.   By first class mail to all parties whose property would be directly
affected by the proposed amendment; and
      2.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City.
(2006 Code § 31-6-15)
   D.   Advisory Report; Action By City Council: Within a reasonable time after
the public hearing, the Zoning Board shall submit their advisory report to the
City Council. The City Council shall act on every proposed amendment at their
next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of said report. Without
further public hearing, the City Council, by simple majority vote of all the
members then holding office, may either pass the proposed amendment or refer it
back to the Zoning Board for further consideration.
(2006 Code § 31-6-16)
ARTICLE F: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
8-11F-1:   Enforcement Officer; Duties
8-11F-2:   Street Graphic Permit
8-11F-3:   Nonconforming Street Graphics
8-11F-4:   Corrective Action Orders
8-11F-5:   Remedial Action By City; Costs
8-11F-6:   Complaints
8-11F-7:   Penalty
8-11F-1:   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES:
The Building and Zoning Administrator, referred to herein as the
“Administrator”, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is
not limited to, the following specific duties:
   A.   To review and pass upon applications of street graphic permits;
   B.   To inspect existing and newly constructed street graphics to determine
compliance with this chapter, and where there are violations, to initiate
appropriate corrective action;
   C.   To review and forward to the Zoning Board all applications for special
street graphic permits, variances, appeals, and amendments;
   D.   To maintain up to date records of said applications and of any official
actions taken pursuant thereto;
   E.   To periodically review the provisions of this chapter to determine
whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these matters to
the City Council;
   F.   To provide information to the general public on matters related to this
chapter; and
   G.   To perform such other duties as the City Council may from time to time
prescribe and the Administrator may accept.
(2006 Code § 31-5-1)
8-11F-2:   STREET GRAPHIC PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Upon the effective date hereof, no sign, or other
street graphic, except those listed in section
8-11D-2 of this chapter, shall be erected, expanded, altered, relocated, or
reconstructed without a street graphic permit issued by the Administrator.
(2006 Code § 31-5-2)
   B.   Application For Permit: Every applicant for a street graphic permit
shall submit to the Administrator, in narrative and graphic form, all of the
items of information listed below:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      2.   Name and address of the owner of the premises on which the street
graphic is to be erected, if different from subsection B1 of this section;
      3.   Location of the building, structure, or lot where the proposed
street graphic is to be erected, and the zoning district classification of said
premises;
      4.   Description and a professionally done colored rendering of the
proposed street graphic indicating proposed location, dimensions, area, overall
height, illumination, and method of support/attachment;
      5.   Relationship of the proposed street graphic to nearby traffic
control devices;
      6.   Amount of street frontage that the establishment which proposes to
display the street graphic has, and the total area of all existing signs on
said premises;
      7.   Separation from side property lines;
      8.   Distance from corners at intersections; and
      9.   Such other information as the Administrator shall reasonably require
to determine full compliance with this chapter.
(2006 Code § 31-5-3)
   C.   Permit Fees: All fees indicated below shall be paid to the
Administrator with the application. Said fees are intended to defray the
administrative costs connected with the processing/conducting of the listed
permits/procedures. They do not constitute a tax or other revenue raising
device.
Sign Permit/Procedure Fee
Sign Permit/Procedure   Fee
Flush mounted           $10.00
Projecting              10.00
Awning, canopy, marquee 10.00
Window                  10.00
Shopping center         10.00
Freestanding            10.00
Off premises graphics:
Flush mounted           10.00
Freestanding            10.00
 
(2006 Code § 31-5-9)
8-11F-3:   NONCONFORMING STREET GRAPHICS:
   A.   Definition: A NONCONFORMING STREET GRAPHIC means any lawfully erected
sign or other street graphic that does not conform to one or more provisions of
this chapter or any amendment hereto.
   B.   Restrictions:
      1.   A nonconforming street graphic that does not pose an imminent peril
to life or property may remain and be maintained by ordinary repairs but shall
not be:
         a.   Altered or enlarged in such a way as to increase its
nonconformity;
         b.   Replaced by another nonconforming street graphic (provided, that
changing the message on a changeable copy sign shall not be deemed a violation
of this provision);
         c.   Relocated unless it is made to conform with this chapter; or
         d.   Reconstructed after incurring damage in an amount exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of its market value at the time of loss as determined by the
Administrator.
      2.   Provided, that whenever any street graphic is nonconforming solely
because it is appurtenant to a nonconforming commercial/industrial use located
in a nonurban district or in any residential district (see section 8-11D-3 of
this chapter), the Administrator shall apply subsections B1b, B1c and B1d of
this section only to the extent necessary to achieve compliance with the
regulations applicable to street graphics appurtenant to commercial/industrial
uses located in any commercial district or in the Industrial District.
(2006 Code § 31-5-4)
8-11F-4:   CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS:
   A.   Notice Of Corrective Action Needed: Whenever the Administrator finds,
by inspection or otherwise, that any street graphic is in violation of this
chapter, he shall so notify the responsible party, and shall order appropriate
corrective action. Provided, that this notice requirement shall not apply
whenever the Administrator determines that any street graphic poses an imminent
peril to life or property.
   B.   Contents Of Order: The order to take corrective action shall be in
writing and shall include:
      1.   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
      2.   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
      3.   A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance;
      4.   The date by which the violation must be corrected (which may be the
same as the date of the order);
      5.   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to conference with
the Administrator if he so desires;
      6.   The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be
filed, and a statement of the procedure for so filing; and
      7.   A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall
result in revocation of the street graphic permit and may result in remedial
action by the City and/or the imposition of a fine.
   C.   Service Of Order: A corrective action order shall be deemed properly
served upon the owner of the offending street graphic if it is:
      1.   Served upon him personally;
      2.   Sent by registered mail to his last known address; or
      3.   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
(2006 Code § 31-5-5)
8-11F-5:   REMEDIAL ACTION BY CITY; COSTS:
Whenever the recipient of a corrective action order fails to obey said order
within the time limit set forth therein, or in an emergency, the Administrator
may alter/remove the offending street graphic or take any other action
necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. Any expense incurred by the
City pursuant to authorized street graphic remedial action shall be billed by
first class mail to the owner of the offending street graphic.
(2006 Code § 31-5-6)
8-11F-6:   COMPLAINTS:
Whenever any violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint in letter form. The Administrator shall
record such complaints, promptly investigate, and, if he deems necessary,
initiate appropriate corrective action.
(2006 Code § 31-5-7)
8-11F-7:   PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) minimum, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such nuisance
continues unabated.
(2006 Code § 31-5-8)
CHAPTER 12: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
8-12-1:   Findings
8-12-2:   Purpose
8-12-3:   Definitions
8-12-4:   Principles For Development Activities
8-12-5:   Site Development Permit
8-12-6:   Design And Operation Standards And Requirements
8-12-7:   Enforcement And Penalties
8-12-1:   FINDINGS:
The City Council hereby finds that:
   A.   The soil types found in the City are susceptible to erosion and if left
unprotected could cause severe loss of soil with resultant damage to property;
   B.   The topography of the City contains areas with steep slopes upon which,
if clearing of trees and/or inappropriate construction takes place, could
result in severe erosion and slope stability problems which could result in
damage to property;
   C.   Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing
development for certain nonagricultural uses including, but not limited to, the
construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the
building of roads and highways, the modification of stream channels and
drainageways, and the creation of recreational facilities;
   D.   The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon
roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
   E.   Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed out
fills, and embankments;
   F.   Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to
pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands, and reservoirs;
   G.   Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial
purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and
other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove; and
   H.   Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage
capacity of floodplains and natural depressions, resulting in increased chances
of flooding at risk to public health and safety.
(2006 Code § 32-1-1)
8-12-2:   PURPOSE:
The City Council, therefore, declares that the purpose of this chapter is to
safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and
promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction, use and maintenance of any development or other activity which
disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on
land situated in the City. It is the intention of this chapter that the
delivery of sediment from sites affected by land disturbing activities be
limited, as closely as practicable, to that which would have occurred if the
land had been left in its natural undisturbed state.
(2006 Code § 32-1-2)
8-12-3:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as set
forth in this section:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and
tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter.
CITY: The City of Grafton, Jersey County, Illinois.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of “average end areas”.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
LOT: An individual platted lot in an approved subdivision.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
SITE: A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work
is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and construction
improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction or
alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion,
runoff and grading.
SLOPE DISTURBANCE LINE: The line as shown on City plats which delineates
relatively level building areas and sloped areas where slopes exceed twenty
percent (20%) and where special precautions must be taken.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade
drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which
surface water or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions.
(2006 Code § 32-2-1)
8-12-4:   PRINCIPLES FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES:
It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation
caused by development activities, including clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating, and filling of land, in the City. Measures taken to control soil
erosion and off site sediment runoff should be adequate to assure that sediment
is not transported from the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less.
The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the
City and to the preparation of the submissions required under section
8-12-5 of this chapter:
   A.   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site
so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided where possible, and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   B.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands
should be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of
watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures.
   C.   Special precautions should be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake,
pond, or wetland. Preventive measures should reflect the sensitivity of these
areas to erosion and sedimentation.
   D.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   E.   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures should be installed prior to
site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
   F.   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency or climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and
benefits involved.
   G.   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   H.   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
and rates of discharges will not create additional erosion on site or
downstream.
   I.   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and functional
as soon as practical during development.
   J.   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses should be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
   K.   All waste generated as a result of site development activity should be
properly disposed of and should be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   L.   All construction sites should provide measures to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways.
   M.   All downspouts from structures shall be connected to or shall direct
drainage to the approved storm drainage system.
(2006 Code § 32-3-1)
8-12-5:   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating,
or filling of land which meets the following provisions without having first
obtained a site development permit from the Building and Zoning Administrator
of the City.
      1.   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area in
excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet;
      2.   Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of
five hundred (500) square feet if the activity is within twenty five feet (25')
of a lake, pond, stream, or wetland; or
      3.   Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed one
hundred (100) cubic yards.
      4.   Any land disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope
disturbance line.
      5.   Any tree cutting where the tree is in excess of four inches (4") in
diameter.
   B.   Exemptions From Permit: A permit shall not be required for any of the
following; provided, that the person responsible for any such development shall
implement necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the
principles set forth in section 8-12-4 of this chapter: Agricultural use of
land, including the implementation of conservation measures included in a farm
conservation plan approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, and
including the construction of agricultural structures and home gardens.
(2006 Code § 32-4-2)
   C.   Application For Permit: Application for a site development permit shall
be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the Building
and Zoning Administrator on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application
shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site,
the contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm, and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Each application
shall include certification that any land clearing, construction, or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the
plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
   D.   Submissions:
      1.   Single Lot Development Permit: Each application for a single lot
development permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
         a.   A plat of the lot indicating lot lines, dimensions, building
setback lines, the slope disturbance line (if any), and the location of any
proposed structures.
         b.   The location and description of erosion and runoff control
measures to be employed during construction.
         c.   For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of
the slope disturbance line, a site development plan prepared by a registered
professional engineer. The site plan shall include the following:
            (1)   Limits of disturbance including tree removal.
            (2)   Runoff control measures during construction.
            (3)   Cross section view of any cut or fill proposed on the site.
            (4)   Erosion control measures during construction.
            (5)   Details of method(s) proposed for providing slope stability.
            (6)   Permanent measures to be employed for runoff control.
            (7)   Permanent measures to be employed for erosion control.
      2.   Site Development Permit: Each application for a site development
permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
         a.   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in
the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the
boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a
legend and scale.
         b.   A development plan of the site showing:
            (1)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation
and drainage pattern of the area.
            (2)   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities,
streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage facilities,
vegetative cover, paved areas and other significant natural or manmade features
on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
            (3)   A general description of the predominant soil types on the
site, their location, and their limitations for the proposed use.
            (4)   Proposed use of the site, including present development and
planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading, excavation, and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions
for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map,
indications of flow directions, and computations; kinds and locations of
utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or
seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed.
         c.   An erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures
necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of
construction and permanently after completion of development of the site,
including:
            (1)   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and traps,
including outlets details.
            (2)   Location and description of all soil stabilization and
erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod,
method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime
and fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures, and types of nonvegetative
stabilization measures.
            (3)   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions, waterways, and outlets.
            (4)   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment off site, including construction entrance details, as appropriate.
            (5)   Description of dust and traffic control measures.
            (6)   Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization
methods.
            (7)   Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations,
and methods of stabilization.
            (8)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including
type and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
            (9)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person
(s) or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion
control structures and measures during development and after development is
completed.
         d.   (1) The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter
controls), clearing and grading, installation of temporary soil stabilization
measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas,
final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative cover, and the
removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to notify the Building and Zoning Administrator of any significant changes
which occur in the site development schedule after the initial erosion and
sediment control plan has been approved.
            (2)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the standards and requirements contained in
"Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" (the
Yellow Book) published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
"Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control" (the Green Book) prepared by the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and adopted by the Jersey County
Soil and Water Conservation District, which standards and requirements are
hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.
            (3)   The Building and Zoning Administrator may waive specific
requirements for the content of submission upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives
and principles of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 32-4-4)
   E.   Bond, Letter Of Credit Or Other Security: The applicant for a site
development permit is required to file with the City a faithful performance
bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to
the City Attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the Building and Zoning
Administrator to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of
improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures
for such period as specified by the City, and engineering and inspection costs
to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
(2006 Code § 32-4-5)
   F.   Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit
shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The Building and Zoning Administrator will review each application
for a development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of
this chapter. The officer may also refer any application to the Jersey County
Soil and Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or
public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and
comment. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Building
and Zoning Administrator shall in writing:
         a.   Approve the permit application if it is found to be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit;
         b.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
         c.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies
and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
      2.   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless:
         a.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the City where applicable; or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the City; or
         c.   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the City for the area in which the
site is situated; and
         d.   All relevant Federal and State permits (i.e., for floodplains and
wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject to soil
disturbance.
      3.   Failure of the Building and Zoning Administrator to act on an
original or revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt shall
authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless
such time is extended by agreement between the Building and Zoning
Administrator and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a revised
plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with
conditions established by the Building and Zoning Administrator.
(2006 Code § 32-4-6)
   G.   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or if not completed by a date
which shall be specified in the permit; except, that the Building and Zoning
Administrator may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit. The Building and
Zoning Administrator may require modification of the erosion control plan to
prevent any increase in erosion or off site sediment runoff resulting from any
extension.
(2006 Code § 32-4-7)
   H.   Appeals:
      1.   The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the
filing of the application, may appeal the decision of the Building and Zoning
Administrator as provided in subsection F of this section, to the Board of
Appeals.
      2.   Upon receipt of an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall schedule and
hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days’ notice thereof.
      3.   The Board shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the
hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but need not be
limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface
water flow to tributary and downstream lands, and comprehensive watershed
management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation
of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff
surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and
type of soil or rock which, when disturbed by the proposed development
activities, may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation.
(2006 Code § 32-4-8)
   I.   Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications, and reports for all site
developments shall be retained in original form by the Building and Zoning
Administrator.
(2006 Code § 32-4-9)
8-12-6:   DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall be
subject to the application standards and requirements set forth in this
section.
(2006 Code § 32-5-1)
   B.   Responsibility: The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility
for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the City or its
officers or agents will not be made liable for such damage by:
      1.   The issuance of a permit under this chapter;
      2.   Compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions
attached to it by the Building and Zoning Administrator;
      3.   Failure of City officials to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions;
      4.   Failure of City officials to recommend denial or to deny a permit;
or
      5.   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.
(2006 Code § 32-5-2)
   C.   Single Lot Site Design Requirements:
      1.   On site sediment control measures shall be constructed and
functional prior to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, or
fill activities on the site.
      2.   Control measures shall be constructed to control runoff from the
property to such an extent possible that sediment is retained on site. The
applicant may select one or more of the control measures as shown in the Office
of Building and Zoning.
         a.   For minimally sloping lots (slopes less than 8 percent) or areas
with limited disturbance must select control measures as shown in the Office of
Building and Zoning.
         b.   For moderately sloping lots (slopes between 8 percent and 20
percent), select control measures both in the Office of Building and Zoning.
      3.   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or nonvegetative measures.
         b.   Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be
stabilized with sod, mat, or blanket in combination with seeding or equivalent.
      4.   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of
their intended function.
      5.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
disposed of within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved
with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
      6.   On site sediment control measures, as specified by the following
criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating clearing,
grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site:
         a.   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter barriers
(including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures) shall be
constructed to control all off site runoff as specified in referenced
handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25'), may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.
         b.   For disturbed areas draining more than one but less than five (5)
acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at
the downslope point of the disturbed area.
         c.   For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point
of the disturbed area.
         d.   Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall provide for both
detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be composed
of equal volumes of “wet” detention storage and “dry” detention storage, and
each shall be sized for the 2-year, 24-hour runoff from the site under maximum
runoff conditions during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be
that rate required to achieve minimum detention times of at least ten (10)
hours. The elevation of the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only
drains the dry detention storage.
         e.    The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated
sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction
period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume or sediment generated in
one year. For construction periods exceeding one year, the 1-year sediment load
and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
      7.   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year frequency
storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards:
         a.   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
         b.   For grades of four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), sod or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied in the channel.
         c.   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be effectively
reduced using drop structures.
      8.   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or nonvegetative measures.
         b.   Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be
stabilized with sod, mat, or blanket in combination with seeding, or
equivalent.
      9.   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided
where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following
requirements shall be met:
         a.   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to
the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel.
         b.   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept
to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be stabilized
within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is completed,
interrupted, or stopped.
         c.   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall
be constructed in the dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
      10.   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment
traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
      11.   Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than
twenty five feet (25') to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers,
including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed
immediately on the downslope side of the piles.
      12.   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.
      13.   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads,
access drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent
sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment
reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street
cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a
controlled sediment disposal area.
      14.   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance of
their intended function.
      15.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
disposed of within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved
with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
(2006 Code § 32-5-3)
   D.   Handbook Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications
contained in “Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control” (the Yellow Book) and the "Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control" (the Green Book) cited in subsection 8-
12-5D2d(2) of this chapter are hereby incorporated into this section and made a
part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods
of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans
approved under section
8-12-5 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of said
manuals and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
(2006 Code § 32-5-4)
   E.   Maintenance Of Control Measures: All soil erosion and sediment control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained
periodically by the applicant or subsequent land owner during the period of
land disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure
adequate performance.
(2006 Code § 32-5-5)
   F.   Inspections:
      1.   The Building and Zoning Administrator shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan. Plans for
grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval
of the Building and Zoning Administrator shall be maintained at the site during
progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections and to ensure compliance
with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, the grading or building
permit, and this chapter, the permittee shall notify the Building and Zoning
Administrator within two (2) working days of the completion of the construction
stages specified below:
         a.   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding
with any other earth disturbance or grading;
         b.   After stripping and clearing;
         c.   After rough grading;
         d.   After final grading;
         e.   After seeding and landscaping deadlines; and
         f.   After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment controls.
      2.   If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in
phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the
completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an
inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5)
working days after notice is received by the City from the permittee, the
permittee may continue work at his/her own risk, without presuming acceptance
by the City. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in
writing at the site.
(2006 Code § 32-5-6)
   G.   Special Precautions:
      1.   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the Building
and Zoning Administrator determines by inspection that the nature of the site
is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the
Building and Zoning Administrator may require, as a condition of allowing the
work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions be taken as is
considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. “Special
precautions” may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed
slope; construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing,
compaction, or cribbing; installation of plant materials for erosion control;
and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering geologist
which may be made requirements for further work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Building and Zoning
Administrator may specify the time of starting grading and time of completion
or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to
ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of
seasonal rains.
(2006 Code § 32-5-7)
   H.   Amendments Of Plans: Major amendments of the site development or
erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the Building and
Zoning Administrator and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the
same manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be
authorized by the Building and Zoning Administrator by written authorization to
the permittee.
(2006 Code § 32-5-8)
8-12-7:   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Exceptions: The Board of Appeals may, in accordance with the following
procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set
forth in this chapter:
      1.   Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition
of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the grounds of
the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be
filed with the site development permit application. In order for a petition to
be granted, it shall be necessary that the Board of Appeals find all of the
following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
         a.   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impracticable for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
         b.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
         c.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
      2.   Each application for an exception shall be referred to the Building
and Zoning Administrator for review. The officer shall transmit his
recommendations to the Board of Appeals, which shall review such
recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
      3.   The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application
for exception, within thirty (30) days after receiving the application, in the
manner provided with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the Board may
approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and
conditions it deems necessary, or it may disapprove such site development
permit application and exception application, or it may take such other action
as appropriate.
(2006 Code § 32-6-1)
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant
to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site
development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Building and
Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
      2.   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued
by the Building and Zoning Administrator and delivered to the permittee or his
agent or the person performing the work. The stop work order shall be effective
immediately, shall state the specific violations cited, and shall state the
conditions under which work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in
effect until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Appeals at
which the conditions of subsection B3 of this section can be met.
      3.   a.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Board of Appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered
mail, and shall state:
            (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language; and
            (2)   The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
         b.   Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present
evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Appeals
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
(2006 Code § 32-6-2)
   C.   Violations And Penalties: No person shall construct, enlarge, alter,
repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
ordinance violation, and each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. In addition to any
other penalty authorized by this subsection, any person, partnership, or
corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior to commission
of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration.
(2006 Code § 32-6-3)
CHAPTER 13: STORMWATER CONTROL
Section
8-13-1:   Authority, Purpose And Objectives
8-13-2:   Definitions
8-13-3:   Application Of Provisions
8-13-4:   Drainage Plan Submittal Requirements
8-13-5:   Minimization Of Increases In Runoff Volumes And Rates
8-13-6:   Water Quality And Multiple Uses
8-13-7:   Design Criteria, Standards And Methods
8-13-8:   Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas
8-13-9:   Early Completion Of Detention Facilities
8-13-10:   Fee In Lieu Of Detention
8-13-11:   Maintenance Responsibility
8-13-12:   Inspections
8-13-13:   Administration And Enforcement Official
8-13-14:   Appeals
8-13-15:   Violation; Penalty
8-13-1:   AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
City by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to diminish threats to public health,
safety, and welfare caused by runoff of excessive stormwater from new
development and redevelopment. This excessive stormwater could result in the
inundation of damageable properties, the erosion and destabilization of
downstream channels, and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources.
The cause of increases in stormwater runoff quantity and rate and impairment of
quality is the development and improvement of land and as such, this chapter
regulates these activities to prevent adverse impacts.
   C.   This chapter is adopted to accomplish the following objectives:
      1.   To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or
flood hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      2.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage due to increased stormwater runoff;
      3.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased
flooding on a watershed basis;
      4.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, correction of channel
erosion problems, and flood rescue and relief operations caused by increased
stormwater runoff quantities from new development;
      5.   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources;
      6.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
      7.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce
soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
(2006 Code § 33-1-1)
8-13-2:   DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands
affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality, and quantity.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary
forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a development from the City.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of
flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event.
BYPASS FLOWS: Stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary to a
property’s drainage system but not under its control.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface water or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. "Channel modification" includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of debris or
removal of trash.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when fill or structure is placed within the floodplain.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of
this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DETENTION TIME: The mean residence time to stormwater in a detention basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
   B.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition
to a building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   D.   Construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects;
   E.   Redevelopment of a site;
   F.   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of a ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste;
   H.   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
deviation, direction, or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and
environmental features, as well as the drainage system and environment of a
property.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary
storage of stormwater flows and for the majority of its bottom area to be
normally dry.
EROSION: The general process whereby earth is removed by flowing water or wave
action.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged
from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in excess of that volume
and rate which pertained before urbanization.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the “special flood hazard area
(SFHA)”.
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream
or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth of one
foot (0.1') increase in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage
and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing, for a given location on a stream or conduit, the
flow rate with respect to time.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the
convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small
open channels, and swales and, where manmade, is usually designed to handle the
10-year runoff event or less.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which stormwater drainage and development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes
without intervention by man.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent (1%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or
conduit.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property
including depressional areas that may also be drained by a storm sewer.
PROPERTY: A parcel of real estate.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources, which is
needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth of one foot (0.1')
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and on more
than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways are
designated for the Mississippi River on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
prepared by FEMA and dated October 23, 1981. The regulatory floodways or those
parts of the unincorporated County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City are designated for the Mississippi River on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by FEMA and dated October 23, 1981. To
locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory floodway
boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site
plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed
to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the
division should be contacted for the interpretation.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of
stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration,
emergency bypass or pumping.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage
systems.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural and manmade, used for conducting
stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet
from a property. The stormwater drainage system includes, but is not limited
to, any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and
pumping stations.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within
a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of
the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are
collected in channels or conduits.
10-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten percent (10%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most
hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in that watershed.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a
given point.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
(2006 Code § 33-1-2)
8-13-3:   APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to all development in the City.
(2006 Code § 33-1-3)
8-13-4:   DRAINAGE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Each applicant shall submit the following information, depending on development
size, to ensure that the provisions of this chapter are met. The submittal
shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the
development on water resources both on site and downstream, and the
effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in managing stormwater runoff. The
applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage,
and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage
plan. The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions. Drainage basins smaller than twenty (20) acres
shall submit only the basic drainage plan called for in subsection A of this
section. Drainage basins larger than twenty (20) acres shall comply with the
submittal requirements of both the basic drainage plan and the advanced
drainage plan of subsections A and B of this section.
   A.   Basic Drainage Plan:
      1.   Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at two foot
(2') contours unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer under existing and
proposed conditions, and areas upstream and downstream, necessary to determine
off site impact of the proposed drainage plan. The map shall be keyed to a
consistent datum specified by the City.
      2.   Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions, where relevant, of
existing and proposed drainage system features of the property and immediate
vicinity including:
         a.   The banks and centerline of streams and channels;
         b.   Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins;
         c.   Farm drains and tiles;
         d.   Subwatershed boundaries within the property;
         e.   Watershed soils classifications;
         f.   The property's location within the larger watershed;
         g.   Location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage
swales;
         h.   Sanitary or combined sewer;
         i.   Depressional storage areas;
         j.   Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and
watersheds which might be affected by the development;
         k.   Detention facilities;
         l.   Roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets;
         m.   Base flood elevation, and regulatory floodway where identified
for the property;
         n.   Basis of design for the final drainage network components; and
         o.   How gutters and their downspouts will connect to or drain to the
approved drainage system.
      3.   Environmental Features: A depiction of environmental features of the
property and immediate vicinity including the following:
         a.   The limits of wetland areas;
         b.   Any designated natural areas; and
         c.   Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
   B.   Advanced Drainage Plan: The same information as required in this
section is required for properties larger than twenty (20) acres along with the
following additional information for the minor drainage system’s design runoff
event and the 100-year runoff event of critical duration:
      1.   Elevations and maps of 100-year flooding;
      2.   Cross section data for open channel flow paths and designated
overland flow paths;
      3.   Direction of storm flows;
      4.   Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage
system; and
      5.   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's
provision for handling events greater than the 100-year runoff.
(2006 Code § 33-1-4)
8-13-5:   MINIMIZATION OF INCREASES IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES:
In the selection of a drainage plan for a new development, the applicant shall
evaluate and implement, where practicable, site design features which minimize
the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the site. The applicant’s
drainage plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features which
are consistent with the following hierarchy:
   A.   Minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the needs
of the project;
   B.   Provide stormwater retention structures;
   C.   Provide stormwater detention structures; and
   D.   Construct storm sewers.
(2006 Code § 33-1-5)
8-13-6:   WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES:
   A.   The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse water
quality impacts downstream and on the property itself. Detention basins shall
incorporate design features to capture stormwater runoff pollutants. Retention
of stormwater shall be promoted throughout the property’s drainage system to
reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff
pollutants.
   B.   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable.
Uses considered compatible with stormwater management include open space,
aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, trails, playing fields),
wetlands and water quality mitigation. The applicant should avoid using
portions of the property exclusively for stormwater management.
(2006 Code § 33-1-6)
8-13-7:   DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND METHODS:
   A.   Release Rates: The drainage system for a property shall be designed to
control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the 10-year, 24-hour
and 100-year, 24-hour events to levels which will not cause an increase in
flooding or channel instability downstream when considered in aggregate with
other developed properties and downstream drainage capacities in basins less
than twenty (20) acres, the modified rational method of design as specified in
the IDOT drainage manual may be used to calculate release rates.
Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be
evaluated when designing the outlet.
   B.   Detention Storage Requirements: The design maximum storage to be
provided in the detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the 100-year,
24-hour event and reservoir (also called a modified pool or level pool) routing
or equal. Detention storage for basins less than twenty (20) acres shall be
computed using the rational method. Detention storage for basins greater than
twenty (20) acres shall be computed using hydrograph methods.
   C.   Drainage System Design And Evaluation: The following criteria should be
used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The underlying objective
is to provide capacity to pass the 10-year peak flow in the minor drainage
system and an overload flow path for flows in excess of the design capacity.
      1.   Design Methodologies: Major and minor conveyance systems for areas
up to twenty (20) acres may be designed using the rational formula. The
rational formula may also be used in sizing the minor drainage system for
larger sites. Runoff hydrograph methods as described in subsection D of this
section must be used for major drainage system design for all systems with
greater than twenty (20) acres of drainage area and for the design of all
detention basins.
      2.   Positive Drainage: Whenever practicable, all areas of the property
must be provided an overland flow path that will pass the 100-year flow at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the flow path. Overland flow paths designed to handle flows in excess of the
minor drainage system capacity shall be provided drainage easements. Street
ponding and flow depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one inch
(1").
   D.   Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs: Runoff hydrographs shall be
developed incorporating the following assumptions of rainfall amounts and
antecedent moisture:
      1.   Rainfall: Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system
hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois
State Water Survey’s Bulletin 70. The first quartile point rainfall
distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems
with critical durations less than or equal to twelve (12) hours. The third
quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis
of detention basins and conveyance systems with critical durations greater than
twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours. The fourth
quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with
durations greater than twenty four (24) hours. The first, third, and fourth
quartile distributions described by Huff are presented in Table 37 of Bulletin
70. The SCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the Huff
distributions.
      2.   Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not
rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume
a conservative wet antecedent moisture condition as a minimum.
   E.   Wet Detention Basin Design: Wet detention basins shall be designed to
remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and, as
much as feasible, to be available for recreational use.
      1.   Wet Basin Depths: Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep,
excluding near shore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be
provided, it shall be at least six feet (6') deep over twenty five percent
(25%) of the bottom area to prevent winter freezeout.
      2.   Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes: The side slopes of wet basins at the
normal pool elevation shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1 horizontal to
vertical).
      3.   Permanent Pool Volume: The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at
normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-
year event.
      4.   Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance
between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible, they
should be at opposite ends of the basin.
   F.   Dry Detention Basin Design: In addition to the other requirements of
this chapter, dry basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to
be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and, as much as feasible, to be available
for multiple uses.
      1.   Dry Basin Drainage: Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty
percent (80%) of their bottom area shall have standing water no longer than
seventy two (72) hours for any runoff event less than the 100-year event.
Underdrains directed to the outlet control shall be used if necessary to
accomplish this requirement.
      2.   Velocity Dissipation: Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize resuspension of pollutants.
      3.   Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance
between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible, they
should be at opposite ends of the basin.
   G.   Minimum Detention Outlet Size: Where a single pipe outlet or orifice
plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of
four inches (4"). If this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater
than those specified in this section, and regional detention is not a practical
alternative, alternative outlet designs shall be utilized which incorporate
self-cleaning flow restrictions.
   H.   Detention In Floodplains: The placement of detention basins within the
floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable
operation during flood events. However, the stormwater detention requirements
of this chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood
fringe areas on the project site, provided the following provisions are met:
      1.   Detention In Flood Fringe Areas: The placement of a detention basin
in a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for one and one-half
(1-1/2) times the volume below the base flood elevation occupied by the
detention basin including any berms. The release from the detention storage
provided shall still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this
section. The applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream flow and
floodplain backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along
watercourses shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention.
All floodplain storage lost below the 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced
below the existing 10-year elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year
flood elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
      2.   Detention In Floodways: Detention basins shall be placed in the
floodway only in accordance with subsection H3 of this section.
      3.   On Stream Detention: On stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this chapter with respect to water quality and control of the 2-
year and 100-year, 24-hour events from the property. Further criteria are
presented in section
8-13-8 of this chapter. If on stream detention is used in watersheds larger
than one square mile, it is recommended that the applicant use dynamic modeling
to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for any properties
upstream or downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the stream as part
of on stream detention:
         a.   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which
require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
         b.   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality
or stream aquatic habitat;
         c.   Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
         d.   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands;
         e.   Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source
management program throughout the upstream watershed; and
         f.   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge.
   I.   Drainage Into Wetlands: Wetlands shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated
with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter,
the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose drainage
flows into wetlands:
      1.   Detention In Wetlands: Existing wetlands shall not be modified for
the purposes of stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the
existing wetland is low in quality and the proposed modifications will maintain
or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions. Existing
depressional storage in wetlands shall be maintained and the volume of
detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
      2.   Sediment Control: The existing wetlands shall be protected during
construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and
shall not be filled.
      3.   Alteration Of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
the wetland.
      4.   Detention/Sedimentation: All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture
the 2-year, 24-hour event and hold it for at least twenty four (24) hours,
before being discharged to the wetland. This basin shall be constructed before
property grading begins. In addition, the drainage hierarchy defined in Section
8-13-5 of this chapter should be followed to minimize runoff volumes and rates
being discharged to the wetland.
      5.   Vegetated Buffer Strip: A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet
(25') in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of the wetland.
   J.   Street, Parking Lot And Culvert Drainage:
      1.   Streets: If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major
drainage system, ponding depths shall not exceed curb heights by more than one
inch (1") and shall not remain flooded for more than eight (8) hours for any
event less than or equal to the 100-year event.
      2.   Parking Lots: The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking
area shall not exceed six inches (6") for more than four (4) hours.
      3.   Culvert, Road And Driveway Crossings: Sizing of culvert crossings
shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tail water conditions on the
culvert.
   K.   Safety Considerations: The drainage system components, especially all
detention basins, shall be designed to protect the safety of any children or
adults coming in contact with the system during runoff events.
      1.   Side Slopes: The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year
capacity shall be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the
basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side slopes of detention
basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1)
(horizontal to vertical).
      2.   Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety
ledge at least four feet (4') in width two and one-half feet (2-1/2') to three
feet (3') below the normal water depth.
      3.   Velocity: Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be
controlled to safe levels taking into consideration rates and depths of flow.
      4.   Overflow Structures: All stormwater detention basins shall be
provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structures shall
be equivalent to the 100-year inflow rate.
   L.   Maintenance Considerations: The stormwater drainage system shall be
designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Turfed side slopes shall be
designed to allow lawn mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins
shall be provided with alternate outflows which can be used to completely drain
the pool for sediment removal. (Pumping may be considered if drainage by
gravity is not feasible). Presedimentation basins shall be included, where
feasible, for localizing sediment deposition and removal. Access for heavy
equipment shall be provided.
(2006 Code § 33-1-7)
8-13-8:   ACCOMMODATING FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS:
Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in
the design of the property’s drainage system. Whenever practicable, flows from
upstream areas that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin
being provided for the site being developed.
   A.   Upstream Areas Not Meeting Requirements:
      1.   When there are areas not meeting the storage and release rates of
this chapter, tributary to the applicant's property, regionalized detention on
the applicant’s property shall be explored by the applicant. The following
steps shall be followed:
         a.   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his
property using the release rates of section
8-13-6 of this chapter, the applicant's property area, and the procedures
described in section
8-13-7 of this chapter.
         b.   Areas tributary to the applicant's property not meeting the
storage and release rate requirements of this chapter shall be identified.
         c.   Using the areas determined in subsection A1b of this section,
plus the applicant's property area, total storage needed for the combined
properties shall be computed.
      2.   Allowable release rates shall be computed using the combined
property areas. Storage shall be computed as described in section
8-13-7 of this chapter. If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable
fully developed land cover, based on local zoning, shall be assumed for the
purposes of computing storage.
      3.   Once the necessary combined storage is computed, the City may choose
to pay for oversizing the applicant’s detention basin to accommodate the
regional flows. The applicant’s responsibility will be limited to the storage
for his property as computed above. If regional storage is selected by the
City, then the design produced in subsection A1c of this section shall be
implemented. If regional storage is rejected by the City, the applicant shall
bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever
practicable. If the applicant must route upstream flows through his basin and
the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size, the applicant must meet the
provision of subsection
8-13-7H3 of this chapter for on stream basins.
   B.   Upstream Areas Meeting Code Requirements: When there are areas which
meet the storage and release rate requirements of this chapter, tributary to
the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed around the
applicant’s detention basin if this is the only practicable alternative.
Storage needed for the applicant’s property shall be computed as described in
subsection A1a of this section. However, if the City decides to route tributary
area flows through an applicant's basin, the final design stormwater releases
shall be based on the combined total of the applicant's property plus tributary
areas. It must be shown that at no time will the release rate from the combined
property exceed the allowable release rate for the applicant’s property alone.
(2006 Code § 33-1-8)
8-13-9:   EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES:
Where detention, retention, or depressional storage areas are to be used as
part of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the
first element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded sediment captured in
these facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in
order to maintain the design volume of the facilities.
(2006 Code § 33-1-9)
8-13-10:   FEE IN LIEU OF DETENTION:
   A.   All single-family residential developments under five (5) acres in size
and all other developments under one acre in size shall pay a fee of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each acre-foot of detention which would be
required under this chapter rather than installing detention facilities on the
property, unless specifically directed to do otherwise by the appropriate local
official. The City also shall have the option for larger properties of
requiring a fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each acre-foot of
detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on site, provided
the property will discharge stormwater to the City’s storm sewer system.
   B.   In instances where regional benefits and economies of scale can be
achieved, it will be permissible for adjacent properties to utilize a common
regional detention basin. Applicants shall have the option of paying a fee of
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each acre-foot of detention required so
that the City can build regional facilities or they can jointly build the
necessary facilities themselves.
(2006 Code § 33-1-10)
8-13-11:   MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
Maintenance of stormwater drainage facilities located on private property shall
be the responsibility of the owner of that property. Before an appropriate
permit is obtained from the City, the applicant shall execute a maintenance
agreement with the City guaranteeing that the applicant and all future owners
of the property will maintain its stormwater drainage system. Such agreement
shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the County. The maintenance
agreement shall include a schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect of
the property’s stormwater drainage system and shall provide for access to the
system for inspection by authorized personnel of the City. The maintenance
agreement shall also stipulate that if the appropriate personnel of the City
notify the property owner in writing of maintenance problems which require
correction, the property owner shall make such corrections within thirty (30)
calendar days of such notification. If the corrections are not made within this
time period, the City may have the necessary work completed and assess the cost
to the property owner. The City has the option of requiring a bond to be filed
by the property owner for maintenance of the stormwater drainage system.
(2006 Code § 33-1-11)
8-13-12:   INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Inspections During Construction: General site grading shall not begin
until the Building and Zoning Administrator has certified in writing to the
applicant that any necessary detention facilities are in place and operational.
The Building and Zoning Administrator or his representative will also conduct
periodic inspections of the work in progress to be certain that the drainage
system is being built as designed. If any violations of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter are noted during such inspections, the Building
and Zoning Administrator shall notify the property owner in writing of the
items needing correction. The property owner shall have ten (10) calendar days
to make such corrections unless given a specific extension of time in writing
by the Building and Zoning Administrator. Failure to complete such corrections
within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Final Inspection: Upon notification by the applicant that the drainage
system is completed, the Building and Zoning Administrator or his
representative shall conduct a final inspection. If the drainage system is
found to contain deficiencies which require correction, the Building and Zoning
Administrator or his representative shall notify the property owner of the
necessary corrections. The property owner shall correct such deficiencies
within ten (10) calendar days unless given a specific extension of time in
writing by the Building and Zoning Administrator. Failure to make necessary
corrections within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of
this chapter. Upon finding that the drainage system meets the provisions and
requirements of this chapter, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall issue
in writing a notice of drainage system completion to the property owner.
   C.   Routine Inspections: All privately owned drainage systems shall be
inspected by representatives of the City not less often than once per year. A
written report shall be filed of the results of any inspection and a copy sent
to the property owner detailing any problems which need correction.
(2006 Code § 33-1-12)
8-13-13:   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility
of the Building and Zoning Administrator of the City or his representatives.
(2006 Code § 33-1-12)
8-13-14:   APPEALS:
All appeals to the Building and Zoning Administrator's decisions regarding the
interpretation of this chapter shall be heard by the Board of Appeals of the
City.
(2006 Code § 33-1-12)
8-13-15:   VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be subject to a
fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(2006 Code § 33-1-14)
CHAPTER 14: FLOOD CONTROL
Section
8-14-1:   Statute Authority; Purpose
8-14-2:   Definitions
8-14-3:   Duties Of Building And Zoning Administrator
8-14-4:   Base Flood Elevation
8-14-5:   Development Permit
8-14-6:   Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Damages
8-14-7:   Protecting Buildings
8-14-8:   Subdivision Requirements
8-14-9:   Public Health And Other Standards
8-14-10:   Carrying Capacity And Notification
8-14-11:   Variances
8-14-12:   Disclaimer Of Liability
8-14-13:   Violation; Penalty
8-14-14:   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
8-14-1:   STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the City by
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12,
5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(2006 Code § 14-1-1)
8-14-2:   DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the “100-year
flood”. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
8-14-4  of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY:
   A.   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can put special
populations at risk.
   B.   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
      1.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
      2.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
      3.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for
a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
      4.   Installation of utilities; construction of roads, bridges, culverts
or similar projects;
      5.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
      6.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
      7.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and
      8.   Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of floodwaters or surface waters.
   B.   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date hereof.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within
the City. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation or determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA):
   A.   These two (2) terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the City, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, or that may be
annexed into the City, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the City are generally identified as such on panel number(s)
17083CINDOA of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jersey County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated April 2, 2009.
FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the
City.
   B.   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Jersey County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed
into the City are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for Jersey County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
April 2, 2009.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers
shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jersey
County prepared by FEMA and dated April 2, 2009. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the City shall be according to the best data available
from the Federal, State, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
8-14-7  of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date hereof and includes any subsequent improvements of
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date hereof.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The “actual start”
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, “actual
start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes “repetitive
loss buildings”. See definition of REPETITIVE LOSS.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place during a ten (10) year period in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started; or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   B.   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
   C.   The term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   D.   The term does not include: 1) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety
Code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or 2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
required Federal, State, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
(2006 Code § 14-1-2)
8-14-3:   DUTIES OF BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The Building and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City meet the requirements
of this chapter. Specifically, the Building and Zoning Administrator shall:
   A.   Process development permits in accordance with section
8-14-5 of this chapter;
   B.   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
8-14-6 of this chapter;
   C.   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
8-14-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the as built elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   D.   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
8-14-8 of this chapter;
   E.   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section 8-14-9 of this chapter;
   F.   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
8-14-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   G.   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
8-14-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   H.   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, State and Federal permits;
   I.   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
   J.   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   K.   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   L.   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies
of State and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
   M.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   N.   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map.
(2006 Code § 14-1-4)
8-14-4:   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood elevation data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/
OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the rivers, creeks and
streams shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide
Flood Insurance Study of Jersey County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an AH Zone
or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jersey County.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an A Zone on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Jersey
County shall be according to the best data available from Federal, State or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Jersey County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the City, or that may be annexed into the City, shall be as delineated on
the 100-year flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study of Jersey County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated April 2, 2009.
(2006 Code § 14-1-3)
8-14-5:   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building and Zoning Administrator. The Building and
Zoning Administrator shall not issue a development permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basements) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
8-14-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   C.   Upon receipt of an application for development permit, the Building and
Zoning Administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The Building and Zoning Administrator shall maintain documentation of
the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification.
   E.   The Building and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this
type of activity. The Building and Zoning Administrator shall not issue a
permit unless all other Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
(2006 Code § 14-1-5)
8-14-6:   PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Barge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit No. 2:
         a.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot (1').
         b.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (½') at a point one thousand feet
(1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         c.   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         d.   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         e.   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois, and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         f.   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3: The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 4:
         a.   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         b.   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         c.   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         d.   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         e.   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         f.   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety
Code, and Federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 5:
         a.   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limit established by the IDNR and
Corps of Engineers.
         b.   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
         c.   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner’s shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         d.   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         e.   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         f.   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         g.   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         h.   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         i.   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will
minimize obstruction to flow.
         j.   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6: The following activities (not involving fill
or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
         a.   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
         b.   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
         c.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
         d.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
         e.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this Statewide permit.
         f.   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7:
         a.   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         b.   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity
of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of
riprap or other design measures.
         c.   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         d.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8:
         a.   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the
river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or streambed shall be returned to its original condition.
         b.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         c.   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause “water
pollution”, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/3.545),
shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         d.   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9:
         a.   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. “Urban
areas” are defined as areas of the State where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban).
         b.   In addition to the materials listed in subsection
8-14-6A8a of this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be
utilized in rural areas, provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         c.   The following shall not be used in any case: auto bodies, garbage
or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials, asphalt or other
bituminous materials, or any material which would cause "water pollution", as
defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5/3.545).
         d.   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         e.   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         f.   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         g.   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the
bank.
         h.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site. For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe
of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         i.   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         j.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         k.   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         l.   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, State, and
Federal laws and rules, and shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10:
         a.   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
         b.   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         c.   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property; and
         d.   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         e.   No construction shall be undertaken in or within fifty feet (50')
of the bank of the stream channel.
         f.   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         g.   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure
shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         h.   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11:
         a.   The affected length of the stream shall not, either singularly or
cumulatively, exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         b.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel; and
         c.   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         d.   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank, provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of the bank, and provided the
cross sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than
ten percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards
per linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee, provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         e.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12:
         a.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure; and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         b.   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         c.   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR).
         d.   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor Dredging
Activities).
         e.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13:
         a.   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required Federal, State and local
authorizations.
         b.   The term “temporary” shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         c.   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         d.   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         e.   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream
channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that
the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition Number
3 of this Statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
         f.   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         g.   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         h.   Materials used for the project shall not cause “water pollution”,
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/3.545).
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(2006 Code § 14-1-6)
8-14-7:   PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: In addition to the damage prevention
requirements of section
8-14-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during a ten (10) year period. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during a ten (10) year period. If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   REPETITIVE LOSS to an existing building as defined in section
8-14-2  of this chapter.
   B.   Residential Or Nonresidential Buildings: Residential or nonresidential
buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the following
methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure;
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse materials; and
         e.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters;
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation;
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation; and
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage;
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation, provided they are waterproofed;
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade;
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade;
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point;
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential Buildings: Nonresidential buildings may be structurally
dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation), provided a licensed professional
engineer or architect certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured Homes Or Travel Trailers: Manufactured homes or travel
trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section; and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Manufactured
Home Installation Code Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code section 870.
   E.   Travel Trailers And Recreational Vehicles: Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per
year shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection D of this section
unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck;
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      5.   The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet;
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model; and
      10.   The vehicle must either:
         a.   Be entirely supported by jacks; or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, Sheds Or Other Minor Accessory Structures: Garages, sheds or
other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be permitted, provided the following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable; and
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use; and
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits; and
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot; and
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage; and
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation; and
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area; and
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost, whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet; and
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning;
and
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(2006 Code § 14-1-7)
8-14-8:   SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The City Council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   B.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
8-14-6 and
8-14-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain. Where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when available; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(2006 Code § 14-1-8)
8-14-9:   PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
8-14-6 and
8-14-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
8-14-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as “development” shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(2006 Code § 14-1-9)
8-14-10:   CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the City shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.
(2006 Code § 14-1-10)
8-14-11:   VARIANCES:
   A.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Building and
Zoning Administrator for a variance. The Building and Zoning Administrator
shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the City. The City may attach such conditions to the granting
of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   B.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities;
      6.   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      7.   All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   C.   The Building and Zoning Administrator shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection
standards of section
8-14-7 of this chapter would lessen the degree of protection to a building
which will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   D.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
8-14-7 of this chapter requested in connection with the reconstruction, repair,
or alteration of a historic site or historic structure, as defined in
8-14-2, HISTORIC STRUCTURES, of this chapter, may be granted using criteria
more permissive than the requirements of sections
8-14-6  and
8-14-7  of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(2006 Code § 14-1-11)
8-14-12:   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the City or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully hereunder.
(2006 Code § 14-1-12)
8-14-13:   VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure
to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Building and Zoning
Administrator or the City Attorney may determine that a violation of the
minimum standards of this chapter exists. The Building and Zoning Administrator
or the City Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   B.   If the owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The City shall make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense; and
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The City shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   C.   The Building and Zoning Administrator or the City Attorney shall inform
the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood
damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy
to be suspended.
   D.   The City is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
   E.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation;
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence on the permittee's behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended
or revoked.
   F.   Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(2006 Code § 14-1-13)
8-14-14:   ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including
floodplain ordinance 356. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(2006 Code § 14-1-14)
TITLE 9: ZONING
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND SAVING CLAUSES
Section
9-1-1:   Purpose
9-1-2:   Scope
9-1-3:   Jurisdiction
9-1-4:   Interpretation
9-1-5:   Disclaimer Of Liability
9-1-6:   Severability
9-1-1:   PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law, this Code regulates structures and land uses in
order to preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
More specifically, this Code is intended to assist in achieving the following
objectives:
   A.   To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate sites
in order to maximize community wide social and economic benefits while
accommodating the particular needs of all residents;
   B.   To discourage development of buildings and uses on sites not suited for
development;
   C.   To protect the character and stability of sound existing residential,
commercial and industrial areas;
   D.   To conserve and increase the value of taxable property throughout this
City;
   E.   To ensure the provision of adequate light, air and privacy to the
occupants of all buildings;
   F.   To provide adequate parking and access for all buildings and lots;
   G.   To reduce congestion on the public streets and highways;
   H.   To protect property from damage caused by fire, or by flooding and
poorly controlled storm water runoff;
   I.   To guide the provision of water, sewer, storm water, and other
utilities and municipal services;
   J.   To reduce the initial costs and future maintenance expenses of public
and private improvements and services through thoughtful planning; and
   K.   To gradually eliminate existing structures and uses that impede
achievement of the above objectives.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-1-2:   SCOPE:
In order to achieve the objectives enumerated in section
9-1-1, this Code:
   A.   Divides this entire City into districts, and permits in each district
only those structures and uses that are compatible with the character of such
district;
   B.   Regulates sizes of lots, and the bulk, setbacks, lot coverage, and
manner of use of structures;
   C.   Imposes supplementary regulations to control certain potentially
troublesome structures and uses;
   D.   Sets forth standards for off-street parking areas;
   E.   Restricts nonconforming lots, structures, and uses that adversely
affect the type of development appropriate in each district; and
   F.   Establishes zoning administrative and enforcement procedures.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-1-3:   JURISDICTION:
This Code shall be applicable within the corporate limits of this City.
   A.   Annexed Territory: Whenever, any territory is annexed to the City, the
annexed area shall retain its existing district classification until such time
that an amendment is passed in accordance with the provisions of section
9-8-11 of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-1-4:   INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this Code shall be construed liberally in favor of this
municipality, and every requirement imposed in this Code shall be deemed
minimal. Whenever the requirements of this Code differ from the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted ordinance, regulation, deed restriction, or
covenant, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-1-5:   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent or employee of this Municipality shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this Code.
   B.   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of this municipality, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this Code, shall be defended by the Municipal
Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings. (See "Local
Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act", 745 ILCS 10/1-101)
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-1-6:   SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of
the remainder of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
9-2-1:   Construction Of Terms
9-2-2:   Selected Definitions
9-2-1:   CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this Code, the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.   Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in section
9-2 2 unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not defined in
section
9-2 2 shall have their standard English meanings.
   B.   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   C.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   D.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
   E.   The term "shall" is mandatory.
   F.   The term "may" is discretionary.
   G.   The term "this Municipality" shall mean the City of Grafton, Illinois.
   H.   The words "lots," "parcel," "tract," and "site" shall be synonymous.
   I.   The phrases "used for," "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for,"
"maintained for," and "occupied for" shall be synonymous.
   J.   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot; six
inches (6") or more shall be deemed one (1) foot.
   K.   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   L.   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-2-2:   SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
ABUTTING: As applied to lots, "abutting" means having a common lot line or
district line, or so located in relation to each other that there would be a
common lot line or district line but for the existence of a street, alley, or
other public right of way.
ACCESS WAY: A curb cut, ramp, or other means for providing vehicular access to
an off street parking or loading area from a street.
ACCESSORY USE: Any structure or use that is:
   A.   Subordinate in size or purpose to the principal use or structure which
it serves;
   B.   Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the
occupants of the principal use or structure served; and
   C.   Located on the same lot as the principal use or structure served.
ADJACENT: Lying near, in the vicinity of, next to, adjoining.
ADMINISTRATOR: The Building and Zoning Commissioner or other official appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Aldermen to administer
this Code, or his representative.
AGRICULTURE: Any one or any combination of the following: the growing of farm
or truck garden crops, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, or
animal/poultry husbandry. The term "agriculture" encompasses the farmhouse, and
accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural
activities.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting premises that front on a nearby street.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit situated in a multiple-family dwelling.
ATTACHED: As applied to buildings, "attached" means having a common wall and/or
a common roof.
AUDITORIUM: A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school,
recreation building or other building assigned to the gathering of people as an
audience, to hear lectures, plays and other presentations, as well as
participate in dances, dinners, expositions, bingos, etc.
BASEMENT:  A story having one-half or more of its height below average level of
the adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A licensed establishment, located in a residence that
provides over-night lodging with breakfast for compensation. The owner of the
establishment must reside on the premises. An off-street parking space shall be
required for each sleeping room and each establishment must meet all state and
local codes.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways
(except pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless
exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded by a combination of
streets, public parks, railroad rights of way, waterways, or corporate boundary
lines.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property. When a
structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced wall extending from the
ground up, each part is deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, ENCLOSED:  A building covered by a permanent roof and separated on
all sides from adjacent open space or other buildings by fixed exterior walls
or by common walls, with openings only for windows and doors.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the proposed finish grade at the front wall of the building to the highest
point of the roof.
BUILDING LINE: The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating the
minimum open space required between the front of a structure and the street
right of way line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A non accessory building in which the principal use of the
premises is conducted.
BULK:  Any one or any combination of the following:
   A.   Size or height of structure;
   B.   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or other structures;
   C.   Floor/area ratio;
   D.   Yards or setbacks;
   E.   Lot coverage.
BUSINESS DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT TAX: A division of the Illinois Municipal Code
that provides for a municipality to impose a tax within a designated "Business
District". Such tax shall be used to implement the Business District Plan.
CAMPING TRAILER: A recreational vehicle (RV) or any mobile structure such as
houseboats designed for temporary occupancy which must be licensed by the
Department of Motor Vehicles or IDNR.
CAMPING TRAILER/RV PARK: A lot developed with facilities for accommodating
temporarily occupied camping trailers.
CELL/COMMUNICATION TOWER: A structure designed to support antennas for
communications and broadcasting.
CENTERLINE:
   A.   The centerline of any right of way having a uniform width;
   B.   The original centerline, where a right of way has been widened
irregularly;
   C.   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, FINAL: An occupancy permit issued by the
Administrator indicating that a newly completed structure complies with all
pertinent requirements of this Code and may, therefore, be occupied or used.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, INITIAL: A building permit issued by the
Administrator indicating that proposed construction work is in conformity with
the requirements of this Code and may, therefore, proceed.
CHURCH: A building designed or used for regularly scheduled worship services.
CLINIC: An establishment where licensed physician, dentist, veterinarian, or
other health professional practice their professions.
CLUB/LODGE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose facilities are
restricted to members and their guests; not including a group organized solely
or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial
enterprise.
COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT: Any use or establishment wherein goods or
services are purchased or sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to
other businesses (wholesale).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group home or specialized residential care home serving
unrelated persons with handicaps which is licensed, certified or accredited by
appropriate local, state or national bodies. Community residence does not
include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for
a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance
or alcohol abuse or for treatment of communicable disease.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, LARGE: A community residence serving nine (9) or more
persons.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, SMALL:  A community residence serving eight (8) or fewer
persons in a family like atmosphere.
CONVENIENCE SHOP: Any small retail commercial or service establishment offering
goods/services.
DAY CARE CENTER: See "Nursery School."
DECK: An open porch which is generally open on the sides, is above ground
level, and its intended use is for leisure enjoyment.
DETACHED: As applied to buildings, "detached" means surrounded by yards on the
same lot as the principal building.
DEVELOP:  To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefore.
DISTRICT ZONING: A portion of the territory of this municipality wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots and uses under the terms of this Code.
DRIVE IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: An establishment principally used for
the sale of fast order food for consumption off the premises or in parked cars
on the premises. Fast order food means food that is:
   A.   Primarily intended for immediate consumption;
   B.   Available after a short waiting time; and
   C.   Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten
outside the premises where it is sold.
DRIVEWAY:  A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or
parking area.
DWELLING:  A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as living
quarters for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels, and other
accommodations for the transient public. Modular dwellings on permanent
foundations shall be treated in the same manner as conventionally constructed
dwellings (see definition for modular and permanent foundation).
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing two (2) or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A detached dwelling containing one dwelling unit and
intended for the occupancy of one family. Does not include mobile homes.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one
family. A "dwelling unit" always includes a bathroom and a kitchen.
EASEMENT: A right to use another person's real property for certain limited
purposes.
ENLARGE:  To increase the size (floor area, height, etc.) of an existing
principal structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an existing
use.
ERECT: Build, construct.
ESTABLISHMENT: Either of the following:
   A.   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that is
the sole occupant of one or more buildings; or
   B.   An institutional, business, commercial, or industrial activity that
occupies a portion of a building such that:
      1.   The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other
activities within the building and not a department of the whole; and
      2.   The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of the
building, or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway
that has direct access to the exterior of the building.
EXISTING: Existing, constructed or in operation, on the effective date of this
Code.
EXTEND: To increase the amount of floor area or land area devoted to an
existing use.
FAMILY: One (1) person, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or legal adoption; or up to four (4) unrelated persons maintaining a common
household in a dwelling unit.
FILLING STATION: A building and premises or portion thereof designed and
primarily used for the retail sale of gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil,
and automotive parts, supplies, and accessories. A filling station may include
facilities for the sale of convenience foods/drinks and supplies as well as
facilities for washing vehicles and for making minor automotive repairs.
FLOOD PLAIN CODE: Chapter 8-14 of the City Code of Grafton, Illinois, as may be
amended or replaced.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: As used in determining floor/area ratios and parking
requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
center of the common walls of attached buildings. Gross floor area includes all
of the following: basement floors; attic floor space; halls, closets,
stairwells; space devoted to mechanical equipment; enclosed porches.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building to which freight is brought by truck, air or
railroad freight cars for later distribution.
FRONTAGE: The lineal extent of the front (street side) of a lot.
GARAGE: A structure designed and primarily used for the storage of motor
vehicles, whether free of charge or for compensation.
GOVERNMENT:  The act or process of administering public policy in a political
unit; a political jurisdiction, the office or function thereof.
HISTORIC BUSINESS DISTRICT: An area designated by the City of Grafton for the
purpose of encouraging preservation, restoration, rehabilitation and rebuilding
properties within the district.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any business, profession, or occupation conducted for gain or
support entirely within a dwelling or on residential premises in conformity
with the provisions of this Code. (See section
9-4 5 .)
HOTEL/MOTEL: A building providing overnight accommodations to the general
public for compensation and which may include ancillary services such as a
restaurant, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services and recreational
facilities.
IMMOBILIZE: As applied to a mobile home, "immobilize" means to remove the
wheels, tongue and hitch and place the mobile home on a permanent foundation.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two or more public rights of way (generally
streets) meet.
JUNK YARD: An open area of land and any accessory structures thereon that are
used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing, disassembling,
or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles,
machinery, and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof, and
metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags, and rubber tires. A lot on which three
(3) or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a junk yard. A "junk
yard" includes an automobile wrecking yard.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises or portion thereof on which more than three
(3) dogs, cats, or other household domestic animals, over four (4) months of
age, are kept or on which more than two (2) such animals are maintained,
boarded, bred, or cared for in return for remuneration or are kept for the
purpose of sale.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space used for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A tract of land used or developed as a unit, under single ownership or
under single control. A "lot" may or may not coincide with a "lot of record."
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER:  A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or structures,
including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot boundary abutting the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and most nearly
parallel to the front lot line. The rear lot on corner lots shall be defined as
the line most distant and most nearly parallel to either of the front lot lines
as defined elsewhere in these definitions.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded or registered with the Recorder of Deeds of Jersey County, Illinois,
in accordance with State law.
LOT SIZE REQUIREMENT: Refers to the lot area, width, and depth requirements of
the applicable district.
LOT SIZE/BULK VARIANCE: A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size
and/or bulk requirements applicable to a particular lot or structure. A lot
size/bulk variance goes with the property.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at right angles to the depth; or the same distance measured at a point
midway between the front lot line and the rear lot line; or at the rear line of
the required front yard (building lines), especially on irregularly shaped
lots.
MAINTENANCE: The routine upkeep of a structure, premises, or equipment,
including the replacement or modification of structural components to the
extent necessary to keep a structure in sound condition.
MINI WAREHOUSE: A building, or part of one, for the storage of goods,
merchandise, etc. for rent to individuals or businesses for a monthly fee.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory assembled structure designed for permanent
habitation with a chassis constructed to permit its transport. Mobile/
manufactured homes must have a HUD Certification label attached to their
structure. Mobile/manufactured homes located outside of mobile home parks must
be placed on permanent foundations and will be taxed as real property.
MODULARS: A factory constructed structure designed for permanent habitation
which is substantially assembled on site utilizing pre- manufactured
components. These structures must be built upon a permanent foundation and must
meet or exceed the building codes of the City of Grafton.
MOTEL: See "Hotel".
NONCONFORMING: As applied to a lot, structure, or use, "nonconforming" means:
(1) lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code, but (2) not in
compliance with the applicable provisions thereof.
NUISANCE: Any thing, condition, or conduct that endangers health, or
unreasonably offends the senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable
enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment
of life.
NURSERY: A tract of land on which trees, shrubs, and other plants are raised
for transplanting and sale, and including any structure in which said
activities are conducted.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An establishment for the part time care and/or instruction (at
any time of day) of four (4) or more unrelated children of predominantly pre
elementary school age.
NURSING HOME: A building used as a medical care facility for persons who need
long term nursing care and medical service, but do not require intensive
hospital care.
OFF STREET PARKING AREA: Land that is improved and used primarily for the
storage of passenger motor vehicles, free of charge or for compensation. An
"off street parking area," depending on the circumstances of its use, may
either be a principal use or an accessory use.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: An area at least twenty feet (20') long and ten feet
(10') wide within an off street parking area or garage, used for the storage of
one passenger motor vehicle.
OFFICE: Any building, or portion thereof, in which the business (usually
clerical and administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or
professional person is transacted.
OVERNIGHT STAYS/GUEST HOUSES: A licensed facility that provides overnight
lodging without any food service for compensation. One off-street parking space
must be provided for each lodging room. In residential areas, the facility may
not change the residential exterior façade or have any exterior signage.
PATIO: An at grade paved area without any walls usually adjacent to a building,
and which is intended to be used as an outdoor lounging, dining, or
entertaining area.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION: A permanent support for buildings that are constructed of
conventional foundation materials such as concrete or cement blocks. The
foundation footing shall extend below the frost line. The foundation must
extend the entire perimeter of the structure, for single family and mobile
homes.
PERMITTED USES: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular
district(s), provided it conforms with all the requirements applicable to said
district(s).
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization, or corporate body.
PLAN: The geographical and topographical maps, engineering and architectural
drawings and specifications, and other information indicating the location and
nature of a development.
PORCH: A structure attached to a building to shelter an entrance or to serve as
a semi enclosed space, usually covered with a roof, generally open sided, and
usually large enough to allow seating devices.
PREMISES: A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE: The main structure erected on or the main use
occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure or
use.
PRIVATE STREET: Any street providing access to abutting property that is not
maintained by and dedicated to a unit of government.
RECONSTRUCT: As applied to nonconforming structures, "reconstruct" means to
rebuild after partial destruction.
RECREATION VEHICLE (RV) PARK: See "Camping Trailer/RV Park".
REFUSE: Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial wastes.
RELOCATE: To move to another portion of a lot or to a different lot.
REPAIR: To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct.
RETAIL: Refers to the sale of goods and services directly to the consumer
rather than to another business.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated
to the City or to another unit of government for streets and alleys.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A tract of open land used for the permanent disposal of
refuse in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
SATELLITE DISH: Any parabolic/dish type apparatus, external to or attached to
the exterior of a building or structure, capable of receiving, for the benefit
of the principal use, television or radio signals. Satellite dishes are
considered an accessory use.
SETBACK: The required distance between the property line and the building line.
SKIRTING: The cover affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a mobile
home to conceal the underside thereof.
SPECIAL USE: A use that has unusual operational, physical, or other
characteristics which distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but
which can be made compatible with the intended overall development within a
district. Special uses commonly must meet special standards not necessarily
applicable to permitted uses in the district, and are allowed only by permit. A
special use permit may not be transferable.
STABLE: A structure, situated on the same lot as a dwelling, and designed or
used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, but
not for hire.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street"
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line abutting a lot line.
STRUCTURE:  Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures,
but not all structures are buildings.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY:  Any structure that is not attached to a permanent
foundation.
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT: A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this
Code and valid for not more than one (1) year, which allows the erection/
occupation of a temporary structure or the operation of a temporary enterprise.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
TRAILER: See "Camping Trailer".
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or a structure thereon is designed,
arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.
UTILITY SUBSTATION:  A utility facility such as an electrical substation, gas
regulator station, telephone exchange facility, sewage treatment plant, or
water distribution facility.
VARIANCE:  See "Lot Size/Bulk Variance".
WHOLESALE: Refers to the sale of goods or services by one business to another
business.
YARD: Open space that is unobstructed except as specifically permitted in this
Code and that is located on the same lot as the principal building.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the front lot line and the building
line.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot lines, and the
rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line,
side yard line, and side lot line.
YARD LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the
applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point
than the required depth or width of said yard.
ZONING MAP: The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning districts.
The zoning map is incorporated into this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Regulations
9-3-1:   Establishment Of Districts
9-3-2:   Zoning District Descriptions
9-3-2-1:   R-1 Single Family
9-3-2-2:   R-2 And R-3 Single Family
9-3-2-3:   R-4 Multi-Family
9-3-3:   Zoning Map And District Boundaries - Annual Publication
9-3-4:   Determining Territory Of Districts With Precision
9-3-5:   General Prohibition
9-3-6:   Unlisted Uses Prohibited
9-3-7:   Temporary Uses
9-3-8:   One Building And All Yards On One Lot
9-3-9:   Access Required
9-3-10:   Front Setbacks - Corner/Through Lots
9-3-11:   Front Setbacks In Certain Built-Up Areas
9-3-12:   Intrusions Into Yards
9-3-13:   Exceptions To Height Limits
9-3-14:   Accessory Uses
9-3-15:   Specifically Prohibited Accessory Uses
9-3-16:   Limitations
9-3-17:   Sewers, Septic Tanks
9-3-18:   Schedule; Area And Bulk Regulations; Parking Requirements
9-3-19:   Schedule; Permitted Uses And Accessory Uses; Special Uses; Prohibited
Uses
Planned Developments
9-3-20:   Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
9-3-21:   Planned Unit Development (PUD) Procedures
9-3-22:   Locations Where PUDs May Be Allowed
9-3-23:   Development Standards
9-3-24:   PUD Preliminary Plans
9-3-25:   Final PUD
9-3-26:   Common Open Space Documents
9-3-27:   Changes In Approved Planned Unit Developments
GENERAL REGULATIONS
9-3-1:   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to implement this Code, and to achieve the objectives in chapter 9-1,
the entire municipality is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
DISTRICT DESIGNATION
DISTRICT                         DESIGNATION
Single Family Residence District R-1
Single Family Residence District R 2
Single Family Residence District R-3
Multi-Family Residence District  R-4
Downtown Business District       B-1
General Business District        B-2
Mobile Home District             MH-1
Conservation Reserve District    C-1
Industrial District              I-1
 
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-2:   ZONING DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS:
   A.   R-1, Single Family: A zone characterized by one principal dwelling on a
low density (min. 10,000 sq. ft.) lot. This zone is generally located on top of
the bluffs.
   B.   R-2, Single Family: A zone characterized by one principal dwelling on a
medium density (min. 8,000 sq. ft.) lot.
   C.   R-3, Single Family: A zone characterized by one principal dwelling on a
high density (min. 4,500 sq. ft.) lot. This area was developed prior to the
enactment of Zoning within the City.
   D.   R-4 , Multi-Family: A zone characterized by one or more dwelling units
per lot.
   E.   B-1, Commercial: A zone characterized by retail, service and other
business uses. It is generally located along Main Street in Grafton.
   F.   B-2, Commercial: A mixed use commercial zone which includes larger
tracts of land suitable for development within Grafton.
   G.   MH-1 - Mobile Home: This land use area is generally characterized by
smaller lots to provide areas for affordable housing.
      1.   No portion of any property in an MH-1 zoning district shall be used
or devoted to any commercial trade, manufacturing, or industrial purpose, or be
used as a boarding house, rooming house, or clubhouse, or for any purpose other
than that of a single family residence. This restriction shall not prevent any
resident from doing professional work in his or her own home, provided that
there are no signs placed upon the premises or other advertising identifying
the professional work to be performed.
      2.   No signs of any kind shall be installed, maintained or displayed
within an MH-1 zoning district, except for the following:
         a.   Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in size, and
used for the sole and exclusive purpose of advertising for sale or lease the
home or the lot on which the sign is erected.
         b.   Signs expressing a purely political or religious expression of
the view of the owner or resident of the lot upon which the sign is located.
Political signs supporting a candidate or a proposition relative to a
particular election shall be removed not more than three (3) days following the
election to which the sign is related.
      3.   No livestock, poultry, reptiles, or exotic animals (except that
dogs, cats, or other household pets without vicious propensities, to a limit of
three (3), may be kept if not bred or maintained for commercial purposes) may
be kept in or on any part of any lot located within an MH-1 zoning district. No
animals of any kind shall be allowed to run at large or to be off the animal
owner's property unless such animal is at all times under control by means of a
secure leash or other device.
      4.   No owner shall permit any lot in an MH-1 zoning district to be used
for dumping of rubbish or for the storage of junk, and it shall be the duty of
any owner to cause any rubbish or junk located on any such lot to be removed
within seven (7) days of notice from the City to do so.
      5.   All lots in an MH-1 zoning district, whether vacant or otherwise,
shall be mowed at regular intervals, and shall be kept free of unsightly weeds
and brush. If the owner of a lot fails to mow or keep his or her lot free of
unsightly weeds and brush, the City may cause such a lot to be mowed or cleared
of unsightly weeds or brush at the expense of the owners after written notice
from the City in compliance with State statutes. The cost of mowing or clearing
the lot of unsightly weeds or brush, if incurred by the City, shall become a
lien against the subject property in compliance with State statutes.
      6.   No burning of trash, garbage, leaves, limbs or other waste shall be
allowed within the area of an MH-1 zoning district. No incinerators, burning
barrels, or other means of burning household trash or yard waste shall be
permitted to be established in the MH-1 zoning district.
      7.   No above ground storage tanks containing gasoline, diesel fuel, oil
or home heating oil shall be allowed in an MH-1 zoning district.
      8.   No accessory or service buildings shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained prior to the erection or construction of the principal residential
dwelling upon a lot in the MH-1 zoning district.
      9.   No person shall reside in any partially completed or temporary
structure in the MH-1 zoning district.
      10.   No building materials of any kind or character shall be placed or
stored on a building site until the lot owner or contractor has received a
building permit issued by the City with regard to the building site, and any
such materials thereafter placed on the building site must be located entirely
within the lot lines of the lot upon which the building site is located in an
MH-1 zoning district.
      11.   No commercial vehicles, farm machinery, tractors, trucks, boats,
motorcycles, campers, recreational vehicles (including vans equipped or used
for recreational purposes), house trailers, boat trailers and/or trailers of
any other description, shall be parked or stored on any lot, other than in a
garage or accessory building or its concrete apron; except boats, recreational
vehicles (RV's), or campers, so long as currently licensed may be parked on the
rear forty feet (40') of the lot and; except that a construction trailer or
commercial vehicle required in connection with approved construction on a lot
may be parked on such lot during the period of such approved construction. The
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to temporary parking for pick-up,
delivery or other commercial services to residences within the MH-1 zoning
district. An additional mobile residence may be parked on a lot within the MH-
1 zoning district while visiting a permanent residence, but not for a period to
exceed ten (10) consecutive days.
      12.   Each lot owner shall provide off-street parking for all vehicles in
use by the lot owner and/or the resident of each lot in the MH-1 zoning
district. There shall be no repair, maintenance, or overhaul work on
automobiles or mobile equipment that exceeds one twenty four (24) hour period
except and unless such work is performed in a garage, accessory or service
building. Immobilized automobiles, defined as those not properly licensed by
the State of Illinois, or those automobiles not in a mechanical state of repair
so as to be operable, shall not be permitted to remain in the MH-1 zoning
district for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, unless fully within
a closed garage.
      13.   No water wells shall be permitted to be drilled or maintained in
the MH-1 zoning district. No oil drilling, oil development operations, oil
refining, quarry or mining operations of any kind shall be permitted upon or in
any lot, nor shall oil wells, tanks, tunnels, mineral excavations, or shafts be
permitted on any lot in the MH-1 zoning district. No derrick or other structure
designed for use in boring for oil or natural gas shall be erected, maintained
or permitted upon any lot in the MH-1 zoning district.
      14.   Communication satellite dishes for television reception or
otherwise may not be installed in an MH-1 zoning district unless in the rear
yard area behind or to the rear of the principal residential structure on any
lot. No exterior towers exceeding twelve (12) feet in height shall be installed
on any lot in an MH-1 zoning district.
      15.   No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub plant which obstructs sight lines
at elevations between two (2) and ten feet (10') above the roadways shall be
placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangle area formed
by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty feet
(30') from the intersection of the street lines in an MH-1 zoning district. In
the case of a rounded street property corner, the foregoing restriction applies
from the intersection of the street property lines as extended. The same site
line limitation shall apply on any lot within ten feet (10') from the
intersection of a street property line with the edge of a driveway.
      16.   No fence or wall shall be erected, placed, or maintained on any lot
in an MH-1 zoning district nearer to any street than the minimum building
setback lines as established by City ordinance. No fence shall exceed six and
one-half feet (6.5') in height (measured from natural ground level) and shall
not extend past the front of any dwelling of any property adjacent to the
fence. No electrically charged fences or barbed wire fences are allowed or
permitted in an MH-1 zoning district. The property owner upon which any fencing
is located shall maintain the fencing in an upright, neat and orderly manner at
all times.
   H.   C-1, Conservation Reserve: This land use area is characterized by large
undeveloped areas that contain a variety of special features. In Grafton's
case, these areas are the bluffs and uplands and those areas exhibit special
features, such as, steep slopes, erodible soils, a lack of utility services and
infrastructure. Development can occur in these areas but must meet criteria to
prevent economic or environmental damage and, in some instances, large lot
sizes will be required.
   I.   I-1, Industrial: This land use area is characterized by industrial
activities of a processing, fabrication, assembly or similar nature. Limited
opportunities currently exist in Grafton for industrial activities but this use
should be considered for future opportunities.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-2-1:   R-1 SINGLE FAMILY:
The R-1 zoning district shall be subject to all of the permitted uses,
accessory uses, prohibited uses, special uses, and area and bulk regulations
and parking requirements as established as applicable to R-1 zoning districts
by the Zoning Code of the City as in effect upon the effective date of this
Code. In addition to the foregoing rights and restrictions, property located
within an R-1 zoning district shall be subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Any dwelling to be constructed from or after the effective date of this
Code must contain the following minimum square footage of livable space:
      1.   Single floor dwelling must contain at least one thousand four
hundred fifty (1,450) square feet not including garage.
      2.   Split level dwellings must contain at least one thousand (1,000)
square feet above grade and a total of one thousand four hundred (1,400) square
feet of livable space not including garage.
      3.   One and one-half (1.5) story dwellings must contain at least one
thousand (1,000) square feet above grade and a total of one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet of livable space not including garage.
      4.   Two story dwellings must contain at least one thousand seven hundred
(1,700) square feet of livable space not including attached garage.
   B.   All dwellings to be constructed from or after the effective date of
this Code must include in their initial construction, an attached garage of at
least two hundred forty (240) square feet with a concrete or masonry driveway.
   C.   Materials used for the construction of any structure or building, such
as a detached garage or an accessory or service building, must blend with or
complement the principal dwelling structure on each lot.
   D.   All subsequent improvements, additions, remodeling, replacement, or
repairing of the exterior of any building or dwelling shall be in harmony with
the original and the same type of materials and workmanship originally
exhibited on each lot.
   E.   No previously constructed house or residence may be relocated into the
R-1 zoning district.
   F.   All buildings and/or residential dwellings shall be constructed a
minimum of twenty feet (20') back from the front lot line of each lot and a
minimum of ten feet (10') back from the side lot line of each lot, unless a
variance is granted due to the topography of the land or other circumstances
which reasonably require a variance to facilitate the reasonable use of a
particular lot.
   G.   Any detached garage or accessory or service building ancillary to the
principal dwelling on each lot must have a minimum square footage of interior
space of four hundred (400) square feet, and the height of any such detached
garage, accessory or service building may not exceed the height of the
principal residential dwelling on each lot.
   H.   No portion of any property in an R-1 zoning district shall be used or
devoted to any commercial trade, manufacturing, or industrial purpose, or be
used as a boarding house, rooming house, or clubhouse, or for any purpose other
than that of a single family residence. This restriction shall not prevent any
resident from doing professional work in his or her own home, provided that
there are no signs placed upon the premises or other advertising identifying
the professional work to be performed.
   I.   No signs of any kind shall be installed, maintained or displayed within
an R-1 zoning district, except for the following:
      1.   Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in size, and
used for the sole and exclusive purpose of advertising for sale or lease the
home or the lot on which the sign is erected.
      2.   Signs expressing a purely political or religious expression of the
view of the owner or resident of the lot upon which the sign is located.
Political signs supporting a candidate or a proposition relative to a
particular election shall be removed not more than three (3) days following the
election to which the sign is related.
   J.   No livestock, poultry, reptiles, or exotic animals (except that dogs,
cats, or other household pets without vicious propensities, to a limit of three
(3), may be kept if not bred or maintained for commercial purposes) may be kept
in or on any part of any lot located within an R-1 zoning district. No animals
of any kind shall be allowed to run at large or to be off the animals owner's
property unless such animal is at all times under control by means of a secure
leash or other device.
   K.   No owner shall permit any lot in an R-1 zoning district to be used for
dumping of rubbish or for the storage of junk, and it shall be the duty of any
owner to cause any rubbish or junk located on any such lot to be removed within
seven (7) days of notice from the City to do so.
   L.   All lots, whether vacant or otherwise, shall be mowed at regular
intervals, and shall be kept free of unsightly weeds and brush. If the owner of
a lot fails to mow or keep his or her lot free of unsightly weeds and brush,
the City may cause such a lot to be mowed or cleared of unsightly weeds or
brush at the expense of the owners after written notice from the City in
compliance with State statutes. The cost of mowing or clearing the lot of
unsightly weeds or brush, if incurred by the City, shall become a lien against
the subject property in compliance with State statutes.
   M.   No burning of trash, garbage, leaves, limbs or other waste shall be
allowed within the area of an R-1 zoning district. No incinerators, burning
barrels, or other means of burning household trash or yard waste shall be
permitted to be established in the R-1 zoning district.
   N.   No above ground storage tanks containing gasoline, diesel fuel, oil or
home heating oil shall be allowed.
   O.   No accessory or service buildings shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained prior to the erection or construction of the principal residential
dwelling upon a lot in the R-1 zoning district.
   P.   No person shall reside in any partially completed or temporary
structure in the R-1 zoning district.
   Q.   No building materials of any kind or character shall be placed or
stored on a building site until the lot owner or contractor has received a
building permit issued by the City with regard to the building site, and any
such materials thereafter placed on the building site must be located entirely
within the lot lines of the lot upon which the building site is located.
   R.   No commercial vehicles, farm machinery, tractors, boats, motorcycles,
campers, recreational vehicles (including vans equipped or used for
recreational purposes), house trailers, boat trailers and/or trailers of any
other description, shall be parked or stored on any lot, other than in a garage
or accessory building or its concrete apron. Boats, recreational vehicles
(RV's), or campers, so long as currently licensed may be parked on the rear
forty feet (40') of the lot. A construction trailer or commercial vehicle
required in connection with approved construction on a lot may be parked on
such lot during the period of such approved construction. The foregoing
prohibition shall not apply to temporary parking for pick-up, delivery or other
commercial services to residences within the R-1 zoning district. A mobile
residence may be parked on a driveway within the R-1 zoning district while
visiting a permanent residence, but not for a period to exceed ten (10)
consecutive days.
   S.   Each lot owner shall provide off-street parking for all vehicles in use
by the lot owner and/or the resident of each lot in the R-1 zoning district.
There shall be no repair, maintenance, or overhaul work on automobiles or
mobile equipment except and unless such work is performed in a garage,
accessory or service building. Immobilized automobiles, defined as those not
properly licensed by the State of Illinois, or those automobiles not in a
mechanical state of repair so as to be operable, shall not be permitted to
remain in the R-1 zoning district for a period in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours, unless fully within a closed garage.
   T.   No water wells shall be permitted to be drilled or maintained in the R-
1 zoning district. No oil drilling, oil development operations, oil refining,
quarry or mining operations of any kind shall be permitted upon or in any lot,
nor shall oil wells, tanks, tunnels, mineral excavations, or shafts be
permitted on any lot in the R-1 zoning district. No derrick or other structure
designed for use in boring for oil or natural gas shall be erected, maintained
or permitted upon any lot in the R-1 zoning district.
   U.   Communication satellite dishes for television reception or otherwise
may not be installed in an R-1 zoning district unless in the rear yard area
behind or to the rear of the principal residential structure on any lot. No
exterior towers exceeding twelve feet (12') in height shall be installed on any
lot in an R-1 zoning district.
   V.   No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub plant which obstructs sight lines at
elevations between two (2) and ten feet (10') above the roadways shall be
placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangle area formed
by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty feet
(30') from the intersection of the street lines in an R-1 zoning district. In
the case of a rounded street property corner, the foregoing restriction applies
from the intersection of the street property lines as extended. The same site
line limitation shall apply on any lot within ten feet (10') from the
intersection of a street property line with the edge of a driveway.
   W.   No fence or wall shall be erected, placed, or maintained on any lot in
an R-1 zoning district nearer to any street than the minimum building setback
lines as established by City ordinance. No fence shall exceed six and one-half
feet (6.5') in height (measured from natural ground level) and shall not extend
past the front of any dwelling of any property adjacent to the fence. No
electrically charged fences or barbed wire fences are allowed or permitted in
an R-1 zoning district. The property owner upon which any fencing is located
shall maintain the fencing in an upright, neat and orderly manner at all times.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-2-2:   R-2 AND R-3 SINGLE FAMILY:
The R-2 and R-3 zoning districts shall be subject to all the regulations,
requirements and restrictions as established by the Zoning Codes of the City.
In addition, property located within these districts shall be subject to the
following restrictions:
   A.   Any dwelling constructed after the effective date of this Code must
contain a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of livable space.
   B.   Two off street parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit.
Garages are not required.
   C.   No accessory or service building shall be erected or constructed prior
to the construction of the principal dwelling.
   D.   No livestock, poultry, reptiles or exotic animals (except dogs, cats or
other household pets without vicious propensities, to a limit of three (3) may
be kept).
   E.   Commercial vehicles, farm machinery, building materials or other
similar items may not be stored on a lot other than in a garage or accessory
building. Licensed boats and recreational vehicles may be parked on the rear
forty feet (40') of the lot.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-2-3:   R-4 MULTI-FAMILY:
The R-4 zoning district shall be subject to all of the permitted uses,
accessory uses, prohibited uses, special uses, and area and bulk regulations
and parking requirements as established as applicable to R-4 zoning districts
by the Zoning Code of the City as in effect upon the effective date of this
Code.
   A.   No portion of any property in an R-4 zoning district shall be used or
devoted to any commercial trade, manufacturing, or industrial purpose, or be
used as a boarding house, rooming house, or clubhouse, or for any purpose other
than that of a single family residence. This restriction shall not prevent any
resident from doing professional work in his or her own home, provided that
there are no signs placed upon the premises or other advertising identifying
the professional work to be performed.
   B.   No signs of any kind shall be installed, maintained or displayed within
an R-4 zoning district, except for the following:
      1.   Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in size, and
used for the sole and exclusive purpose of advertising for sale or lease the
home or the lot on which the sign is erected.
      2.   Signs expressing a purely political or religious expression of the
view of the owner or resident of the lot upon which the sign is located.
Political signs supporting a candidate or a proposition relative to a
particular election shall be removed not more than three (3) days following the
election to which the sign is related.
   C.   No livestock, poultry, reptiles, or exotic animals (except that dogs,
cats, or other household pets without vicious propensities, to a limit of three
(3), may be kept if not bred or maintained for commercial purposes) may be kept
in or on any part of any lot located within an R-4 zoning district. No animals
of any kind shall be allowed to run at large or to be off the animal owner's
property unless such animal is at all times under control by means of a secure
leash or other device.
   D.   No owner shall permit any lot in an R-4 zoning district to be used for
dumping of rubbish or for the storage of junk, and it shall be the duty of any
owner to cause any rubbish or junk located on any such lot to be removed within
seven (7) days of notice from the City to do so.
   E.   All lots in an R-4 zoning district, whether vacant or otherwise, shall
be mowed at regular intervals, and shall be kept free of unsightly weeds and
brush. If the owner of a lot fails to mow or keep his or her lot free of
unsightly weeds and brush, the City may cause such a lot to be mowed or cleared
of unsightly weeds or brush at the expense of the owners after written notice
from the City in compliance with State statutes. The cost of mowing or clearing
the lot of unsightly weeds or brush, if incurred by the City, shall become a
lien against the subject property in compliance with State statutes.
   F.   No burning of trash, garbage, leaves, limbs or other waste shall be
allowed within the area of an R-4 zoning district. No incinerators, burning
barrels, or other means of burning household trash or yard waste shall be
permitted to be established in the R-4 zoning district.
   G.   No above ground storage tanks containing gasoline, diesel fuel, oil or
home heating oil shall be allowed in an R-4 zoning district.
   H.   No accessory or service buildings shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained prior to the erection or construction of the principal residential
dwelling upon a lot in the R-4 zoning district.
   I.   No person shall reside in any partially completed or temporary
structure in the R-4 zoning district.
   J.   No building materials of any kind or character shall be placed or
stored on a building site until the lot owner or contractor has received a
building permit issued by the City with regard to the building site, and any
such materials thereafter placed on the building site must be located entirely
within the lot lines of the lot upon which the building site is located in an
R-4 zoning district.
   K.   No commercial vehicles, farm machinery, tractors, trucks, boats,
motorcycles, campers, recreational vehicles (including vans equipped or used
for recreational purposes), house trailers, boat trailers and/or trailers of
any other description, shall be parked or stored on any lot, other than in a
garage or accessory building or its concrete apron; except boats, recreational
vehicles (RV's), or campers, so long as currently licensed may be parked on the
rear forty feet (40') of the lot and; except that a construction trailer or
commercial vehicle required in connection with approved construction on a lot
may be parked on such lot during the period of such approved construction. The
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to temporary parking for pick-up,
delivery or other commercial services to residences within the R-4 zoning
district. An additional mobile residence may be parked on a lot within the R-
4 zoning district while visiting a permanent residence, but not for a period to
exceed ten (10) consecutive days.
   L.   Each lot owner shall provide off-street parking for all vehicles in use
by the lot owner and/or the resident of each lot in the R-4 zoning district.
There shall be no repair, maintenance, or overhaul work on automobiles or
mobile equipment except and unless such work is performed in a garage,
accessory or service building. Immobilized automobiles, defined as those not
properly licensed by the State of Illinois, or those automobiles not in a
mechanical state of repair so as to be operable, shall not be permitted to
remain in the R-4 zoning district for a period in excess of twenty-four (24)
hours, unless fully within a closed garage.
   M.   No water wells shall be permitted to be drilled or maintained in the R-
4 zoning district. No oil drilling, oil development operations, oil refining,
quarry or mining operations of any kind shall be permitted upon or in any lot,
nor shall oil wells, tanks, tunnels, mineral excavations, or shafts be
permitted on any lot in the R-4 zoning district. No derrick or other structure
designed for use in boring for oil or natural gas shall be erected, maintained
or permitted upon any lot in the R-4 zoning district.
   N.   Communication satellite dishes for television reception or otherwise
may not be installed in an R-4 zoning district unless in the rear yard area
behind or to the rear of the principal residential structure on any lot. No
exterior towers exceeding twelve feet (12') in height shall be installed on any
lot in an R-4 zoning district.
   O.   No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub plant which obstructs sight lines at
elevations between two (2) and ten feet (10') above the roadways shall be
placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangle area formed
by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty (30)
feet from the intersection of the street lines in an R-4 zoning district. In
the case of a rounded street property corner, the foregoing restriction applies
from the intersection of the street property lines as extended. The same site
line limitation shall apply on any lot within ten (10) feet from the
intersection of a street property line with the edge of a driveway.
   P.   No fence or wall shall be erected, placed, or maintained on any lot in
an R-4 zoning district nearer to any street than the minimum building setback
lines as established by City ordinance. No fence shall exceed six and one-half
feet (6.5') in height (measured from natural ground level) and shall not extend
past the front of any dwelling of any property adjacent to the fence. No
electrically charged fences or barbed wire fences are allowed or permitted in
an R-4 zoning district. The property owner upon which any fencing is located
shall maintain the fencing in an upright, neat and orderly manner at all times.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-3:   ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES - ANNUAL PUBLICATION:
The boundaries of the listed zoning districts are hereby established as shown
on the zoning map of this Municipality. The zoning map, including all notations
and other information thereon, is hereby made a part of this Code by reference.
Official copies of the zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the
Administrator or other appropriate official.
In accordance with State Law, the Administrator shall publish the City's zoning
map not later than March 31 of each year. However, no map shall be published
for any calendar year during which there have been no changes in zoning
districts or regulations. (See 65 ILCS Sec. 5/11-13-19.) Note: The map shall be
published if there are any annexations.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-4:   DETERMINING TERRITORY OF DISTRICTS WITH PRECISION:
In determining with precision what territory is actually included within any
zoning district, the Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   A.   Where a district boundary as indicated on the zoning map approximately
follows the features listed below on the left, the corresponding feature on the
right shall be deemed the district boundary:
      1.   Center line of any street, alley or highway      Such centerline.
      2.   Lot line                     Such lot line.
   B.   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is legally vacated, the
zoning districts adjoining each side of such vacated public way shall
automatically extend to the center of such way, and all territory included in
the vacated way shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
   C.   All territory (including bodies of water) that lies within the zoning
jurisdiction of this Municipality, but which is not shown on the zoning map as
being located within any district, shall comply with the zoning regulations of
the most restrictive adjoining district.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-5:   GENERAL PROHIBITION:
No structure or part thereof shall be erected, used, occupied, enlarged,
altered, relocated or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of
this Code. Similarly, no lot or part thereof shall be used, occupied, or
developed except in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-6:   UNLISTED USES PROHIBITED:
Whenever any use is not specifically listed as permitted or special within a
particular zoning district, such use shall be deemed prohibited in that
district. However, if the Board of Aldermen, following consultation with the
Administrator finds that the unlisted use is similar to and compatible with the
listed uses, they may amend this Code in accordance with section
9-8-11 to allow such use. The Board's decision shall become a permanent public
record, and any unlisted use that they approve shall thereafter have the same
status as listed uses.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-7:   TEMPORARY USES:
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Code, no temporary structure
shall be used or occupied for any purpose, and no land shall be used for any
temporary enterprise, whether for profit or not for profit, unless a temporary
use permit has been obtained. Applications for temporary use permits shall be
treated in the same way as applications for special use permits. A temporary
use permit shall be valid for not more than one (1) year unless it is properly
renewed (see section
9-8 9).
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-8:   ONE BUILDING AND ALL YARDS ON ONE LOT:
Except as specifically provided otherwise:
   A.   Only one principal building or structure shall be permitted on any
residential lot; and
   B.   No portion of any minimum area, minimum dimensions, or minimum yards
required for any lot, structure, or use shall be counted to satisfy the minimum
area, dimensions, or yards requirements for any other lot, structure or use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-9:   ACCESS REQUIRED:
No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has permanent
easement of access to, a public street or a private street.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-10:   FRONT SETBACKS - CORNER/THROUGH LOTS:
Every lot with multiple frontages (such as corner or through lots) shall meet
the front setback requirements of the district in which it is located on every
side having frontage.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-11:   FRONT SETBACKS IN CERTAIN BUILT-UP AREAS:
Except as specifically provided otherwise, in the Residential zoning district
and in the business districts, where lots having fifty percent (50%) or more of
the frontage on one side of a street between intersections (that is, in one
block) are developed with buildings, the minimum required front setback on that
block shall be the average of the existing front setbacks.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-12:   INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS:
Except where principal buildings are commonly attached (for example, in the
downtown business area), no part of a principal building on one lot shall be
closer than ten feet (10') from any part of a principal building located on an
abutting lot.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-13:   EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS:
   A.   Necessary Appurtenances: Chimneys, parapet walls, cooling towers,
elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas, or other necessary appurtenances
commonly constructed above the roof line shall be permitted to exceed the
maximum height limitations for the district in which they are located if they
comply with all other pertinent ordinances of the City.
   B.   Intersections: On corner lots except in the downtown business district
B-1, in the triangular portion of land bounded by the street lines that are
thirty feet (30') from the point of intersection, whether natural or man made,
shall intrude into the air space that is between two feet (2') and ten feet
(10') above the level of the adjacent street.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-14:   ACCESSORY USES:
An "accessory use" means any structure or use which is:
   A.   Subordinate in size or purpose to the principal structure or use which
it serves;
   B.   Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the
occupants (whether individuals or a commercial enterprise) of the principal
structure or use served; and
   C.   Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served.
If an accessory use is attached to the principal structure, it shall be
considered part of that principal structure.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-15:   SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED ACCESSORY USES:
The following accessory uses are strictly prohibited unless expressly permitted
in particular zoning district(s):
   A.   Use of an accessory structure as a dwelling.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-16:   LIMITATIONS:
See schedules (sections
9-3-18 and
9-3-19) for limitations and schedule listings.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-17:   SEWERS, SEPTIC TANKS:
In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where people
live, work, or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all sewage
in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Whenever the municipal or public sanitary sewerage system is available,
all sewage shall be discharged into such system, whether or not a private
sewage system already exists or is more convenient.
   B.   Whenever the municipal or public sewage system is not reasonably
available, a private sewage system shall be installed and used. All private
sewage systems shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the following requirements:
      1.   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, (225 ILCS 225/1 et
seq.) as now or hereafter amended; and
      2.   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code No. 4.002, promulgated by the
Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health, as now or hereafter
amended; and
      3.   Pertinent, current regulations issued by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency; and
      4.   Applicable codes and ordinances of this City.
The Administrator shall not issue any Certificate of Zoning Compliance unless
he is satisfied that these requirements will be met.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-18:   SCHEDULE; AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS; PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   To facilitate public understanding of this Code and for the better
administration and convenience of use thereof, the regulations limiting the
dwelling unit density, the heights, bulk and arrangement of buildings, and
requiring minimum off-street parking for each of the districts established by
section
9-3-1 hereof (or specified use), area set forth in schedule 9-3-18 hereof. Such
schedule 9-3-18 is hereby adopted and declared to be an integral part of this
Code, and it may be amended in the same manner as any other part of this Code.
Schedule 9-3-18: Area And Bulk Regulations And Parking Requirements
Area And Bulk Regulations
          Minimum Lot Size                Minimum Yard Dimensions
                                                                  Minimum
          Maximum  Area            Mean         Depth Of Depth Of Distance        Maximum
Zoning    Number   In     Width At Depth  Depth Side     Side     To        Depth Coverage
Districts of       Square Building In     Of    Yard     Yard     Nearest   Of    In
          Dwelling Feet   Line     Linear Front Abutting Abutting Principal Rear  Percent
          Units    Or              Feet   Yard  Street   A Lot    On        Yard  Of Lot
                   Acres                                          Adjacent
                                                                  Lot
Schedule 9-3-18: Area And Bulk Regulations And Parking Requirements
Area And Bulk Regulations
             Minimum Lot Size                Minimum Yard Dimensions
                                                                     Minimum
             Maximum  Area            Mean         Depth Of Depth Of Distance        Maximum
Zoning       Number   In     Width At Depth  Depth Side     Side     To        Depth Coverage
Districts    of       Square Building In     Of    Yard     Yard     Nearest   Of    In
             Dwelling Feet   Line     Linear Front Abutting Abutting Principal Rear  Percent
             Units    Or              Feet   Yard  Street   A Lot    On        Yard  Of Lot
                      Acres                                          Adjacent
                                                                     Lot
C-
1            1 per    3      200'     200'   50'   50'      25'      50'       50'   None
Conservation lot      acres
Reserve
R-1 Single-  1 per    10,000
Family       lot      sq ft  80'      125'   20'   20'      10'      20'       40'   25%
Residential
R-2 Single-  1 per    8,000
Family       lot      sq ft  70'      115'   20'   20'      5'       10'       40'   25%
Residential
R-3 Single-  1 per    4,500
Family       lot      sq ft  50'      90'    20'   20'      5'       10'       20'   25%
Residential
R-4 Multi-   1 per
Family       1,500 sq 6,000  50'      100'   20'   20'      5'       10'       10'   40%
Residential  ft of    sq ft
             lot area
MH-1 Mobile  1 per    5,000  50'      100'   20'   20'      5'       10'       20'   40%
Home         lot      sq ft
B-1 Downtown None     None   None     None   None  None     None     None      None  None
Business
B-2 General  None     4,500  50'      90'    20'   20'      10'      20'       20'   50%
Business              sq ft
I-           None     None   100'     100'   50'   50'      25'      50'       25'   40%
1 Industrial
 
Schedule 9-3-18: Area And Bulk Regulations And Parking Requirements (cont.)
Area And Bulk Regulations
          Accessory Building - Minimum Distance To               Parking
                                                                 Requirements
                    Accessory
                    Building
                    Maximum
Zoning    Maximu m  Height                    Side Lot           Number Of Minimum
Districts Height Of Maximum   Principal Front Line     Side Rear Accessory Off-
          Principal Coverage  Building  Lot   Adjacent Lot  Lot  Buildings Street
          Building  In                  Line  To       Line Line Permitted Parking
                    Percent                   Street
                    Of Lot Of
                    Accessory
                    Building
Schedule 9-3-18: Area And Bulk Regulations And Parking Requirements (cont.)
Area And Bulk Regulations
             Accessory Building - Minimum Distance To               Parking
                                                                    Requirements
                       Accessory
                       Building
                       Maximum
Zoning       Maximu m  Height                    Side Lot           Number Of Minimum
Districts    Height Of Maximum   Principal Front Line     Side Rear Accessory Off-
             Principal Coverage  Building  Lot   Adjacent Lot  Lot  Buildings Street
             Building  In                  Line  To       Line Line Permitted Parking
                       Percent                   Street
                       Of Lot Of
                       Accessory
                       Building
C-
1            35'       20'/2.5%  50'       50'   25'      25'  10'  1 per     2 per
Conservation                                                        unit      unit
Reserve
R-1 Single-                                                         1 per     2 per
Family       35'       20'/10%   5'        20'   20'      5'   5'   unit      unit
Residential
R-2 Single-                                                         1 per     2 per
Family       35'       20'/10%   5'        20'   20'      5'   5'   unit      unit
Residential
R-3 Single-                                                         1 per     2 per
Family       35'       20'/10%   5'        20'   20'      5'   5'   unit      unit
Residential
R-4 Multi-                                                          1 per     2 per
Family       35'       20'/10%   5'        50'   20'      5'   5'   unit      unit
Residential
MH-1 Mobile  25'       20'/10%   5'        20'   20'      5'   5'   1 per     2 per
Home                                                                unit      unit
B-1 Downtown                                                        1 per     See
Business     35'       35'/None  None      50'   None     None None unit      section
                                                                              9-5-8
                                                                              1 per
B-2 General                                                         1 per     300 sq
Business     35'       35'/None  None      20'   20'      10'  10'  unit      ft
                                                                              business
                                                                              area
                                                                              1 per
                                                                              1.5
I-           40'       40'/20%   None      50'   50'      25'  25'  No limit  employee
1 Industrial                                                                  s per
                                                                              section
                                                                              9-5-8
 
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-19:   SCHEDULE; PERMITTED USES AND ACCESSORY USES; SPECIAL USES; PROHIBITED
USES:
   A.   To facilitate public understanding of this Code and for the better
administration and convenience of use thereof, the regulations designating
permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, special uses and specifically
prohibited uses for each of the districts established by section
9-3-1 hereof, are set forth in schedule 9-3-19 as a part of section
9-3-1 hereof. Such schedule 9-3-19 is intended and declared to be an integral
part of this Code and it may be amended in the same manner as any other part of
this Code.
   B.   Each column refers to a specific district which lists the permitted
uses, permitted accessory uses, special uses and specifically prohibited uses,
and are read vertically under a district column.
   C.   Limitations and requirements in schedule 9-3-19 as used in a column
shall mean and include the specific limitations and requirements as set forth
in the same column for the district referred to. Where reference is made in
schedule 9-3-19 to another section or provision of this Code, such section or
provision referred to shall thereby be incorporated as an integral part of the
requirements including such reference. All provisions of this Code shall apply
as integral parts of this section although not specifically cited as a column.
   D.   Schedule: Permitted Uses; Permitted Accessory Uses; Special Uses;
Specifically Prohibited Uses; Use Limitations:
Schedule 9-3-19
Permitted Uses and Accessory Uses, Prohibited Uses, Special Uses
Zoning Districts Permitted Uses and Prohibited Uses Special Uses Per Chapter 9-
                 Accessory Uses                     8
Schedule 9-3-19
Permitted Uses and Accessory Uses, Prohibited Uses, Special Uses
Zoning Districts    Permitted Uses and   Prohibited Uses   Special Uses Per
                    Accessory Uses                         Chapter 9-8
                    Single-family
                    dwellings, parks and
                    recreational uses,
C-1 Conservation    non-commercial clubs Commercial uses   Agricultural uses
Reserve             and lodges,          Industrial uses
                    churches, schools,
                    cemeteries, cultural
                    uses
                                         Commercial uses   Public utility
R-1 Single-Family   Single-family        Industrial uses   buildings, home
Residence           dwellings, parks     Overnight stays/  occupations
                                         guest houses
                    Single-family                          Public utility
                    dwellings, parks,                      buildings, home
R-2 and R-3 Single- bed and breakfasts,  Commercial uses   occupations, mobile
Family Residence    overnight stays/     Industrial uses   homes on permanent
                    guest houses                           foundations,
                                                           community residences
                    Single-family
                    dwellings, multiple                    Public utility
R-4 Multi-Family    family dwellings,    Commercial uses   buildings, funeral
Residence           parks, bed and       Industrial uses   homes, churches,
                    breakfasts,                            schools, home
                    overnight stays/                       occupations
                    guest house
                    Retail and service
                    uses, eating and
                    drinking places,
                    public buildings,
                    residential uses                       Public utility
B-1 Downtown        above a business,    Industrial uses   buildings, churches,
Business            single-family                          above ground
                    dwellings, multi-                      petroleum storage
                    family dwellings,
                    hotels/motels,
                    overnight stays/
                    guest houses
                    Retail and service
                    uses, eating and
                    drinking places,
                    public buildings,
                    utility buildings,                     Mobile homes on
B-2 General         residential uses                       permanent
Business            above a business,    Industrial uses   foundation, above
                    single-family                          ground petroleum
                    dwellings, multi-                      storage
                    family dwellings,
                    hotels/motels,
                    overnight stays/
                    guest houses
                    Manufacturing,
                    warehousing,
                    wholesale business,  Manufacturing and Commercial uses,
I-1 Industrial      laboratories, truck  storage of        above ground
                    terminals and        explosives        petroleum storage
                    repair, public
                    utility buildings
                    Single-family,       Multi-family      Public utility
MH-1 Mobile Home    mobile homes on      dwellings,        buildings, home
District            permanent foundation commercial uses,  occupations
                                         industrial uses
 
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
9-3-20:   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD):
The planned unit is intended to provide for developments incorporating a single
type or a variety of related uses which are planned and developed as a
Comprehensive Project. Such development may consist of conventionally
subdivided lots or provide for development by a single phase or multi-phased
project.
The purpose of the planned unit development is to encourage:
   A.   A wide choice in the types of living and shopping environments
available to the public by allowing a development that would not be possible
under prevailing district standards;
   B.   Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and
facilities;
   C.   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic,
and geologic features;
   D.   A creative approach to the use of land and relative physical facilities
that result in better development and design and the construction of aesthetic
amenities;
   E.   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings, and other
facilities;
   F.   Land uses which promote the public health, safety, comfort, and
welfare; and
   G.   Innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial development so
that growing demands of population may be met by greater variety in type,
design, and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use
of open space ancillary to said buildings.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-21:   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) PROCEDURES:
A planned unit development shall be processed and approved with procedures
similar to those for a Special Use Permit (chapter 9-8), and therefore may
depart from normal procedures, standards, and other requirements of the other
sections of the Zoning Code. Applications shall be made on forms provided by
the City and shall be accompanied by the required plans and documents listed in
the following sections.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-22:   LOCATIONS WHERE PUDS MAY BE ALLOWED:
The planned unit development is authorized as a special use in each of the
zoning districts established in this Code. The size of the planned unit
development and the standards to which it must be built vary in different
districts in accordance with section
9-3-23.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-23:   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The planned unit development must meet the following minimum standards:
   A.   Ownership And Size: The site of the planned unit development must be
under single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than two (2)
acres.
   B.   Compatibility: The uses permitted in a planned unit development must be
of a type and so located as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon
surrounding properties, and shall be compatible with each other.
   C.   Parking Requirements: The individual uses permitted within the planned
unit development shall adhere to the parking requirements provided for in other
sections of this Code for the particular use or uses proposed. Dual use and
City parking facilities may be considered in the parking mix.
   D.   Height: No building shall exceed zone district height restrictions.
Structures in a Planned Unit Development exceeding the maximum height limit
contained in the Zoning Code may be allowed if fire retardant construction
materials are used, sprinkler systems are installed, and the scenic view of the
rivers directly affecting other City residents or property owners is not
obstructed.
   E.   Density Controls: A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross
land area devoted to multiple family residential use shall consist of common
open space. Common open space shall not include alleys, streets, parking lots
and similar uses.
   F.   Traffic: Provisions shall be made to provide adequate ingress and
egress designated to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-24:   PUD PRELIMINARY PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plan: A Preliminary Land Use Plan application shall be
filed with suitable vehicular/pedestrian routes, utility plans, and all other
information required to demonstrate compatible, high quality development. This
plan is required to be detailed enough to provide a clear picture of the
applicant's intended development.
   Phased development may be requested for larger projects. These would take
the form of a complete Preliminary Plan followed by Final PUD phases. Because
it is the intent of the City to provide for innovation and flexibility,
submittals are expected to vary, based on the conditions of each project.
   B.   Preliminary PUD Plan Submittal Requirements: To attain sufficient
information, each PUD preliminary application should include the following:
      1.   Plat of Survey, or professionally drawn plans demonstrating the
property boundaries with dimensions, area calculations, street frontages and
significant features (topographic, etc.).
      2.   Application - Site Plans: The project application shall include a
site plan that presents a clear picture of the development proposed including:
         a.   Land Uses: Footprint of structures, accessory buildings, open
space recreation areas, and;
            (1)   Height, Bulk, Coverage: The application shall include plans,
elevations, other drawings demonstrating code compliance and development
quality.
            (2)   Density/Open Space: The application shall include plans,
elevations, datum and drawings demonstrating the density requested and common
open space.
         b.   Traffic/Parking Plans: The application shall include plans/datum
demonstrating adequate parking and ingress and egress designated to minimize
traffic congestion in the public streets.
         c.   Utility Plans: Plans and engineering showing utilities provided
to adequately serve the development.
         d.   Property Owners/Surrounding Property Owners: Application shall
include a map and property owner's mailing address list for notification
purposes.
         e.   Existing Uses: Application shall include a Project Site/
Surrounding property map identifying existing uses on the project site and on
the adjacent properties. This will assure compatibility consideration.
         f.   Time Line: The application shall include a proposed time line for
implementing the proposed development.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-25:   FINAL PUD:
   A.   Final PUD Plan: A final Planned Use Development Plan and/or plat map
shall be submitted and approved before project development.
      1.   If the Project requires Plat Map approval, all documents and
engineering shall be in a form suitable for recording with the County Recorder
of Deeds.
      2.   Should the planned unit development not require a subdivision, a
final PUD plan that meets the requirements of this section shall be prepared
and submitted.
This final plan may be subject to written conditions, which if included, be a
binding part of the final approval.
   B.   Final PUD Plan Submittal Requirements: The final planned unit
development plan shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development;
      2.   If subdivided lands are included in the planned unit development, a
subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the
requirements of a normal subdivision plat;
      3.   An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space;
      4.   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
constructed, and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each
building shall be put, and a street numbering for each building;
      5.   Street construction details, including centerline elevations,
pavement type, curbs and gutters, culvert, etc.;
      6.   Utility construction details;
      7.   Certificate, seals and signatures required for the dedication of
land, and recording the document; and
      8.   Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, including land
area, number of buildings, and number of dwelling units per acre.
      9.   When in the base flood elevation area, elevation information
sufficient to insure compliance with flood plain development regulations.
      10.   A specific time line for the implementation of the development.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-26:   COMMON OPEN SPACE DOCUMENTS:
The developer shall submit open space disposition documents that satisfy the
City of Grafton. These documents shall resolve the following:
All common open space, at the elevation of the City, shall be:
   A.   Conveyed to a municipal or public corporation, or conveyed to a not-
for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefitting the
owners and residents of the planned development or adjoining property owners
and residents of them. All lands conveyed hereunder shall be subject to the
right of the grantee or grantees to enforce maintenance and improvement of the
common open space; or
   B.   Guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space and its
maintenance and improvement, running with the land for the benefit of residents
of the planned unit development or adjoining property owners and/or both;
   C.   The relationship and compatibility, beneficial or adverse, of the
proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood;
   D.   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development, tax
base, and economic well-being of the entire community; and
   E.   The conformity with the recommendation of the City Community Plan.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-3-27:   CHANGES IN APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The planned unit development project shall be developed only according to the
approved final plan/plat which shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, grantees and assigns.
Minor revisions may occur - to be approved by the Administrator. Significant
revisions require Planning Commission and/or Council approval.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 4: SUPPLEMENTARY ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
9-4-1:   Applicability Of Chapter
9-4-2:   Camping Trailers
9-4-3:   Fences, Walls
9-4-4:   Filling Stations
9-4-5:   Home Occupations
9-4-6:   Junk Yards
9-4-7:   Swimming Pools
9-4-8:   Utility Substations
9-4-9:   Kennels
9-4-10:   Agricultural Activities
9-4-11:   Lighting Controls
9-4-1:   APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
This chapter establishes lot and structure requirements, design standards, and
use limitations for specific, potentially troublesome, structures, and uses.
These regulations apply in every zoning district where the specific structure
or use is permitted, or allowed by special use permit. But if more stringent
regulations are applicable in any particular district, such regulations shall
prevail.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-2:   CAMPING TRAILERS:
The regulations of this section do not apply to camping trailers or other
similar recreational vehicles parked in a permitted camping trailer park. The
requirements of subsections A, C, and D do not apply to camping trailers or
other similar recreational vehicles parked on a permitted camping trailer sales
lot.
   A.   Not more than one (1) camping trailer or other similar recreational
vehicle per dwelling shall be parked on any one lot.
   B.   No camping trailer or other similar recreational vehicle shall be used
as living quarters (other than in a camping trailer park).
   C.   No camping trailer or other similar recreational vehicle shall be used
as an office or for any other commercial purpose.
   D.   No camping trailer or other similar recreational vehicles shall be
parked on any front yard, except on a driveway.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-3:   FENCES, WALLS:
The following provisions shall be used to regulate fences and walls in the
City:
   A.   No barbed wire or electrically charged fence, shall be erected or
maintained anywhere in this municipality.
   B.   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected within any public
right-of-way.
   C.   No fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected in violation of
the city or Illinois Drainage Code.
   D.   Every fence, wall or other obstruction shall conform to the special
height restrictions applicable in areas near intersections. No fence or wall in
any required front yard area shall exceed four feet (4') in height; nor shall
any fence/wall exceed six feet (6') in height in any required rear or side
yard. Fence and wall height limits in side yards abutting streets shall be
limited to four feet (4'), same as front yards.
   E.   No fence or wall shall exceed a height of six feet (6'). A special use
permit may be sought for higher fences based on special circumstances.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-4:   FILLING STATIONS:
   A.   All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at
least twenty five feet (25') from any street right of way line, side lot line,
or rear lot line.
   B.   Every access way (curb cut) shall be located at least two hundred feet
(200') from any fire station, school, public library, church, park, or
playground.
   C.   All trash receptacles, except minor receptacles adjacent to the
gasoline pumps, shall be screened from view.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-5:   HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Within this municipality every home occupation shall be considered a special
use. No home occupation shall be established except in conformity with the
following regulations.
   A.   Employees: A home occupation shall have no employees.
   B.   Floor Space: The total area used for a home occupation shall not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling, or three
hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less.
   C.   Dwelling Alterations: In any residential district, a principal
residential building shall not be altered to accommodate a home occupation-in
such a way as to materially change the residential character of the building.
   D.   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor (unenclosed) storage on the premises of
equipment or materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited.
   E.   Nuisances: A home occupation shall not generate any offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or electrical interference
noticeable at or beyond the lot lines.
   F.   Day Care Home shall be considered a home occupation provided eight (8)
or fewer children are cared for in the facility.
   G.   Signs: A home occupation, being a special use, is subject to conditions
established by the Board of Aldermen. A sign may be displayed by the home
occupation based upon the recommendations and at the discretion of the Board of
Aldermen. The sign shall be a maximum of two (2) square feet in size and shall
not be illuminated or detract from the general character of the neighborhood.
The sign must be flush mounted to the building. All home occupations shall have
a business license issued by the City of Grafton.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-6:   JUNK YARDS:
   A.   No part of any junk yard which includes any lot on which any three (3)
or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be located closer than five
hundred feet (500') to the boundary of any residential district.
   B.   All vehicles, parts, and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed structure or within an area screened by a wall, solid fence, or
closely planted shrubbery at least eight feet (8') high and of sufficient
density to block the view from adjacent property.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-7:   SWIMMING POOLS:
Every swimming pool, whether public or private, shall be enclosed by a wall or
fence at least four feet (4') in height and must have a gate that shall be
locked when the pool is not in use. An above the ground pool, extending four
feet (4') or higher above finished grade, need not have a fence with a gate, so
long as the ladder is removed when not in use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-8:   UTILITY SUBSTATIONS:
Every electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange
facility, sewage treatment plant, water storage facility, or similar facility
shall be deemed a special use, and shall conform to the following regulations:
   A.   Every part of any such facility shall be located at least twenty five
feet (25') from all lot lines, or shall meet the district setback requirements,
whichever is greater.
   B.   In any residential district, the structure housing any such facility
shall be designed and constructed to be compatible with the residential
character of the area.
   C.   Every such facility is required to provide screening, approved by the
City sufficiently to block the view from adjacent property. Furthermore, if the
Administrator determines that the facility poses a safety hazard (for example,
if there are exposed transformers), he shall require that a secure fence at
least eight feet (8') in height be installed behind the planting screen.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-9:   KENNELS:
   A.   Every kennel shall be located at least four hundred feet (400') from
the nearest dwelling, and at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential
lot line.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-10:   AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Farm Animals: No barn, stable, shed, or other structure intended to
shelter farm animals (including, but not limited to, horses, cattle, hogs, and
chickens) shall be erected closer than two hundred feet (200') feet to any lot
line of residential property. Similarly, fences shall be erected or other means
shall be taken to prevent farm animals from approaching closer than two hundred
feet (200') to any lot line of residential property, whichever distance is
greater.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-4-11:   LIGHTING CONTROLS:
Any light used for the illumination of signs, swimming pools, or for any other
purpose shall be arranged so as to confine the direct light rays away from
neighboring residential properties and away from the vision of passing
motorist.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 5: SUPPLEMENTARY OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Section
9-5-1:   Applicability Of Chapter
9-5-2:   Existing Parking/Loading Facilities
9-5-3:   Parking Design And Maintenance Standards
9-5-4:   Location Of Parking
9-5-5:   Parking Surfaces
9-5-6:   Design And Location Of Off-Street Loading Facilities
9-5-7:   Computation Of Required Parking/Loading Spaces
9-5-8:   Number Of Parking And Loading Spaces Required
9-5-1:   APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this
chapter for all structures and uses erected or established after the effective
date of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-2:   EXISTING PARKING/LOADING FACILITIES:
   A.   Existing off street parking or loading facilities located on the same
lot as the use served shall not be reduced below, or if already less than,
shall not be further reduced below the requirements and standards for similar
new structures or uses.
   B.   When an existing structure or use is damaged or destroyed and
subsequently repaired or rebuilt, additional off street parking and loading
facilities need not be provided, but parking/loading facilities equivalent to
any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored.
   C.   Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through
addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, etc.,
additional parking and loading facilities commensurate with such increase in
use intensity shall be provided.
   D.   Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different use,
parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required herein for such new
use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-3:   PARKING DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Spaces:
      1.   Each required parking space shall be at least ten feet (10') wide
and twenty feet (20') long, and shall have at least seven feet (7') of vertical
clearance. Every space shall be situated so that no part of any parked vehicle
overhangs the public right of way.
      2.   For multi family, business and industrial uses, markings shall be
laid and restored as often as necessary to clearly delineate each parking
space.
      3.   A spacing plan to identify parking spaces must be installed for all
gravel or rock surfaced parking lots.
   B.   Interior Aisles: Aisles within parking lots shall be sufficiently wide
to permit safe and efficient vehicular movement in the aisles, and into and out
of parking spaces. Aisles designed for two way traffic shall be at least twenty
two feet (22') wide. One way aisles designed for sixty degree (60°) parking
shall be at least eighteen feet (18') wide.
   C.   Access Way:
      1.   Parking areas in the Multi-Family, Business and Industrial Districts
shall be designed so that ingress to and egress from a parking space is from an
aisle or driveway, not directly from the public right of way.
      2.   No access way to any parking area shall be located within thirty
feet (30') of any corner formed by the intersection of the rights of way of two
(2) or more streets. At intersections where traffic control devices are
installed, the Administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to
prevent traffic hazards.
      3.   The access way to every parking lot located in any business and
industrial zoning district shall be at least twenty-two feet (22') wide unless
two (2) one-way drives, each eleven feet (11') wide, are provided.
      4.   The access way to every parking area located in any residential
zoning district shall be at least eleven feet (11') wide; but if the parking
area contains more than eight (8) parking spaces or if the access way is longer
than one hundred feet (100'), access shall be provided either by one (1) 2-way
drive at least twenty-two feet (22') wide or by two (2) 1-way drives, each at
least eleven feet (11') wide.
      5.   The provisions of subsections C1 through C4 apply to all new use or
reconstruction activities but are not retroactive to existing access ways.
   D.   Lighting: Any light(s) used to illuminate any parking area shall be
arranged or shielded so as to confine direct light rays within the parking area
boundary lines to the greatest extent practicable.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-4:   LOCATION OF PARKING:
All off street parking shall be located in conformity with the following
requirements:
   A.   For Dwellings:
      1.   Parking spaces accessory to dwellings located in any residential
zoning district shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling. Such parking
spaces shall not be located in any front yard except in the driveway, but may
be located in the side or rear yards. Each parking space accessory to a multi
family dwelling shall be unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order
to allow another vehicle to enter/exit the parking area. This provision applies
to all new construction and new uses of existing property.
      2.   All parking spaces accessory to permitted non dwelling uses located
in a residential zoning district shall be located on the same lot as the use
served. No commercial vehicle exceeding one ton cargo capacity shall be parked
anywhere in a residential district (except for normal loading, unloading, and
service call), unless a special use permit has been obtained. No vehicle repair
work shall be permitted on any parking lot located in any residential district.
   B.   Business And Industrial Districts:
      1.   In any business or industrial district, off-street parking
facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided collectively if the
total number of spaces so located together is not less than the sum of the
separate requirements for each use, and if all regulations governing location
of parking spaces in relation to the use served are observed.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-5:   PARKING SURFACES:
All parking areas and parking lots shall be graded and improved with either a
compacted stone base at least four inches (4") thick, surfaced with at least
two inches (2") of asphalt, or four inches (4") of concrete. However, in the I-
1 and B-2 Zoning Districts, parking spaces and parking lots located behind the
required setback area may be graded and improved with a compacted stone base at
least six inches (6") thick covered with an oil and chip surface. Any parking
lot within the 100-year flood elevation may be constructed of six inches (6")
of compacted stone base with a gravel or stone surface.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-6:   DESIGN AND LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES:
All off street loading facilities shall conform to the minimum standards as
indicated:
   A.   Size Of Space: Every required off street loading space shall be at
least twelve feet (12') wide and forty five feet (45') long exclusive of aisle
and maneuver space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet
(14'). In no case shall a vehicle being loaded or unloaded overhang into the
public right of way.
   B.   Access Way: Every off street loading space shall have a safe means of
vehicular access to a street or alley. Such access way shall be at least twelve
feet (12') wide.
   C.   Location: Every off street loading space shall be located on the same
parcel of land as the use served, and not closer than fifty feet (50') to the
intersection of the rights of way of two (2) or more streets, and not on any
required front yards.
   D.   Buffer Strips: No loading space or area for vehicles over two (2) ton
cargo capacity shall be developed closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot
located in any residential district unless such space/area is screened by
walls, a solid fence, or closely planted shrubbery at least ten feet (10') in
height and of sufficient density to block the view from residential property.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-7:   COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING/LOADING SPACES:
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this Code, the
Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   A.   In computing parking space requirements based on the number of
employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the
day shall be used. "Employee parking" means one (1) parking space shall be
required per one and one-half (1.5) employees", unless otherwise stated.
   B.   In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of
building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.
   C.   Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into
number of parking spaces, three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross area
shall be deemed one (1) parking space.
   D.   If computation of the number of parking or loading spaces required by
this Code results in a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (.5) or more
shall be counted as one (1) space.
   E.   No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable
requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted
as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another
structure or use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-5-8:   NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in tabular
form below. For any use that is not listed in the table, the same amount of
parking and loading space shall be provided as is required for the most similar
listed use. The Administrator shall make the determination of similarity:
 Use Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required (if any)
    Use                      Parking Spaces Required  Loading Spaces Required
                                                      (if any)
(A) Dwellings, Lodgings:                              
    Hotels, motels, boarding 1 space per lodging      1 space if the use has
   houses                   unit, plus employee      20,000 sq. ft. or more of
                             parking                  floor area
    Overnight stays, guest   In R-2 & R-3 Zoning
   house                    Districts 1 off street   Not applicable
                             space per sleeping room
   Mobile homes             2 spaces per mobile      Not applicable
   Multi-family dwellings                           Not applicable
      1 Bedroom or       1.5 spaces per dwelling   
       less               unit
      2 or more          2 spaces per dwelling     
       bedrooms           unit
   Single-family & two-     2 spaces per dwelling    Not applicable
    family dwellings         unit
    Educational,
(B) Institutional,                                    
    Recreational:
   Churches, auditorium     1 space per 4 seats in   Not applicable
                             the largest seating area
   Libraries, museums       1 space per 500 sq. ft.  On review by the
                             of floor area            Administrator
                                                      To 50,000 sq. ft. of
                                                      floor area: 1 space;
   Nursing homes            1 space per 5 beds       50,001-100,000 sq. ft: 2
                                                      spaces; 100,001-200,000
                                                      sq. ft.: 3 spaces
   Schools                                          On review by the
                                                      Administrator
                             1 space for every 20
       Elementary and     students that the
      Junior             building is designed to   
       High               accommodate, plus
                             employee parking
                             1 space for every 4
      Senior High        students over 16 years    
                             old that the building is
                             designed to accommodate
                             1 space for every 3
                             students that the
      Trade Schools      building is designed to   
                             accommodate, plus
                             employee parking
(C) Commercial, Office,                               
    Service:
                                                      To 10,000 sq. ft. of
    Note: All commercial and                          floor area: 1 space; more
    service uses, unless     1 space per 300 sq. ft.  than 10,000 sq. ft: 1
   specifically indicated   of floor area            space plus 1 additional
    otherwise below.                                  space per 50,000 sq. ft.
                                                      of floor area in excess
                                                      of 10,000 sq. ft.
   Banks, savings and loans                          
                                                      (Both walk-in and drive-
                                                      in): To 30,000 sq. ft. of
                                                      floor area: none
                             1 space per 300 sq. ft.  required; 30,001 to
      Walk-in            of floor area, plus      100,000 sq. ft.: 1 space;
                             employee parking         more than 100,000 sq. ft.
                                                      1 space plus 1 additional
                                                      space per 10,000 sq. ft.
                                                      of floor area in excess
                                                      of 100,000 sq. ft.
                             4 stacking spaces per
      Drive-in           teller or customer        
                             service stall
   Beauty and barber shops  2 spaces per chair, plus Not applicable
                             employee parking
                             4 spaces per bowling
                             lane plus additional     Not applicable, except as
   Bowling alleys           spaces as required       required for affiliated
                             herein for affiliated    uses
                             uses such as restaurants
                             and taverns
   Car wash                 5 spaces per wash lane   Not applicable
                                                      To 25,000 sq. ft. of
                                                      floor area: 2 spaces;
                                                      more than 25,000 sq. ft.
   Furniture and appliance  1 space per 600 sq. ft.  of floor area: 2 spaces,
    stores                   of floor area            plus 1 additional space
                                                      per 25,000 sq. ft. of
                                                      floor area in excess of
                                                      25,000 sq. ft.
                             1 space per 150 sq. ft.
                             of floor area devoted to
   Home occupations         the home occupation in   Not applicable
                             addition to the parking
                             requirements for the
                             dwelling
                                                      To 30,000 sq. ft. of
                                                      floor area: none
                                                      required. 30,001-100,000
    Offices generally, but   1 space per 300 sq. ft.  sq. ft.: 1 space; more
   not medical/dental       of floor area            than 100,000 sq. ft.: 1
    offices                                           space plus 1 additional
                                                      space per 100,000 sq. ft.
                                                      of floor area in excess
                                                      of 100,000 sq. ft.
                             1 space per 200 sq. ft.
   Offices, medical/dental  of floor area or 3       Not applicable
                             spaces per professional,
                             whichever is greater.
                             1 space per 5 seats plus
                             1 space per funeral      1 space per 10,000 sq.
   Mortuaries               vehicle, but not less    ft. or more of floor area
                             than 20 spaces per
                             chapel or viewing room
   Restaurants (both sit-                            
    down and drive-in):
   Refreshment stands                                
                             1 space per 4 seats or 1 1 space per structure
      Sit-down           space per 50 sq. ft. of  having 10,000 sq. ft. or
                             floor area, whichever is more floor area
                             greater
      Drive-in           1 space per 25 sq. ft.    
                             of floor area
                             2 spaces per service
   Service stations         stall, plus employee     Not applicable
                             parking
                             1 space per 4 seats or 1 1 space per structure
   Taverns                  space per 50 sq. ft. of  having 10,000 sq. ft. or
                             floor area, whichever is more of floor area
                             greater
   Theaters                                         Not applicable
      Indoor             1 space per 4 seats in    
                             the largest seating area
                             1 space per 600 sq. ft.
                             of enclosed floor area
                             plus: up to 10,000 sq.   To 25,000 sq. ft. of
                             ft. of open lot area     floor area and open lot
                             devoted to sale/ display area: 2 spaces; more than
                             of vehicles: 1 space per 25,000 sq. ft. of floor
   Vehicle sales            2,500 sq. ft. of open    area and open lot area: 2
                             lot area. Above 10,000   space, plus 1 additional
                             sq. ft.: 4 spaces plus 1 space per 25,000 sq. ft.
                             additional space per     in excess of 25,000 sq.
                             5,000 sq. ft. of open    ft.
                             lot area in excess of
                             10,000 sq. ft.
(D) Industrial:                                       
                                                      To 20,000 sq. ft. of
                             Employee parking (1      floor area: 1 space;
                             space per 1.5 employee)  20,001-50,000 sq. ft.: 2
    Any manufacturing,       plus 1 space per company spaces; 50,001-90,000 sq.
   warehousing, or other    vehicle, plus 1 visitor  ft.: 3 spaces plus 1
    industrial use           space per 25 employees   additional space per
                             on the major shift       50,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                                      area in excess of 90,000
                                                      sq. ft.
 
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
9-6-1:   Purpose Of Chapter
9-6-2:   Nonconforming Lots
9-6-2-1:   Residential
9-6-2-2:   Other Districts
9-6-2-3:   Two Or More Lots In Common Ownership
9-6-3:   Nonconforming Structures
9-6-4:   Nonconforming Uses Occupying A Structure
9-6-5:   Nonconforming Use Of Land
9-6-6:   Nonconformities Under Permit Authority
9-6-1:   PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The requirements imposed by this Code are designed to guide the use of land by
encouraging the development of structures and uses that are compatible with the
predominant character of each of the various residential, business, and
industrial districts. Lots, structures, and uses of land or structures that do
not conform to the requirements of the district in which they are located
impede appropriate development. For example, nonconformities are frequently
responsible for heavy traffic on residential streets, the overtaxing of parking
facilities, the emission of noxious fumes or excessive noise, and/or the
lowering of property values. The regulations in this chapter are intended to
alleviate such existing/potential problems by encouraging the gradual
elimination of nonconformities.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-2:   NONCONFORMING LOTS:
Any vacant lot, that does not conform to one or more of the lot size
requirements of the district in which it is located, may be used in the manner
indicated at sections
9-6-2-1 and
9-6-2-2 if it:
   A.   Is of record on the date of the adoption or amendment of this Code; and
   B.   Was not created after the adoption of the City of Grafton Zoning Code.
   C.   Is at least thirty feet (30') wide.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-2-1:   RESIDENTIAL:
On any such lot located in any district, any permitted structures may be
erected, provided all the bulk (see definitions) and setback regulations of the
particular district are observed.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-2-2:   OTHER DISTRICTS:
On any such lot located in the business or industrial districts, any structure
permitted in the particular district may be erected if the bulk and setback
requirements of that district are met.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-2-3:   TWO OR MORE LOTS IN COMMON OWNERSHIP:
If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage were of record and in common ownership on the effective
date of the enactment or amendment of this Code, and if one (1) or more of
those lots does not meet the minimum lot width, depth, and area requirements of
the district in which they are located, the land involved shall be considered
an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Code. No portion of any such
parcel shall be developed except in compliance with this Code, nor shall any
such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet the
requirements of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-3:   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Any lawful structure which exists on the date of the enactment or amendment of
this Code, but which could not be erected under the terms of this Code because
of restrictions on lot size, height, setbacks, lot coverage, or other
characteristics of the structure, or its location on the lot, may lawfully
remain, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Enlargement, Alterations: No such structure shall be enlarged or
altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
   B.   Relocation: No such structure shall be relocated unless, after
relocation, it will conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   C.   Reconstruction: No structure which is destroyed or damaged by any means
shall be reconstructed if the Administrator determines that the cost of such
reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure's market value at
the time of loss, unless after reconstruction the structure will conform to all
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event the
Administrator determines the estimated cost of reconstruction is less than
fifty percent (50%) of the structure's market value at the time of loss,
repairs or reconstruction shall be permitted, provided such work starts within
six (6) months from the date the damage occurred and is diligently pursued to
completion.
A bona fide construction contractor or adjuster shall make the reconstruction
cost estimate, and a licensed real estate appraiser shall determine the
structure's market value at the time of loss. The owner of the damaged
structure shall be responsible for transmitting these estimates to the
Administrator.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-4:   NONCONFORMING USES OCCUPYING A STRUCTURE:
If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date of the
enactment or amendment of this Code, but would not be allowed under the terms
of this Code, such a use may lawfully continue, subject to the following
provisions:
   A.   Maintenance: Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be
maintained through ordinary repairs.
   B.   Enlargement, Alteration, Reconstruction, Relocation: No structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered,
reconstructed or relocated unless the use of the structure is changed to a
permitted use.
   C.   Extension Of Use: No nonconforming use may be extended to any part(s)
of the structure not intended or designed to be devoted to such use, nor shall
the nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.
   D.   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be
changed except to a use permitted under the applicable district regulations.
   E.   Discontinuance Of Use: When a nonconforming use of a structure, or of a
structure and premises in combination, is discontinued for twelve (12)
consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year
period, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. Any
discontinuance caused by government action and without any contributing fault
by the nonconforming user shall not be counted in calculating the length of
discontinuance.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-5:   NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
Any lawful use of land existing on the date of the adoption or amendment of
this Code that would not be permitted under the terms of this Code may lawfully
continue, subject to the following provisions:
   A.   Intensification Or Extension Of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall
not be intensified, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied by such use on the date of the adoption or amendment of this Code.
   B.   Relocation: No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or in
part, unless, upon relocation, such use will conform to all pertinent
regulations of the district in which it will be located.
   C.   Change Of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed except
to a use that is permitted under the applicable district regulations.
   D.   Discontinuance: When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be resumed,
and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the applicable district
regulations. Any discontinuance caused by government action and without any
contributing fault by the owner or operator shall not be counted in calculating
the length of discontinuance.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-6-6:   NONCONFORMITIES UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY:
The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to any change in an existing
structure or to any change in the use of a structure or of land for which a
permit was issued prior to enactment of this Code or any pertinent amendment
thereto, provided that the work authorized by such permit is carried out and
completed with diligence.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
9-7-1:   Administrator
9-7-2:   Duties
9-7-3:   Initial Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
9-7-4:   Information Required
9-7-5:   Filing Fee, Duration Of Certificate
9-7-6:   Final Certificates Of Zoning Compliance
9-7-7:   Procedures Upon Violation
9-7-8:   Corrective Action Order
9-7-9:   Stop Work Order
9-7-10:   Emergency Measures
9-7-11:   Complaints
9-7-12:   Penalties For Violation
9-7-1:   ADMINISTRATOR:
The office of Administrator of this municipality is hereby established.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-2:   DUTIES:
The Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the
provisions of this Code. This responsibility includes, but is not limited to,
the following duties:
   A.   To review applications pertaining to land, structures and the uses of
land and/or structures;
   B.   To issue or deny temporary and permanent certificates of zoning
compliance;
   C.   To supervise inspections of land, structures, and the uses of land and/
or structures to determine compliance with this Code, and where there are
violations, to initiate appropriate action to secure compliance;
   D.   To receive, file and forward to the Planning Commission all
applications for variances and appeals;
   E.   To receive and file all applications for amendments and special use
permits;
   F.   To maintain up-to-date records of this Code including, but not limited
to, district maps, certificates of zoning compliance, special-use permits,
variances, interpretative decisions of the Planning Commission, minutes of the
Planning Commission, amendments and all applications related to any of these
matters;
   G.   To periodically review the provisions of this Code to determine whether
revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on these matters to the Board
of Aldermen at least once each year;
   H.   To cause copies of this Code (including the district map) and any
amendments thereto to be printed from time to time, as necessary; and
   I.   To provide information to the general public on topics related to this
Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-3:   INITIAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
After the effective date of this Code, no land shall be developed, no new use
or structure shall be established or erected, and no existing use or structure
shall be enlarged, extended, altered, relocated or reconstructed until a
temporary certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. The Administrator
shall issue no temporary certificate of zoning compliance unless he determines
that, when the (proposed) work is completed, the use and/or structure will
conform to the applicable provisions of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-4:   INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Every applicant for a Initial Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall submit to
the Administrator, a narrative or graphic form, any or all of the following
items of information as required by the Administrator:
Note: As used below, the term "proposed" refers to "altered", "enlarged", or
"extended" as well as "completely new".
   A.   Name and address of the applicant;
   B.   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure or
use, if different from subsection A;
   C.   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of
operations, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
   D.   Location of the proposed use or structures, and its relationship to
existing adjacent uses or structures;
   E.   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
   F.   Existing topography of the site (USGS 10 foot contour data is
acceptable), and proposed finished grade;
   G.   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping, and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
   H.   Height, setbacks, and lot coverage of the proposed structures;
   I.   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
   J.   Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access ways;
   K.   Identification and location of all existing and proposed utilities,
whether public or private;
   L.   Location and square footage of existing and proposed signs by type and
class.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-5:   FILING FEE, DURATION OF CERTIFICATE:
Every applicant for an Initial Certificates of Zoning Compliance shall pay a
filing fee as determined by the Board of Aldermen. Initial Certificates of
Zoning Compliance shall be valid for a term of up to one (1) year. The Board of
Aldermen may renew such initial certificates, for cause, for successive one (1)
year periods upon request in writing.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-6:   FINAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
No lot or structure or part thereof that has been created, developed, erected,
enlarged, altered, relocated, or reconstructed after the effective date of this
Code shall be used or occupied until a Final Certificate of Zoning Compliance
has been issued. The Administrator shall issue no Final Certificate of Zoning
Compliance unless he determines, by inspection, that:
   A.   The development or construction of such lot or structure has been
completed in accordance with plans approved at the time the temporary
certificate of zoning compliance was issued; and
   B.   The lot or structure as completed, and the proposed use thereof,
conforms to all applicable provisions of this Code.
Final certificates of zoning compliance shall be issued free of charge. Failure
to obtain a final certificate of zoning compliance shall constitute a separate
violation of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-7:   PROCEDURES UPON VIOLATION:
Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines, by inspection or by other means,
that reasonable grounds exist for believing that any lot, structure, or use is
in violation of this Code, he shall so notify the responsible party in writing,
and shall institute appropriate measures to secure compliance.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-8:   CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER:
To secure compliance with this Code, the Administrator may issue a corrective
action order. Such order shall be deemed properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or operator of the offending lot, structure, or use if it is served
upon such party personally, sent by registered mail to his last known address,
or posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises. Corrective
action orders shall include:
   A.   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
   B.   A statement of what constitutes the violation;
   C.   An outline of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance;
   D.   The date by which the violation must be corrected;
   E.   The date by which any appeal of the correction order must be filed, and
a statement of the procedure for so filing;
   F.   A statement that failure to abide by a corrective action order
constitutes a separate violation of this Code; and
   G.   A statement of the penalties attached to any violation of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-9:   STOP WORK ORDER:
Whenever any land, structure, or use is being developed, erected, or
established contrary to plans approved at the time the Initial Certificate of
Zoning Compliance was issued, the Administrator may order that such work be
stopped immediately. The Administrator's stop-work order may be served on any
person engaged in or responsible for such work, or may be posted in a
conspicuous place on or about the affected premises. Failure to abide by a
stop-work order shall be deemed a separate violation of this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-10:   EMERGENCY MEASURES:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, whenever the Administrator
determines that any violation of this Code poses an imminent peril to life or
property, he may institute, without notice or hearing, any necessary
proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition. The Administrator shall take
no such action until he has consulted with the City Attorney.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-11:   COMPLAINTS:
Whenever any violation of this Code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any
person may file a written complaint on forms provided by the Administrator. The
Administrator shall record such complaints, immediately investigate, and, if
necessary, institute appropriate corrective measures.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-7-12:   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
   B.   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Code shall be fined
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and/or six (6) months
confinement.
   C.   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this Code.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 8: SPECIAL USES AND AMENDMENTS
Section
Special Uses
9-8-1:   Special Use Permits
9-8-2:   Applicant
9-8-3:   Hearing
9-8-4:   Notice
9-8-5:   Factors Considered
9-8-6:   Criteria For Planned Unit Development
9-8-7:   Recommendation Of Planning Commission
9-8-8:   Decision By Board Of Aldermen, Standards
9-8-9:   Temporary Use Permits
9-8-10:   [Reserved]
Amendments
9-8-11:   Amendments
9-8-12:   Filing
9-8-13:   Hearing
9-8-14:   Notice
9-8-15:   Advisory Report/Findings Of Fact
9-8-16:   Decision By Board Of Aldermen
9-8-17:   When Two-Thirds Majority Vote Is Required
9-8-18:   Notice To Applicant Of Written Protest
SPECIAL USES
9-8-1:   SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
This Code divides this municipality into various districts, and permits in each
district only those uses which are clearly compatible with one another. Certain
other uses, because of their special operational or physical characteristics,
may or may not have a detrimental impact on nearby permitted use, depending
upon their precise location, manner of operation, and other factors. Such
"special uses" require careful case-by-case review, and may be allowed only by
permission of the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-2:   APPLICANT:
Every applicant for a special-use permit shall submit to the Administrator, in
narrative or graphic form, any or all of the items of information enumerated in
section
9-7-4 that he or she may require. When the application is complete, the
Administrator shall forward the application and his recommendation to the
Planning Commission for further consideration.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-3:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for a
special-use permit not later than sixty (60) days after its filing. At the
hearing, any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by
duly authorized agent or attorney.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-4:   NOTICE:
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the applicant and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises for which the special use permit is requested; and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the special use permit is requested, and the
nature of the proposed special use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-5:   FACTORS CONSIDERED:
The Planning Commission shall make their recommendation to the Board of
Aldermen, and shall consider the following factors:
   A.   Whether the proposed design, location, and manner of operation, of the
proposed special use is protective of the public health, safety, and welfare;
   B.   The effect the proposal would have on the value of neighboring
property;
   C.   The effect the proposal would have on this municipality's overall tax
base;
   D.   The effect the proposal would have on the public utilities and on the
traffic circulation on nearby streets; and
   E.   Whether there are any facilities nearby that require special
protection.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-6:   CRITERIA FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The Planning Commission shall recommend to the Board of Aldermen the denial or
approval of the proposed planned unit development and shall include not only
conclusions, but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal and
shall set forth with particularity what aspects of the proposal would or would
not be in the public interest including, but not limited to findings of fact on
the following:
   A.   In what respects the proposed plan is or is not consistent with the
stated purposes of the planned unit development regulations;
   B.   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the planned unit development regulations;
   C.   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including, but not limited to, the density, dimensions, area, bulk, and uses,
and the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public
interest;
   D.   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which said
design does or does not make adequate provisions for public services, provide
adequate control over vehicular traffic, provide for and protect designated
common open space and further the amenities of light and air, recreation, and
visual enjoyment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-7:   RECOMMENDATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall submit their finding of fact and recommendation
to the Board of Aldermen not later than ten (10) days after the public hearing.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-8:   DECISION BY BOARD OF ALDERMEN, STANDARDS:
The Board may grant a special use permit by simple majority vote, provided that
such special use as conditioned, is:
   A.   Protective of the public health, safety, and welfare;
   B.   In keeping with the general purposes of this Code;
   C.   Consistent with the characteristics of the general nature of the area
in which the special use is to be located.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-9:   TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
As set forth at section
9-3 7, requests for temporary use permits shall be treated in the same manner
as requests for special use permits. The Board of Aldermen shall issue no
temporary use permit for a period longer than one (1) year but may renew any
such permit for cause.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-10:   [RESERVED]:
AMENDMENTS
9-8-11:   AMENDMENTS:
In accordance with Illinois law and the provisions of this section, the Board
of Aldermen may amend the regulations imposed and the districts established in
this Code. Any proposed alteration of district boundaries or proposed change in
the status of any use-whether permitted, special, or prohibited-shall be
treated as a proposed amendment, and dealt with accordingly. Amendments may be
proposed by the Board of Aldermen, the Administrator, Planning Commission, or
ay party of interest.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-12:   FILING:
Any proposal to amend this Code shall be filed on a prescribed form with the
Administrator, who shall forward it, together with his recommendation, to the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-13:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on every amendment proposal
not later than sixty (60) days after its filing. At the hearing any interested
party may appear and testify.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-14:   NOTICE:
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the applicant and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises for which the amendment is requested; and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
Municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the special use permit is requested, and the
nature of the proposed special use.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-15:   ADVISORY REPORT/FINDINGS OF FACT:
Not later than ten (10) days after the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall submit their advisory report/findings of fact to the Board of Aldermen.
The Planning Commission shall not recommend the adoption of any amendment
unless they find that such amendment is in the public interest and not merely
for the benefit of the party proposing it. Where the effect of a proposed
amendment is to alter district boundaries or to change any use (permitted,
special, or prohibited), the Planning Commission shall make findings regarding
all of the following matters:
   A.   Existing uses of property in the vicinity of the property in question;
   B.   The district classification of property in the vicinity of the property
in question;
   C.   The suitability of the property in question for uses already permitted
under the existing district classification;
   D.   The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in question,
including changes (if any) which may have taken place since that property was
placed in its present district classification.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-16:   DECISION BY BOARD OF ALDERMEN:
The Board of Aldermen shall act on every proposed amendment at their next
regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the Planning Commission's
advisory report. Except as provided by section
9-8-17, the Board of Aldermen may by simple majority vote, pass any proposed
amendment or may refer it back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-17:   WHEN TWO-THIRDS MAJORITY VOTE IS REQUIRED
The favorable vote of at least two thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of
Aldermen is required to pass an amendment to this Code in each of the following
instances:
   A.   When passage would be contrary to the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
   B.   When the amendment is opposed, in writing, by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered. Such written protest must be
filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-8-18:   NOTICE TO APPLICANT OF WRITTEN PROTEST:
In cases of written protest to an amendment of this Code as prescribed in
subsection
9-8-17B, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protester or
protesters on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the
applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such
applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
CHAPTER 9: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 10: MATTERS ENTRUSTED TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
Planning Commission Established
9-10-1:   Planning Commission Established
9-10-2:   Membership, Appointment, Compensation
9-10-3:   Term Of Office - Vacancies
9-10-4:   Meetings
9-10-5:   Records
9-10-6:   Duties
9-10-7:   [Reserved]
9-10-8:   [Reserved]
9-10-9:   [Reserved]
Special Use Permits
9-10-10:   Special Use Permits
9-10-11:   Filing, Record Transmittal
9-10-12:   Hearing
9-10-13:   Notice
9-10-14:   Decision By Planning Commission
9-10-15:   [Reserved]
9-10-16:   [Reserved]
9-10-17:   [Reserved]
9-10-18:   [Reserved]
9-10-19:   [Reserved]
Site Specific Amendments
9-10-20:   Site Specific Amendments
9-10-21:   Application
9-10-22:   Hearing
9-10-23:   Notice
9-10-24:   Standards For Amendment
9-10-25:   Recommendation By The Planning Commission
9-10-26:   Final Decision
9-10-27:   Super Majority Vote Required
9-10-28:   Notice To Applicant Of Written Protest
9-10-29:   [Reserved]
Text Amendments
9-10-30:   Text Amendments
9-10-31:   Application
9-10-32:   Hearing
9-10-33:   Notice
9-10-34:   Standards For Amendment
9-10-35:   Recommendation By The Planning Commission
9-10-36:   Final Decision
9-10-37:   Super Majority Vote Required
9-10-38:   [Reserved]
9-10-39:   [Reserved]
Lot Size/Bulk Variances
9-10-40:   Lot Size/Bulk Variances
9-10-41:   Application
9-10-42:   Hearing
9-10-43:   Notice
9-10-44:   Standards For Variances
9-10-45:   Decision By Planning Commission
9-10-46:   Unauthorized Variances (Use Variance)
9-10-47:   Filing Fees
9-10-48:   [Reserved]
9-10-49:   [Reserved]
Appeals
9-10-50:   Appeals
9-10-51:   Filing. Record Transmittal
9-10-52:   Stay Of Further Proceedings
9-10-53:   Hearing
9-10-54:   Notice
9-10-55:   Decision By The Planning Commission
PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED
9-10-1:   PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
The Planning Commission of the City is hereby established in accordance with
Illinois law. (See 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.)
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-2:   MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION:
The Planning Commission shall consist of a maximum of seven (7) members. Each
Commission member shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Board of Alderman. One (1) of the members so appointed shall be named as
Chairman at the time of his appointment. Each Commission member shall receive
for his services such compensation, if any, as is determined from time to time
by the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-3:   TERM OF OFFICE - VACANCIES:
Each Commission member shall hold office for five (5) years from the date of
his appointment, and until his successor has been selected and qualified;
provided, however, that the initial appointees to the Commission shall serve
respectively for the following terms: one (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for two
(2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, one (1) for
five (5) years, one (1) for six (6) years, and one (1) for seven (7) years.
With the advice and consent of the Board of Aldermen, the Mayor may remove any
member of the Planning Commission for cause, after a public hearing. Vacancies
on the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose
place has become vacant in the same manner as provided for the appointment of
new members.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-4:   MEETINGS:
All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such times as the Commission may determine. All Commission
meetings shall be open to the public. The Commission may adopt their own rules
of meeting procedures, so long as these rules do not conflict with this Code or
with the applicable Illinois statutes. The Commission may select such officers
as they deem necessary. The Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman,
may administer oaths and request the attendance of witnesses. A majority of all
members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote
of a majority of all members shall be necessary to authorize any Commission
action.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-5:   RECORDS:
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These
minutes shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of
each member on each question, and any official action taken. A copy of every
rule, variance, order or decision of the Commission shall be filed immediately
in the Commission's office, and shall be a public record.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-6:   DUTIES:
The Planning Commission is hereby authorized and directed to perform the
following duties:
   A.   To hear requests for special use permits in accordance with the
provisions of this code; and    
   B.   To hear request for site specific amendments in accordance with the
provisions of this code; and
   C.   To hear requests for text amendments to the Zoning Code in accordance
with the provisions of this code; and
   D.   To hear requests for lot size/bulk variances in accordance with the
standards established in this Code; and
   E.   To hear appeals for any person aggrieved by any decision or order of
the Administrator; and
   F.   To perform such other duties as the Board of Aldermen may prescribe.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-7:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-8:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-9:   [RESERVED]:
SPECIAL USE PERMITS
9-10-10:   SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
Any applicant requesting a special use permit in accordance with the provisions
of this Code shall file his or her application with the Administrator upon
forms to be provided by the Administrator. The Administrator shall determine
when the application is received and complete.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-11:   FILING, RECORD TRANSMITTAL:
Every complete application for special use permit received by the Zoning
Administrator shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission by the
Administrator within ten (10) working days after the complete application is
received.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-12:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on each application for special
use not later than sixty (60) days after receiving notification of the
application from the Administrator. At the hearing, any interested party may
appear and testify.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-13:   NOTICE:
Notice of the hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the petitioner and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises to which the application for special use is requested;
and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
Municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the special use is requested and briefly describe
the issue to be decided.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-14:   DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
The decision by the Planning Commission whether to grant or deny a special use
permit shall be determined and issued in writing within thirty (30) days after
the final hearing thereon before the Planning Commission. A certified copy of
the Planning Commission's decision shall be transmitted to the applicant and to
the Board of Alderman. The decision of the Board of Alderman with regard to a
special use permit shall be a final and appealable decision of the Board of
Alderman. Appeals shall be directed to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-15:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-16:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-17:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-18:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-19:   [RESERVED]:
SITE SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS
9-10-20:   SITE SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS:
A site specific amendment means an amendment to this Zoning Code which shall
affect a particular property within the City as opposed to a non site specific
amendment, which would be applicable to general zoning districts or various
properties within the City. An example of a site-specific zoning amendment
would be an application by a property owner to change the permitted uses
allowed with regard to his or her property.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-21:   APPLICATION:
Every application for a site-specific zoning amendment shall be filed with the
Administrator on a form to be provided by the Administrator. The application
shall identify all owners of the subject property; contain a legally sufficient
description of the subject property, and a specific request with regard to the
action or amendment being requested. The Administrator shall forward the
request for a site specific zoning amendment to the Planning Commission within
ten (10) working days after the application has been properly filed with the
Administrator.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-22:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for site
specific zoning amendment not less than sixty (60) days after the Commission
received the application. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and
testify.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-23:   NOTICE:
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the applicant and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises for which the site specific zoning amendment is
requested; and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
Municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the site-specific zoning amendment is requested,
and the nature of the proposed amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-24:   STANDARDS FOR AMENDMENT:
The Planning Commission shall not grant any site-specific amendments to the
Zoning Code unless the Planning Commission determines that the amendment is
consistent with the general purposes of this Code based upon the evidence
presented to the Planning Commission in the course of the public hearing. The
burden is upon the applicant to produce evidence sufficient to support the
amendment requested.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-25:   RECOMMENDATION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall be required to issue a report of its decision on
all applications for site-specific zoning amendments within thirty (30) days
after the final hearing before the Planning Commission with regard thereto. A
certified copy of the Commission's report shall be transmitted to the applicant
and to the Board of Alderman within ten (10) working days. The Board of
Aldermen of the City shall consider the application in light of the Planning
Commission's report and recommendation. The report from the Planning Commission
shall clearly indicate the Commission's reasons for recommending the grant or
denial of any requested amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-26:   FINAL DECISION:
The Board of Aldermen of the City may grant or deny a site-specific amendment
to the Zoning Code after receipt and consideration of the report of the
Planning Commission with regard thereto. The Board of Aldermen must take action
in response to the report of the Planning Commission on site-specific zoning
amendment application within sixty (60) days of the receipt by the Board of
Aldermen of the report of the Planning Commission. The Board of Aldermen may
pass any proposed site specific zoning amendment by a simple majority vote,
refer it back to the Planning Commission for further consideration in light of
specific issues or questions presented by the Board of Aldermen, or may elect
to deny the proposed amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-27:   SUPER MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED:
The favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of
Aldermen as required to pass a site-specific zoning amendment to this Code in
each of the following instances:
   A.   When the passage would be contrary to the recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
   B.   When the amendment is opposed, in writing, the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered. Such written protest must be
filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-28:   NOTICE TO APPLICANT OF WRITTEN PROTEST:
In cases of written protest to an amendment of this Code as prescribed in
subsection
9-10-27B, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the
applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such
applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-29:   [RESERVED]:
TEXT AMENDMENTS
9-10-30:   TEXT AMENDMENTS:
A text amendment means an amendment to this Zoning Code, which shall affect
various properties within the City as opposed to a site-specific amendment,
which would be applicable to a particular property within the City. An example
of a text zoning amendment would be a change in the permitted uses allowed of a
particular zoning district.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-31:   APPLICATION:
A text zoning amendment may begin by an application to be filed with the
Administrator on a form to be provided by the Administrator by any individual.
In addition, an application for a text zoning amendment may be initiated by
request of the Board of Aldermen of the City or by the Administrator acting in
his or her official capacity. The amendment to the text of the Zoning Code
requested shall be specifically stated and shall identify any portion of the
Zoning Code then in effect to be amended. The Administrator shall forward the
request for a text zoning amendment to the Planning Commission within ten (10)
working days after the application or request for text zoning amendment has
been properly filed with the Administrator.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-32:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for text
zoning amendment not less than sixty (60) days after the Commission received
the application. At the hearing, any interested party may appear and testify.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-33:   NOTICE:
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by posting the agenda of the Planning
Commission meeting containing a description of the proposed text zoning
amendment in compliance with the requirements of the State of Illinois and the
City of Grafton for a public meeting.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the text zoning amendment is requested, and the
nature of the proposed amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-34:   STANDARDS FOR AMENDMENT:
The Planning Commission shall not grant any text zoning amendments to the
Zoning Code unless the Planning Commission determines that the amendment is
consistent with the general purposes of this Code based upon the evidence
presented to the Planning Commission in the course of the public hearing. The
burden is upon the applicant to produce evidence sufficient to support the
amendment requested.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-35:   RECOMMENDATION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall be required to issue a report of its decision on
all applications for zoning amendments within thirty (30) days after the final
hearing before the Planning Commission with regard thereto. A certified copy of
the Commission's report shall be transmitted to the applicant and to the Board
of Aldermen of the City within ten (10) working days. The Board of Aldermen of
the City shall consider the application in light of the Planning Commission's
report and recommendation. The report from the Planning Commission shall
clearly indicate the Commission's reasons for recommending the grant or denial
of any requested amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-36:   FINAL DECISION:
The Board of Aldermen of the City may grant or deny a text zoning amendment to
the Zoning Code after receipt and consideration of the report of the Planning
Commission with regard thereto. The Board of Aldermen must take action in
response to the report of the Planning Commission on text zoning amendment
within sixty (60) days of the receipt by the Board of Aldermen of the report of
the Planning Commission. The Board of Aldermen may pass any proposed text
zoning amendment by a simple majority vote, refer it back to the Planning
Commission for further consideration in light of specific issues or questions
presented by the Board of Aldermen, or may elect to deny the proposed
amendment.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-37:   SUPER MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED:
The favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of
Aldermen as required to pass a text zoning amendment to this Code if the
passage would be contrary to the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-38:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-39:   [RESERVED]:
LOT SIZE/BULK VARIANCES
9-10-40:   LOT SIZE/BULK VARIANCES:
A "lot size/bulk variance" means a relaxation of the strict application of the
lot size and/or bulk requirements applicable to a particular lot or structure.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-41:   APPLICATION:
Every application for a lot size/bulk variance shall be filed with the
Administrator on a prescribed form. The application shall contain sufficient
information to allow the Board to make an informed decision.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-42:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any variance application
not later than sixty (60) days after its filing. At the hearing any interested
party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-43:   NOTICE:
Notice of the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the applicant and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises for which the variance is requested; and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the variance is requested, and the nature of the
proposed variance.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-44:   STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES:
The Planning Commission shall not grant any lot size/bulk variance unless they
find that the proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of this
Code, and that the strict application of the district requirements would result
in great practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant. More specifically
the Planning Commission shall not decide upon a variance unless they determine
based upon the evidence presented to them, that:
   A.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if the
district regulations are strictly applied; and
   B.   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of his
own making; and
   C.   The variance, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, and welfare.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-45:   DECISION BY PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall be required to issue a decision on all
applications within thirty (30) days after the final hearing thereon. A
certified copy of the Planning Commission's decision shall be transmitted to
the applicant or appellant and to the Zoning Administrator. Such decision shall
be binding upon the Zoning Administrator and observed by him and he shall be
required to incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in the Zoning
Certificate to the applicant or appellant whenever a Certificate is authorized
by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall specify the terms of
relief granted (if any) in one statement and their findings of fact in another
statement. The findings of fact shall clearly indicate the Planning
Commission's reasons for granting or denying any requested variance.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-46:   UNAUTHORIZED VARIANCES (USE VARIANCE):
Under no circumstances shall the Planning Commission grant a variance to allow
any use that is specifically or by implication (See section
9-3-6) prohibited in the district involved. A "use variance" constitutes an
amendment to this Code, and may be obtained only in the manner set forth in
section
9-8-11.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-47:   FILING FEES:
By resolution, the Board of Aldermen shall establish (and may periodically
amend) a schedule of filing fees for the various permits and procedures listed
in this Code. Said fees are intended to defray the administrative costs
connected with the processing/conducting of such permits or procedures; the
fees do not constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device. All such fees
shall be paid by the applicant to the City and are non-refundable. A current
schedule of filing fees shall be maintained in the Administrator's office and
filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-48:   [RESERVED]:
9-10-49:   [RESERVED]:
APPEALS
9-10-50:   APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Administrator in any
matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any provision of this
Code may appeal to the Planning Commission on a prescribed form. Every such
appeal shall be made and treated in accordance with Illinois law and the
provisions of this Division.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-51:   FILING. RECORD TRANSMITTAL:
Every appeal shall be made within forty five (45) days of the matter complained
of by filing with the Administrator and the Planning Commission a written
notice specifying the grounds for appeal. Not more than five (5) working days
after the notice of appeal has been filed, the Administrator shall transmit to
the Board all records pertinent to the case.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-52:   STAY OF FURTHER PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal stays all further action on the matter being appealed unless the
Administrator certifies to the Planning Commission, after the notice of appeal
has been filed with him, that for reasons stated in the certificate, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, further action
shall not be stayed unless the Planning Commission or the Circuit Court grants
a restraining order for due cause, and so notifies the Administrator.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-53:   HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing on every appeal not later than
sixty (60) days after the filing of the appeal notice. At the hearing, any
interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized
agent or attorney.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-54:   NOTICE:
Notice of the hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing:
   A.   By registered mail to the petitioner and to every owner of property
adjacent to the premises to which the appeal is requested; and
   B.   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within this
Municipality.
This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of the hearing, the
particular location for which the appeal is requested and briefly describe the
issue to be decided.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
9-10-55:   DECISION BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall be required to make a recommendation on the
appeal to the Board of Alderman within thirty (30) days after the final hearing
thereon. The Board of Alderman shall be required to make a decision on the
appeal within forty five (45) days of the recommendation from the Planning
Commission. A certified copy of the Board of Alderman's decision shall be
transmitted to the applicant or appellant and to the Administrator. Such
decision shall be binding upon the Administrator and observed by him and he
shall be required to incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in the
Zoning Certificate to the applicant or appellant whenever a Certificate is
authorized by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 8-3-2022)
TITLE 10: SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
Section
10-1-1:   Short Title
10-1-2:   Statute Authority; Purpose
10-1-3:   Jurisdiction
10-1-4:   Interpretation
10-1-5:   Exemptions; Plats Not Required
10-1-6:   Disclaimer Of Liability
10-1-1:   SHORT TITLE:
These regulations shall be known as and may be referred to as the SUBDIVISION
CODE.
(2006 Code § 35-1-1)
10-1-2:   STATUTE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law (65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5, 5/11-12-
8, 5/11-12-12; 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq.), this title
regulates the subdivision and development of land in order to implement the
Comprehensive Plan and Official Map duly adopted by the City. This title
assists in achieving the following specific objectives:
   A.   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
   B.   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly and
efficient layout and use of land by facilitating aesthetic urban design;
   C.   To establish accurate legal records, to avoid development in wetland
areas, and to avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land
be properly monumented and recorded;
   D.   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and buildings
throughout the City;
   E.   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City to the
maximum feasible extent, including preservation of such features as stands of
trees, streams, significant archaeological sites, and historical landmarks;
   F.   To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new
developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
   G.   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, stormwater runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   H.   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion and unnecessary public expenditures by requiring the proper
location, design, and construction of streets and sidewalks;
   I.   To provide an environment whereby the cost of installing and
maintaining adequate water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and other
utilities and services can be kept at a minimum; and
   J.   To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be
made available to serve the residents.
(2006 Code § 35-1-2)
10-1-3:   JURISDICTION:
The provisions of this title shall apply to all planned developments whether
residential, commercial, or otherwise in nature, and to any other developments
whether a plat is required or not under the law, statutes, ordinances or
regulations of the City Council, and regardless of whether the same is labeled
a subdivision or not, it being the intent of this title to apply to all types
of development, both within the City and to areas lying within one and one-half
(1.5) miles of the corporate limits of the City.
(2006 Code § 35-1-3)
10-1-4:   INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: Every provision of this title shall be construed
liberally in favor of the City, and every regulation set forth herein shall be
considered the minimum requirement for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   B.   More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Whenever the requirements of this
title differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or
regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent
requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance with State law (65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-11), whenever this title imposes higher standards
than the Jersey County Subdivision Code, said higher standards shall supersede
the County regulations in the unincorporated territory located within the
City’s subdivision jurisdiction.
(2006 Code § 35-1-5)
10-1-5:   EXEMPTIONS; PLATS NOT REQUIRED:
The provision of this title do not apply and no plat is required in any of the
following instances:
   A.   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five (5)
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access or add utility easements.
   B.   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or
add utility easements.
   C.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land.
   D.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or add
special utility easements.
   E.   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyance relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
   F.   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   G.   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of
land recorded on or before July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or
easements of access or add utility easements.
   H.   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access or add utility
easements.
   I.   The sale of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger
tract when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided, however, that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract existing as of October 1, 1973.
(2006 Code § 35-1-4)
   J.   The preparation of a plat for wind energy devices under section 10-620
of the Property Tax Code (35 ILCS 200/10-620).
10-1-6:   DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this title.
   B.   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this title shall be defended by the City Attorney until the
final determination of the legal proceedings.
(2006 Code § 35-1-6)
CHAPTER 2: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section
10-2-1:   Rules Of Word Construction
10-2-2:   Definitions
10-2-1:   RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this title, the
following rules shall be observed:
   A.   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section
10-2-2 of this chapter. Terms not defined in section
10-2-2 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in the City's
zoning title. If any term is not defined either in section
10-2-2 or in the zoning title, said term shall have its standard English
dictionary meaning.
   B.   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   C.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   D.   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and
vice versa.
   E.   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is discretionary.
   F.   The term “City” (when used alone or in conjunction with another word or
words) shall mean the City of Grafton, Illinois.
   G.   Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended
merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive
application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
   H.   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   I.   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(2006 Code § 35-2-1)
10-2-2:   DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed by the Mayor and the City Council to
administer this title.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that fronts on a nearby street, and
which may be used for utility purposes.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this title, properly effected in
accordance with State law and the procedures set forth herein.
AREA, BUILDING: The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of
unenclosed patios, terraces, and steps.
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for
subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for
street and alley rights-of-way and public uses.
AREA, NET: The entire area within the boundary lines of the territory proposed
for subdivision, less the area to be dedicated for street and alley rights-of-
way and public use.
ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular
speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with intersections
at grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to expedite the safe
movement of through traffic.
BARRIER (NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL): Any street, highway, river, pond, canal,
railroad, levee, embankment, or screening by a fence or hedge.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or
rights-of-way (R.O.W.), (except alleys, pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries
of a subdivision unless the exterior boundary is a street, highway, or R.O.W.)
or bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad
rights-of-way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The City of Grafton Zoning Board of Appeals (see title 9,
chapter 3, article B of this Code).
BUILDING: Any structure, whether temporary, semipermanent, or permanent,
designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of
persons or property.
BUILDING LINE: See definition of SETBACK LINE.
CATCH BASIN: A receptacle, located where a street gutter opens into a storm
sewer, designed to retain matter that would not easily pass through the storm
sewer.
CENTERLINE:
   A.   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width.
   B.   The original centerline, where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly.
   C.   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
CENTERLINE OFFSET: The distance between the centerline of two (2) roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said
“parallel” streets intersect.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A subdivision planned and constructed so as to group
housing units into relatively dense patterns while providing a unified network
of open space and wooded areas, and meeting the requirements of the this title
and the zoning title.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate
volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and which may or may
not be continuous.
COMMON LAND: That land set aside for open space or recreational use for the
owners of the lots of a subdivision, which land is conveyed by the developer in
fee simple absolute title by warranty to trustees whose trust indenture shall
provide that said common land be used for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment
of the lot owners present and future. No lot owner shall have the right to
convey his interest in the common land except as an incident of the ownership
of a regularly platted lot.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City Council
to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the City. The
City’s Comprehensive Plan may include, but is not limited to, plans and
programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges,
public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial, or
industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CROSS SLOPE: The degree of inclination measured across a right-of-way rather
than in the direction traffic moves on said right-of-way.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short, minor local street, having only one outlet for vehicular
traffic and having the other end permanently terminated by a turn around for
vehicles. The term may also be used to refer solely to said turn around.
CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of concrete as a single
facility.
DEDICATE: To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the City or other appropriate government entity without
compensation.
DENSITY, GROSS: The total number of dwelling units divided by the total project
area, expressed as gross dwelling units per acre.
DENSITY, NET: The total number of dwelling units divided by the net acreage.
See definition of AREA, NET.
DESIGN: The arrangement of uses on the land and the arrangement of easements,
lots and rights-of- way, including specifications of materials, alignment,
grade and width of these elements.
DEVELOP: To undertake the division of land into two (2) or more lots for the
purpose of either immediate or future sale; or to undertake any activity (such
as grading) in preparation thereof.
DIMENSIONS: Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the City wherein certain
uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots,
and uses under the terms of the City’s zoning title.
DRAINAGEWAY: A watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch which carries
stormwater runoff or which is fed by street or building gutters or by
stormwater sewers, or which serves the purpose of draining water from the lands
adjacent to such watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek, or ditch.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or a
person of the use of land for a limited and specifically named purpose.
ESCROW DEPOSIT: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the
completion of improvements within a subdivision.
FILING DATE: The date that the applicant has filed the last item of required
data or information with the City Clerk and has paid the necessary fees for
review by the Board of Appeals.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: All land subject to periodic inundation from overflow of
natural waterways.
FRONTAGE: The linear extent of the front (street side) of a lot.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
GRADE: The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for “slope”.
HILLSIDE AREA: An area with an average slope of twenty percent (20%) or more.
IMPROVEMENT: Refers to site grading, street work and utilities (including
water, sewer, electric, gas, stormwater, telephone and cable television) to be
installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for
public or private streets, and easements or other purposes as are necessary for
the general use of lot owners in the subdivision, including the furnishing of
all materials, equipment, work and services such as engineering, staking and
supervision, necessary to construct all the improvements required in chapter 5
of this title or any other improvements that may be provided by the subdivider.
All of such materials, equipment and services shall be provided at the
subdivider’s cost and expense, although he may enter into a contract with
individuals and firms to complete such improvements, and the improvements shall
be subject to the final approval of the Board of Appeals and the City Council.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for earth moving and for the structures and facilities to
be installed both in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision. Plans must include
erosion and sedimentation control, stormwater management, streets, alleys and
utility locations to be installed in or in conjunction with a subdivision.
INLET: A receptacle, located where surface water and/or groundwater is directed
to by gravity, to be received by the storm sewer.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public rights-of-way
(generally streets) meet.
LAND USE PLAN: The comprehensive long range plan for the desirable use of land,
the purpose of such plan being, among other things, to serve as a guide to the
zoning and progressive subdividing and use of undeveloped land.
LOCAL STREET: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and for
access to abutting property, and on which the speed limit is low and the
traffic volume minimal.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. A LOT may or may not coincide
with a LOT OF RECORD.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot, exclusive of any land designated for street right-of-way.
LOT, BUTT: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2) corner lots.
LOT CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front end and the rear lot
lines measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot whose side lines do not abut any street.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The line separating the lot from the street. On a corner lot,
the front lot line shall be the frontage having the least dimension.
LOT LINE, REAR: The rear lot line is the lot line most nearly parallel to and
most remote from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A corner side
lot line separating a lot from a street is called a “street side lot line”. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is called an “interior
side lot line”.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the Jersey County Recorder of Deeds in accordance with State law.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a part of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal width of the lot measured at a right angle to
the general direction of the side lot line.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the
City, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed improvements for the
one year period following their dedication.
MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A combination of maps, drawings, site plans, charts
and supportive narrative material that portrays total development to be
achieved in the overall project area, which provides sufficient detailed
information to both illustrate and describe the intended character and
configuration of development to be accomplished.
METES AND BOUNDS: A description of real property which is not described by
reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a
known point and description of the lines forming the boundaries of the property
or delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by describing
lines or portions thereof.
OFFICIAL MAP: A graphic statement of the existing and proposed capital
improvements planned by the City which require the acquisition of land such as
streets, drainage systems, parks, etc.
OWNER: A person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under
this title.
PARKING LANE: An auxiliary lane of a street and primarily used for vehicular
parking.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block
to facilitate safe pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the
City, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within, or in
conjunction with, a subdivision.
PERSON: Any agent, individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
syndicate or trust.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A comprehensively planned development
containing residential, commercial, industrial, or other land uses on an area
of land under continuing unified control. A planned unit development may
contain a single type of land use or combination of land uses; provided, that
such development is reviewed, evaluated and approved by the City and satisfies
the requirements contained herein.
PLANS: All of the drawings including plats, cross sections, profiles, working
details and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has prepared to
show the character, extent and details of improvements required in this title
and which plans shall conform to any requirements of the Board of Appeals as to
scale and details for submittal to the appropriate officials of the City for
consideration, approval or disapproval.
PLAT, FINAL: The final engineering and architectural maps, drawings, and
supporting material indicating the subdivider's plan of the subdivision which,
if approved, may be filed with the Jersey County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Preliminary engineering and architectural maps, drawings,
and supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PROJECT AREA: That territory intended to be subdivided or developed, and
portrayed and defined in the preliminary and final plats.
RESERVE: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by
the City or other appropriate government entity for public purposes.
RESERVE STRIP: A narrow strip of land between a public street and adjacent lots
which is designated on a recorded subdivision plan or property deed as land
over which vehicular travel is not permitted.
RESUBDIVISION: See definition of Subdivision.
RETENTION AREA: An area of land designed to capture water runoff from a
developed parcel and release it at a specified rate of flow as determined by
engineering studies.
REVERSE CURVE: A curve in a street heading in approximately the opposite
direction from the curve immediately preceding it so as to form an S-shape.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated
to the City or other appropriate government entity for streets, alleys, and
other public improvements; sometimes abbreviated as R.O.W.
ROADBED: The graded portion of a street upon which the base course, surface
course, shoulders and median are constructed.
ROADWAY: The entire improved portion of the street, including shoulders,
parking lanes, travelway, curbs and gutters.
SETBACK LINE: A line that is usually parallel to the front, side or rear lot
line establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side or rear
yard.
SIDEWALK: A pedestrianway constructed in compliance with the standards of this
title, generally abutting or near the curb line of the street.
SLOPE: The degree of inclination of a site or right-of-way expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for “grade”.
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT: The Jersey County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian or bicycle use only.
STREET, AREA SERVICE HIGHWAY: Area service highways interconnect collectors and
land access streets with the principal system and vice versa, brings all
developed areas within a reasonable distance of principal streets, connects and
provides direct access to major traffic generators, provides secondary service
to smaller communities, may provide access to abutting property, and have a
medium volume design capacity and travel speeds.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A short, land access street, having only one end open for
vehicular traffic, and the other permanently terminated by a turn around for
vehicles.
STREET, LAND ACCESS: Land access streets provide access to abutting properties,
have a relatively short travel distance, and have a low volume design capacity
and travel speeds.
STREET, LOOPED: Land access streets having two (2) open ends, each end
generally connecting with the same street, no other streets intersecting
between its ends, and property fronts on both sides of the street.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS OR SERVICE ROAD: A land access street parallel and
adjacent to area service highways providing access to abutting properties.
STREET, STUB OR BUTT: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is
planned for future continuation.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent or
temporary location on or in the ground, or is attached to something having a
fixed location on or in the ground. All buildings are structures but not all
structures are buildings (e.g., a fence).
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or
other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a SUBDIVISION as defined in this section.
SUBDIVISION:
   A.   The division of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental or building development, or
use(s) other than agricultural use or production.
   B.   Establishment or dedication of a public street or alley through a tract
of land regardless of size.
   C.   The term SUBDIVISION shall also include all resubdivisions of land or
lots.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
TRAVELWAY: That portion of a street used for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.
VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision, and to
so note on the final plat recorded with the Jersey County Recorder of Deeds.
VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and
improvement standards set forth in this title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is set forth in the zoning title.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the
nearest rear main building and the rear lot lines. The depth of the required
rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main
building toward the nearest point of the rear lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between a main building and the side lot line, extending
from the front yard or front lot lines, where no front yard is required, to the
rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally
from the nearest point of the side lot line toward the nearest part of the main
building.
ZONING TITLE: The zoning title of the City of Grafton.
(2006 Code § 35-2-2)
CHAPTER 3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
10-3-1:   Administration And Enforcement Officer
10-3-2:   Variances
10-3-3:   Amendments
10-3-4:   Schedule Of Fees
10-3-5:   Violation; Penalties
10-3-1:   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The Building and Zoning Administrator, referred to herein as the
“Administrator”, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce
the provisions of this title. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not
limited to, the following specific duties:
   A.   To review and forward preliminary plats to the Planning Commission;
   B.   To transmit improvements plans to the City Engineer for his review;
   C.   To review and forward final plats to the City Council;
   D.   To issue stop orders as necessary when it is determined that approved
improvements are being constructed in violation of this title;
   E.   To pursue actions authorized at subsection
10-4-3G of this title when a developer fails to complete required improvements;
   F.   To evaluate and pass upon proposed changes in approved final plats;
   G.   To review and forward applications for subdivision variances to the
Board of Appeals;
   H.   To maintain up to date records of matters pertaining to this title
including, but not limited to, preliminary plats, as built records of completed
improvements, final plats, variances, and amendments; and
   I.   To provide information to subdividers/developers and to the general
public on matters related to this title.
(2006 Code § 35-4-1)
10-3-2:   VARIANCES:
   A.   Application For Variance: Any subdivider/developer desiring a variance
from the requirements of this title shall file a written application therefor
with the Administrator at the same time that he files his preliminary plat. The
application shall fully explain the grounds for the variance request, and
specify the section(s) of this title which, if strictly applied, would cause
great practical difficulties or hardship. The Administrator shall prepare an
advisory report on every variance application and submit it, together with the
completed application, to the Board of Appeals.
(2006 Code § 35-4-2)
   B.   Review By Board Of Appeals: The Board of Appeals shall review the
variance application and the Administrator's comments, perform on site review
when appropriate, and submit their advisory report to the City Council,
together with their recommendation on preliminary plat approval. The Board of
Appeals advisory report shall be responsive to all the variances standards set
forth in subsection C of this section.
(2006 Code § 35-4-3)
   C.   Action By City Council; Standards: At the same meeting at which they
take action on the application for preliminary plat approval, the City Council
shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny the requested subdivision
variance. A copy of their decision, clearly stating their reasons therefor and
the exact terms of any variance granted, shall be attached to both the
preliminary and final plats. The City Council shall not grant any subdivision
variance unless, based upon the information presented to them, they determine
that:
      1.   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of
this title; and
      2.   Strict application of the subdivision requirements (see
chapter 5 of this title) would result in great practical difficulties or
hardship to the applicant, not a mere inconvenience; and
      3.   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the subdivision
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship; and
      4.   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his own making; and
      5.   The peculiar circumstances creating the variance request are not
applicable to other tracts and, therefore, that a variance would be a more
appropriate remedy than an amendment to this title; and
      6.   The variance, if granted, will not materially frustrate
implementation of the Municipal Comprehensive Plan including the Official Map.
(2006 Code § 35-4-4)
10-3-3:   AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Filing Amendments: Amendments to this title may be proposed by the
Administrator, any member of the City Council, any Board of Appeals member, any
Planning Commission member, or any party in interest. Every amendment proposal
shall be filed on a prescribed form in the Administrator’s Office. The
Administrator shall promptly transmit each proposal, together with any comments
or recommendations he may wish to make, to the Board of Appeals for a public
hearing.
   B.   Public Hearing And Notice: The Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said
proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may appear
and testify, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice
indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the
proposed amendment shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City.
   C.   Advisory Report By Board Of Appeals; Action By City Council: Within a
reasonable time after the public hearing, the Board of Appeals shall submit an
advisory report to the City Council. The City Council shall act on the proposed
amendment at their next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of
this report. Without another public hearing, the City Council may either pass
or reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Board of Appeals
for further consideration.
(2006 Code § 35-4-5)
10-3-4:   SCHEDULE OF FEES:
   A.   Fees Established:
      1.   The review for the preliminary plat shall be four hundred dollars
($400.00), plus engineer's invoiced amount.
      2.   The final plat fee shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus
engineer's invoiced amount.
      3.   Improvement plan review and inspection fee shall be one percent (1%)
of the total opinion of probable cost for all improvements as determined by the
City Engineer or by the total of all certified contracts for all work related
to improvements.
      4.   Minor modifications shall be ten dollars ($10.00), plus engineer’s
invoiced amount.
      5.   General construction permit checklist shall be no fee.
      6.   Grading/soil erosion/tree removal permit shall be no fee.
      7.   Flood development permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus
engineer’s invoiced amount.
      8.   Any project that requires the City Engineer's services: actual
engineer's invoiced amount.
(2006 Code § 35-4-6)
   B.   Time Of Payment: All fees listed in subsection A of this section shall
be paid by the subdivider/developer or the applicant to the City Clerk’s Office
at the time of submission of documents.
(2006 Code § 35-4-7)
10-3-5:   VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Ordinance Violation: Violation of the provisions of this title or
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including conditions and
safeguards established, shall constitute an ordinance violation. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(2006 Code § 35-7-1)
   B.   Penalties: Any person who violates this title shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or to
imprisonment in the County Jail for up to ninety (90) days, or both such fine
and imprisonment.
(2006 Code § 35-7-3)
   C.   Corrective Actions: Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to forbid or remedy any
violations. All such costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible.
(2006 Code § 35-7-2)
CHAPTER 4: PLATS AND PLANS
Section
10-4-1:   Preliminary Plat
10-4-2:   Improvement Plans
10-4-3:   Assurance For Completion Of Required Improvements
10-4-4:   Final Plat
10-4-5:   Maintenance Of Improvements
10-4-6:   Vacation Of Plats
10-4-1:   PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Preapplication; Preparation Of Preliminary Plat: Before preparing a
proposed plat for an area, the owner, developer, or their representatives
should have a preapplication meeting with the Administrator to determine
applicable ordinance regulations and standards which must be complied with.
After the preapplication meeting(s), the subdivider should then prepare the
preliminary plat. As defined in this title, the preliminary plat must contain a
substantial amount of data, and will thus be incomplete and cannot be
considered as filed until all required data are submitted. The preliminary plat
is received with filing fees by the City Clerk’s Office, who, in turn, will
forward the same to the Planning Commission for their review. Following its
review (as well as comments from other appropriate agencies, when required),
the Planning Commission forwards its recommendation(s) to the City Council, who
then either approves, disapproves, or approves with modifications the
preliminary plat.
(2006 Code § 35-3-1)
   B.   Filing Procedure:
      1.   Except as specifically provided otherwise below, every person who
proposes to subdivide any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of
the City shall file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision
with the City Clerk.
      2.   He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting
data with the appropriate soil and water conservation district. Said district
shall have not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it might wish
to make to the Administrator.
      3.   Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a
portion of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a master
development plan of the entire tract shall be submitted.
      4.   All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the
subsections below.
      5.   The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to exemptions as
listed in subsection D of this section, and as more fully described in 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1.
(2006 Code § 35-3-2)
   C.   Information Required: Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by an
Illinois registered land surveyor at any scale from one inch equals twenty feet
(1" = 20') through one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), provided the
resultant drawing is at least eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (8-
1/2' x 14") but not larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36" ). The following information shall be provided on the preliminary plat and/
or on documents provided with the preliminary plat and made a part thereof:
      1.   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to
section or U.S. survey lines and to platted subdivisions and dedicated roads
within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed subdivision;
      2.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not the owner), and
registered professional engineer;
      3.   Proposed name of the subdivision;
      4.   Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided, and of
the adjacent land;
      5.   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
      6.   The gross and net acreage area of the proposed subdivision, the
acreage of streets, and of any areas reserved for the common use of the
property owners within the subdivision and/or for public use;
      7.   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision;
      8.   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles, and
references to known land lines;
      9.   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot
(2') contour data for land having slopes of zero to four percent (0-4%), five
foot (5') contour data for land having slopes between four and twelve percent
(4-12%), and ten foot (10') contour data for land having slopes of twelve
percent (12%) or more;
      10.   Any proposed alteration, adjustment or change in the elevation or
topography of any area;
      11.   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas,
natural drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, etc.;
      12.   Streets and rights-of-way on and adjoining the site of the proposed
subdivision showing: the names and including street right-of-way and paving
widths; approximate gradients; types and widths of pavement, curbs, sidewalks,
crosswalks, planting strips and other pertinent data, including classification
of all existing or proposed streets as to function as arterial, collector,
local collector and cul-de-sac;
      13.   A copy of the results of any tests made to ascertain subsurface
rock and soil conditions and the water table;
      14.   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements;
      15.   A copy of the description of all proposed deed restrictions and
covenants;
      16.   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm
sewers;
      17.   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and
proposed utilities;
      18.   Building setback or front yard lines and dimensions;
      19.   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
      20.   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision; and
      21.   Information as defined in subsection D2c of this section.
(2006 Code § 35-3-3)
   D.   Planning Commission Recommendation:
      1.   Approval Or Disapproval: The Planning Commission shall either
approve or disapprove the application for preliminary plat approval within
sixty (60) days from the date of said application or the filing of the last
item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the Board of
Appeals and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit. If the
Planning Commission disapproves the preliminary plat, they shall furnish to the
applicant within the sixty (60) day period a written statement specifying the
aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this title and/or the
Official Map. If the Planning Commission approves the preliminary plat, they
shall inform the City Council that action can be taken at the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting.
      2.   Notice Of Meeting: The Planning Commission shall give notice of its
consideration of any preliminary plat and allow the opportunity to be heard to
the following person(s) or groups during its preliminary review time span.
         a.   Any person requesting notification of the meeting.
         b.   Any property owner whose property is contiguous to the property,
including property across the streets, railroads, creeks, and similar barriers;
said information shall be provided by the applicant to the City Clerk’s Office
when filing the plat.
         c.   Any governmental or taxing body which requests notification of
the meeting.
(2006 Code § 35-3-4)
   E.   City Council Action:
      1.   The City Council shall review the preliminary plat, along with the
Planning Commission’s recommendations and approve, disapprove or approve
subject to certain conditions and/or modifications said preliminary plat within
thirty (30) days after its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt
of the written Planning Commission recommendation, unless variances from zoning
title requirements are needed, in which case, the City Council’s thirty (30)
days commences the day after the Planning Commission hearing is held, as
required by the zoning title. The preliminary plat review and the request for
variance may be performed at the same meeting.
      2.   If the City Council rejects the preliminary plat, their resolution
shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this title
and/or the Official Map. The City Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the
Council’s resolution of approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. One
copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the Clerk, one copy shall
be filed with the Administrator, and one copy shall be sent to the subdivider
by return receipt mail.
(2006 Code § 35-3-5)
   F.   Rights And Privileges Of Subdivider: Preliminary plat approval shall
confer the following rights and privileges upon the subdivider:
      1.   That the preliminary plat will remain in effect for a one year
period from the day the City Council approves the same. The applicant may,
during this period, submit all or part or parts of said preliminary plat for
final approval. In the event that the subdivision is being developed in stages,
the applicant may, by written mutual agreement with the City Council, have
final approval of the last part of the plat delayed for a period not to exceed
five (5) years from the date of the preliminary plat approval. Any part of a
subdivision which is being developed in stages shall contain a tract of land at
least one block in area or five (5) gross acres.
      2.   That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
plat approval was granted will not be changed for final approval.
      3.   The applicant may also proceed with any detailed improvement plans
required for all facilities or utilities intended to be provided. Actual
construction of such facilities and improvements may commence prior to final
plat approval if the detailed improvement plans have been recommended by the
City Engineer and approved by the City Council; provided, that such facilities
and improvements will be inspected throughout their construction, and final
plat approval will be contingent in part upon acceptable compliance to City
improvement and facilities standards. If the applicant does not submit the
improvement plans prior to the submission of the final plat, then he shall
submit the improvement plans to the City Clerk’s Office at the time that the
final plat is submitted.
(2006 Code § 35-3-6)
10-4-2:   IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   Filing Plans; Payment Of Fees: After the City Council has approved the
preliminary plat, but prior to submission of the final plat, the developer
shall furnish six (6) copies of the plans and specifications for all
improvements to be installed within or in conjunction with the proposed
development to the City Clerk and pay all associated filing fees before review
by the City Engineer. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed
by the registered professional engineer responsible for their preparation.
Until the City Engineer certifies in writing that the proposed improvements
conform to generally accepted engineering practices and to the standards in
this title:
      1.   The Administrator shall not issue any development permit to allow
construction of said improvements; and
      2.   The City Council shall not act upon the application for final plat
approval.
(2006 Code § 35-3-8)
   B.   Information Required: Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue
line prints not larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"). These plans and the related specifications shall provide all of the
following information:
      1.   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the
same scale as the approved preliminary plat;
      2.   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerline of all
streets;
      3.   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
      4.   Locations and typical cross section of street pavements including
curbs/gutters, catch basins, and inlets;
      5.   Locations and typical cross section of sidewalks and driveway
aprons;
      6.   Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
      7.   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other
utilities;
      8.   Locations of street lighting standards and street signs;
      9.   One or more bench marks, when requested by the City Engineer, in or
near the subdivision, to which the subdivision is referenced; the identity and
elevation shall be based on seal level datum;
      10.   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
      11.   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the
tract;
      12.   Such other information as the City Engineer may reasonably require
to perform his duties under this subsection; and
      13.   Existing and proposed survey monuments on street plans or on the
proposed final plat as required by this title.
(2006 Code § 35-3-9)
   C.   Inspections Required:
      1.   The subdivider/developer shall notify the Administrator of both the
start and completion of construction.
      2.   The Administrator shall inspect said improvements while they are
under construction. If he or his designated deputy determines that they are
being built in violation of this title, he shall promptly issue a stop order.
      3.   The Administrator and City Engineer shall inspect improvements upon
their completion. The City shall not accept any completed improvement until the
Administrator and Engineer have stated in writing that it complies with this
title.
(2006 Code § 35-3-10)
   D.   Filing As Built Records:
      1.   The subdivider/developer shall file with the Administrator a set of
reproducible cloth or polyester base film positive showing the as built details
and any deviations from the approved plans upon the completion of improvements,
or when fifty percent (50%) of the building permits have been issued in a given
plat.
      2.   The subdivider/developer shall pay the costs to add water, sewer,
street, and stormwater improvements to the overall City map(s); street, sewer,
water, stormwater.
      3.   If the Administrator finds the as built to be unacceptable, building
permits shall be discontinued until such time as the information is acceptable.
(2006 Code § 35-3-11)
10-4-3:   ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Completion Or Assurance Of Completion Required: The City Council shall
not approve any final plat of subdivision (and, hence, said final plat shall
not be entitled to recording) until:
      1.   All improvements required in the improvements plan have been
completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected by the
Administrator and City Engineer, and dedicated to the City or other appropriate
entity; or
      2.   In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer
has provided the City with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory
completion and dedication of all required improvements.
(2006 Code § 35-3-13)
   B.   Forms Of Assurance: At the option of the City Council, the required
legal assurance may be either a performance bond or an escrow deposit. Every
performance bond shall be reviewed by the City Attorney and posted with the
City Clerk. Any funds to be held in escrow shall be deposited with the City
Clerk.
(2006 Code § 35-3-14)
   C.   Amount Of Bond Or Deposit: The amount of the performance bond or escrow
deposit shall be equal to the City Engineer's opinion of probable costs of
constructing the uncompleted portion of the required improvements, plus all
required inspection fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
      1.   Cash;
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the City the availability of the escrow funds from
time to time upon demand; or
      3.   Certificates of deposit, treasury bills, or other readily negotiable
instruments approved by the City Clerk and made payable to the City.
(2006 Code § 35-3-15)
   D.   Eligible Sureties: No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless
he has been approved by the City Clerk. The Clerk shall conduct or cause to be
conducted spot audits of all sureties. Any surety who fails to perform shall be
ineligible for two (2) years thereafter to act as surety for any subdivision
improvement within the City's jurisdiction.
(2006 Code § 35-3-16)
   E.   Term Of Assurance; Extension: The initial term of any performance bond
or escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. If all the required
improvements have not been completed by the end of the two (2) year period, the
Board of Appeals, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may either
extend said bond/escrow agreement for one year only, or may proceed as per
subsection G of this section.
(2006 Code § 35-3-17)
   F.   Release Of Bond Or Escrow Deposit:
      1.   The City Clerk may release up to ninety percent (90%) of the amount
of the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization
from the Administrator. The amount which the Administrator authorizes to be
released shall be equal to the value of improvements actually completed in
accordance with approved plans.
      2.   The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit
shall not be released by the City Clerk until:
         a.   The Administrator has certified to the City Clerk in writing that
all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
         b.   Said improvements have been accepted by and dedicated to the City
or other appropriate entity.
(2006 Code § 35-3-18)
   G.   Failure To Complete Improvements: If all the required improvements have
not been completed by the end of the two (2) year period (or 3 year period, in
the case of an extension), the Administrator, with the assistance of the City
Attorney, may:
      1.   Require the surety to perform on the bond and to pay to the City an
equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements or the amount
of the bond not theretofor released, whichever is less; or
      2.   Order the City Clerk to retain all escrow funds needed to return the
balance (if any) of such funds to the subdivider/developer; or
      3.   Require the subdivider/developer to submit a new performance bond/
escrow deposit in an amount sufficient to cover any increase in the cost of
constructing the required improvements.
(2006 Code § 35-3-19)
10-4-4:   FINAL PLAT:
   A.   City Council Approval: The City Council shall not approve any final
plat unless they determine that it is in compliance with all requirements of
this title including those set forth in this section.
(2006 Code § 35-3-22)
   B.   Filing; Time Limits:
      1.   The subdivider of every subdivision, but excluding land specifically
exempted from the Illinois Plat Act, as now or hereafter amended (765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/1(b)), who desires final plat approval shall file six (6)
copies of the final plat and supporting data with the City Clerk and pay all
associated filing fees not later than one year after preliminary plat approval
has been granted. However, with the consent of the City Council, the subdivider
may delay application for final approval of part(s) of the tract shown on the
preliminary plat for successive one year periods not to exceed a total of five
(5) years, per subsection 10-4-3G of this chapter. No subdivision plat or
replat shall be filed for record or recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, unless and until the approval of the City is endorsed
thereon. No lot shall be sold for such subdivision plat or replat until it has
been approved by the City Council and filed for record in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds as required by the State Statutes.
      2.   For official filings, the subdivider shall file the approved final
plat with the County Recorder of Deeds within sixty (60) days after the City
Council has approved the same and the Mayor has affixed his signature thereto.
One copy of the final plat shall be given to the City Clerk's Office by the
subdivider bearing the official stamp of the County Recorder attesting its
recording within twenty (20) days of such action.
(2006 Code § 35-3-23)
   C.   Information Required: Every final plat shall be prepared by a land
surveyor on Mylar with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than one
hundred feet equals one inch (100' = 1"); provided, that the resultant drawing
shall not exceed twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). The final
plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following
information:
      1.   North arrow, graphic scale, and date.
      2.   Name of subdivider, subdivision, and identification of the portion
of the public lands survey in which the subdivision is located.
      3.   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the
tract, and the included area of the subdivision to the nearest one-hundredth
(1/100) of an acre.
      4.   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot (1') in ten thousand feet (10,000').
      5.   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals.
      6.   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land within three
hundred feet (300'), by record name, plat book, and page number.
      7.   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the
boundaries of the subdivision.
      8.   Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements,
and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or bearings and curve data,
including radii, arcs or cords, points of tangency, and central angles.
      9.   Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street.
      10.   Purpose of any existing or proposed easement(s).
      11.   Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot
area.
      12.   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved.
      13.   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions.
      14.   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots.
      15.   Certification of dedication of all public areas.
      16.   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
official monument; reference corners shall be accurately described on the final
plat.
      17.   Reference to known and permanent monuments and bench marks from
which future surveys may be made, together with elevations of any bench marks;
and the surveyor must, at the time of making his survey, establish permanent
monuments (set in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost) which
mark the external boundaries of the tract to be divided or subdivided and must
designate upon the plat the locations where they may be found.
      18.   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot markers.
(2006 Code § 35-3-24)
   D.   Certificates Required: As required by State law (765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 205/2 and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8), the following
certificates shall be executed on the final plat:
      1.   Owner’s Certificate:
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
We,            , the Owners of  (description) , have caused the said tract to
be surveyed and subdivided in the manner shown, and said subdivision is to be
hereinafter known as           . All rights-of-way and easements shown hereon
are hereby dedicated to the use of the public forever including the release and
waiver of the right of homestead under the Homestead Exemption laws of the
State of Illinois.
Dated this     day of      20   .
                         (Seal)
                         (Seal)
      2.   Notary Public’s Certificate:
NOTARY PUBLIC’S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois   )
City of Grafton   ) SS
County of Jersey   )
I,            , a Notary Public in and for the County aforesaid, do hereby
certify that  (owners)  are personally known to me to be the same persons whose
names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that they appeared before
me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed and sealed the same as
their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set forth,
including the release of waiver of the right of homestead.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this      day of                   ,
20   .
                                
         Notary Public
      3.   Surveyor’s Certificate:
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I,           , an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, do hereby certify that
this plat is a correct representation of a survey made under my direct
supervision at the request of             for the purpose of subdividing the
tract into lots as shown.
                                  
Land Surveyor
                                  
Illinois Registration Number
                                  
Date
      4.   County Clerk’s Certificate:
COUNTY CLERK’S CERTIFICATE
I,                               , County Clerk of Jersey County, Illinois, do
hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real
estate included within this plat.
                               
County Clerk
                               
Date
      5.   Certificate Of City Council:
CERTIFICATE OF CITY COUNCIL
I,                             , Mayor of the City of Grafton, do hereby
certify that the plat shown herein was duly presented to the City Council and
approved at a meeting of same held on  (date) .
                          
         Mayor
                          
         City Clerk
      6.   Flood Hazard Certificate:
FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE
We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that no part of this plat to be
recorded, is situated within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain or
watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more,
or, if this plat is within five hundred (500) feet of any surface drain or
watercourse, we hereby certify that this plat has been reviewed by the Illinois
Department of Transportation Division of Water Resources and their report is on
file with the Jersey County Recorder of Deeds.
         By:               
         Owner(s)
         By:                               
         Illinois Land Surveyor
                                             
Registration Number
                                              
Date
(2006 Code § 35-3-25)
   E.   Administrative Review; Advisory Report: Within thirty (30) days from
the date of application for final plat approval, the City Engineer and the
Administrator shall review said final plat (and supporting data), and shall
advise the City Council in writing whether it substantially conforms to the
approved preliminary plat and improvement plans. A copy of their advisory
report shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
may prepare an addendum to said report (should they so desire), and forward
same to the City Council.
(2006 Code § 35-3-26)
   F.   Action By City Council:
      1.   The City Council shall either approve or disapprove the application
for final plat approval by resolution within sixty (60) days from the date of
said application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data,
whichever date is later, unless the Council and the subdivider mutually agree
to extend this time limit. The City Council shall not approve any final plat
unless:
         a.   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary
plat; and
         b.   The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design
and improvements standards of this title, the zoning title, and the Official
Map; and
         c.   To the Council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies
with all pertinent requirements of State law; and
         d.   Either of the following has been met:
            (1)   All required improvements have been completed, inspected,
accepted, and dedicated; or
            (2)   The subdivider/developer has posted a performance bond or
deposited funds in escrow to guarantee the satisfactory completion and
dedication of all required improvements.
      2.   If the City Council disapproves the final plat, their resolution
shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions
for approval.
      3.   The City Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Council’s
resolution of approval or disapproval to the final plat. One copy of the
resolution and plat shall be retained by the Clerk, one copy shall be filed
with the Administrator, and one copy shall be given to the subdivider.
(2006 Code § 35-3-27)
   G.   Changes In Approved Final Plat: Once a final plat is approved by the
City Council, it shall not thereafter be modified; provided, however, that
minor changes may be made upon written application to the Administrator. Major
changes require the filing of a new final plat and complete review.
(2006 Code § 35-3-28)
10-4-5:   MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Subdivider’s Responsibilities: The subdivider/developer shall maintain
all the improvements in the subdivision until they have been accepted by and
dedicated to the City or other appropriate entity.
(2006 Code § 35-3-35)
   B.   Maintenance Bond: Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall
post a maintenance bond with the City Clerk in the form approved by the City
Attorney. Said bond shall be in the amount determined by the City Engineer to
be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements for a period of one year from the date of their acceptance and
dedication. If at any time during the one year period the improvements are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/
developer’s expense. If the subdivider/developer fails or refuses to pay such
costs within ninety (90) days after demand is made upon him by the
Administrator, the City shall use the maintenance bond to make the necessary
repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the bond
amount, the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the end of
the one year period, the maintenance bond shall be released.
(2006 Code § 35-3-36)
10-4-6:   VACATION OF PLATS:
In accordance with State law (765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/6, 205/7 and
205/8), any plat or part thereof may be vacated by the owner of the tract, at
any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written vacation instrument
to which a copy of the plat is attached. If there are public service facilities
in any street, other public way, or easement shown on said plat, the instrument
shall reserve to the City or other public entity or public utility owning such
facilities the property, rights-of-way, and easements necessary for continuing
public services by means of those facilities and for maintaining or
reconstructing the same. The vacation instrument shall be approved by the City
Council in the same manner as plats of subdivision and shall also be approved
by the Jersey County Superintendent of Highways, the Highway Commissioner of
the appropriate township, the District Engineer of the Illinois Department of
Transportation, the public utilities and any other unit of government the City
Council deems affected. In the case of the platted tracts wherein any lots have
been sold, the written vacation instrument must also be signed by all the
owners of lots in said tracts.
(2006 Code § 35-3-37)
CHAPTER 5: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Section
10-5-1:   Compliance With Provisions
10-5-2:   Suitability For Development Generally
10-5-3:   Lots
10-5-4
:   Streets
10-5-4-1:   Design Standards
10-5-4-2:   Improvement Standards
10-5-4-3:   Tables 5-A And 5-B
10-5-4-4:   Appendix A
10-5-5:   Blocks
10-5-6:   Sidewalks
10-5-7:   Streetlights
10-5-8:   Street Name Signs
10-5-9:   Easements
10-5-10:   Water Facilities
10-5-11:   Sewer System
10-5-1:   COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   No land within the subdivision and development jurisdiction of the City
shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the regulations of
this chapter and the applicable provisions of State law. (See 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1 et seq.)
No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
      1.   The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the City
Council and recorded in the Office of the Jersey County Recorder of Deeds; and
      2.   The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
   B.   The Administrator shall not issue a building permit for any lot
conveyed in violation of this section.
(2006 Code § 35-5-1)
10-5-2:   SUITABILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT GENERALLY:
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough
topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which will be harmful to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the development
and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless the
subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems
caused by the adverse land conditions.
(2006 Code § 35-5-2)
10-5-3:   LOTS:
   A.   Lot Size: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot
area and dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which said
subdivision is located. Land that is under water or reserved for street
improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every
corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the
district's front setback requirements on every side of the lot that faces a
street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation
of unbuildable parcels. All lots shall contain adequate space for required off
street parking and loading.
(2006 Code § 35-5-4)
   B.   Access And Relationship To Street: Land shall be subdivided in such a
way that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of subsection
10-5-4-1A of this chapter. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight street right-of-way lines or radial to curved street right-of-way
lines except where a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and
lot design.
(2006 Code § 35-5-5)
   C.   Reference Monuments: Stone or reinforced concrete reference monuments,
set in the ground in such a manner that they will not be moved by frost, shall
be placed in the field in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01 et
seq.), as now or hereafter amended. All lot corners shall be marked by one-half
inch (½") iron pins not less than twenty four inches (24") long. These pins
shall be driven into the ground deep enough that they do not protrude above the
ground surface more than one-half inch (½").
(2006 Code § 35-5-6)
10-5-4:   STREETS:
10-5-4-1:    DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Plan Integration: All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed street system indicated in the Municipal Comprehensive
Plan, and shall meet the specifications set forth in Tables 5-A and 5-B,
section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4.
(2006 Code § 35-5-7)
   B.   Right-Of-Way And Pavement Widths: Every right-of-way established for
subdivision purposes is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels
adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of
such lots or parcels. All rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public by the
developer.
(2006 Code § 35-5-8)
   C.   Topographical Considerations: Grades of streets shall conform as
closely as possible to the natural topography, but shall not exceed the maximum
grade nor be less than the minimum grade indicated in Table 5-A, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. All streets shall be arranged so that as many as possible of the
building sites are at or above street grade.
(2006 Code § 35-5-9)
   D.   Through Traffic Discouraged: Marginal access and local streets shall be
laid out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid rectangular
gridiron street pattern shall be avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable
street layout.
(2006 Code § 35-5-10)
   E.   Limited Access To Arterials: Where a development abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Board of Appeals may recommend to the
City Council that access to said arterial street be limited by one of the
following means:
      1.   By subdividing lots so they back onto the arterial street and front
onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
      2.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and generally at right angles to the arterial street, with the rear lot
lines of the lots at the termini of such streets backing onto the arterial
street; or
      3.   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting
strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
(2006 Code § 35-5-11)
   F.   Dead End Streets:
      1.   Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for
the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such
continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire
and police protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such
continuation agrees with the City's Official Map. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must dead end temporarily, the right-of-way shall be
extended to the property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with
future streets shall be reserved. A temporary turnabout shall be provided at
the terminus of any temporary dead end street.
      2.   Permanent Dead End Streets:
         a.   For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and
fire protection, permanent dead end streets shall be limited to five hundred
feet (500') in length.
         b.   The terminus of a permanent dead end street shall not be closer
than fifty feet (50') to the boundary of an adjacent tract. A cul-de-sac
turnaround, having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty feet (50') and a
minimum pavement radius of forty two feet (42'), shall be provided at the end
of every permanent dead end street.
(2006 Code § 35-5-12)
   G.   Intersections:
      1.   Only Two Streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at
any one point.
      2.   Right Angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. In no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an
angle of less than seventy five degrees (75°). An oblique street shall be
curved approaching an intersection and shall be approximately at right angles
with said intersection for at least one hundred feet (100') therefrom.
      3.   Proper Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an
existing street shall, whenever practicable, coincide with any existing
intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline
offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be
permitted, except where the intersected street has divided lanes without median
breaks at either intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial
streets shall be at least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
      4.   Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movements at corners, the
minimum R.O.W. radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be twenty
feet (20'), and the minimum radius at the back of the curb shall be thirty two
feet (32').
      5.   Flat Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade
wherever practical. In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a three
percent (3%) slope for a distance of fifty feet (50') from the nearest right-
of-way line of the intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an
intersection.
      6.   Maximum Cross Slope: The cross slopes on all streets, including
intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%).
      7.   Adequate Sight Lines: Where any street intersection will involve
earth banks or existing vegetation on the triangular area, the developer shall
cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the
grading of the public right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide an
adequate sight distance.
(2006 Code § 35-5-13)
   H.   Reverse Curves: A tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long shall
be introduced between reverse curves on local collector and collector streets.
(2006 Code § 35-5-14)
   I.   Improvements To Existing Streets: Whenever any development abuts an
existing street that is narrower than the standards indicated in the Table A,
section
10-5-4-3 this section
10-5-4, the subdivider shall dedicate sufficient right-of-way on the side
abutting the development to permit compliance with those standards. The
developer shall improve said street to the standards imposed at subsection
10-5-4-2C of this section
10-5-4, and pay one-half (½) the cost of said improvements.
(2006 Code § 35-5-15)
   J.   When Excess Right-Of-Way Required: Right-of-way width in excess of the
standards set forth in Table A, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4, shall be required where:
      1.   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate
earth slopes; or
      2.   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed
to construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
(2006 Code § 35-5-16)
10-5-4-2:   IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Developer’s Expense; General Requirements: All streets and alleys shall
be improved solely at the expense of the developer in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein. Typical roadway and pavement sections are shown
in Table 5-A, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. Requirements for pavement materials, equipment, and methods of
construction for bituminous concrete (flexible) pavements and portland cement
concrete (rigid) pavements are contained in Table 5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. Existing streets that adjoin the development on one side only will be
improved to half the width of the current street standards, and this cost will
be borne by the developer. Existing streets that join in the development on
both sides shall be improved at the developer's expense. The extent of the
improvement of existing streets will be determined by the City and the
developer during the improvement plan approval process. All streets shall meet
IDOT Roads and Bridges Standard Specifications.
   B.   Pavement Structure: All streets and alleys shall be paved across the
entire surface width specified in subsection
10-5-4-1B of this section
10-5-4. The structural composition of the pavement shall conform to the minimum
requirements set forth in Table 5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. Design requirements for both rigid and flexible pavements are as
follows:
      1.   Flexible Pavements: Flexible pavements are to be constructed as
multilayered structures combining hot mix bituminous concrete/bituminous base/
crushed stone base/subbase. Each layer of material is to be constructed in
lifts not to exceed the maximum lift thickness (compacted) specified in Table
5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. The minimum width of any single pass for any lift/layer of bituminous
mixture shall be ten feet (10'). There are alternate designs for either deep
strength asphalt or bituminous concrete on a crushed stone base/subbase.
      2.   Rigid Pavements: Rigid pavements are specified as either reinforced
or nonreinforced portland cement concrete to be constructed either on the earth
subgrade or on a crushed stone subbase or underlayment. Alternate designs are
shown for two (2) of the seven (7) street classifications. The underlayment is
to be one-fourth inch (1/4") thick fabric such as”Bedim” or “Petromat”, or
equal.
         a.   Contraction joints are to be provided at the spacings shown in
Table 5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4, for each of the various alternates. These transverse joints are to be
sawed joints that are one-eighth inch (1/8") to one-fourth inch (1/4") wide
with a depth equal to one-fourth (1/4) of the pavement thickness. Sawed
construction joints are to be sawed within twenty four (24) hours of placement
on the concrete. All contraction joints are to be dowelled with the exception
of the alleys and land access residential streets. Dowel sizes and spacing
shall comply with the following requirements:
 
Minimum Pavement Minimum Dowel Minimum Dowel Length Minimum Dowel Spacing
Thickness        Diameter
6"               5/8"          12"                  12"
7"               3/4"          15"                  15"
8"               1"            15"                  12"
 
The dowel units are to be smooth, plain, round bars placed at mid-height of the
pavement with an expansion cap on one end. The bars, or assemblies, shall be
placed so that the bars are parallel to the centerline and to the pavement
surface and shall be treated to prevent bonding of the concrete.
         b.   Longitudinal joints shall be constructed no closer than eight
feet (8') and no farther apart than fifteen feet (15'). The longitudinal joints
may be either “construction” joints or “sawed” joints. In either case, there
shall be transverse #4 reformed tie bars, thirty inches (30") long, spaced at
thirty inch (30") centers along all longitudinal joints. This includes the
joint between the pavement and curb/gutter if the curb/gutter is not
constructed integral with the pavement. As an option to tie bars, either a
half-round or trapezoidal preformed keyway meeting the following dimensions may
be used on longitudinal joints excluding the gutter joint:
 
Pavement Thickness Half-Round Trapezoidal Edge Inside Depth Inside Height
                   Diameter   Height
6"                 2"         2"               1"           1"
7"                 2"         2"               1"           1"
8"                 2"         2"               1"           1"
 
Sawed longitudinal joints shall be sawed within ten (10) days of concrete
placement and prior to any traffic or vehicles traveling on the surface.
         c.   Transverse construction joints shall be constructed at the end of
each day’s run or at locations where a "cold" joint will occur due to a delay
or interruption in placement operations. All transverse construction joints
shall be “tied” with #4 reformed bars, thirty six inches (36") long, spaced at
twelve inch (12") centers. Construction joints must be at least five feet (5')
from a contraction joint.
         d.   Pavement reinforcement shall be used in all rigid pavements
designated as S.R.P.C.C. in Table 5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. Reinforcement shall be welded wire fabric (6" x 12") with W4 wire
transversely and W5.5 wire longitudinally weighing approximately fifty four
(54) pounds per one hundred (100) square feet. The fabric shall be lapped
twelve inches (12") on transverse laps and six inches (6") on longitudinal
laps. Reinforcement shall be placed on the subgrade and supported by proper
chairs and spacers, prior to paving, at the heights specified below:
 
Pavement Thickness Depth Below Pavement Surface
6"                 2" minimum, 3" maximum
7"                 2" minimum, 3" maximum
8"                 3" minimum, 4" maximum
 
Should the Administrator and/or City Engineer or the developer’s engineer
determine that the minimal standards are not adequate for a given condition
(i.e., traffic volume, size of loads, subgrade support, drainage, etc.), the
required pavement design shall be determined by the subdivider’s engineer on
the basis of current pavement design procedures subject to the approval of the
City Engineer.
(2006 Code § 35-5-20)
   C.   Curb And Gutter:
      1.   All streets, except alleys and collector commercial, local
commercial, arterial or industrial, shall be constructed with portland cement
concrete vertical curb and gutter, V-type gutter and/or mountable curb in
accordance with the dimensions and specifications shown therefor in Tables 5-
A and 5-B, section
10-5-4-3 of this section
10-5-4. Only vertical curb and gutter shall be constructed in industrial
streets. The materials and construction methods for curb and/or gutter shall
conform with IDOT Roads and Bridges Standard Specifications.
      2.   Curb and/or gutter may be constructed either integrally or
separately in conjunction with portland cement concrete pavement. If
constructed separately, the gutter flag shall be “tied” to P.C.C. pavement with
thirty inch (30") long #4 reinforcing bars spaced at thirty inch (30") centers.
(2006 Code § 35-5-21)
   D.   Maintenance Responsibility:
      1.   Subsequent to completion of street construction by the subdivider,
the City Engineer shall make a final inspection of all streets to ascertain the
acceptability of structural condition, earth slopes, drainage structures, etc.
If said inspection indicates no deficient items, the City shall take formal
action to accept the completed streets for maintenance based upon the
Engineer’s recommendation.
      2.   Should any item need correction or repair, the subdivider will be
notified in writing of each deficiency. No street(s) will be accepted in a
subdivision until all streets comply with the City’s requirements to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(2006 Code § 35-5-22)
10-5-4-3:   TABLES 5-A AND 5-B:
TABLE 5-A
STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Residential    Max. No. of Permitted Required Min.        Max.      Min.
Street         Dwelling    On-Street R.O.W.   Pavement    Gradient  Gradient
Classification Units/      Parking   (ft.)    Width (ft.) (%)       (%)
               Net Acre
TABLE 5-A
STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Residential    Max. No. of Permitted  Required Min.        Max.      Min.
Street         Dwelling    On-Street  R.O.W.   Pavement    Gradient  Gradient
Classification Units/      Parking    (ft.)    Width (ft.) (%)       (%)
               Net Acre
Marginal       To 1.99     None       50       24          6         1.3
Access
Local          2.0-4.50    Both Sides 62       40          6         10
Collector      4.50/       Both Sides 66       43          6         1.0
               Greater
               Over 250
Arterial       dwelling    None       70       50          6         1.0
               units
               served
Local          None        50         26       10          1.0
Local          One Side    50         34       10          10
Local          Both Sides  50         42       10          1.0
Collector      None        60         39       8           1.0
 
TABLE 5-B
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STRUCTURAL
COMPOSITION OF PAVEMENTS
Street Classification Flexible Pavements    Rigid Pavements
                                         Alt. #1 Alt. #2
TABLE 5-B
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STRUCTURAL
COMPOSITION OF PAVEMENTS
Street Classification Flexible Pavements     Rigid Pavements
                                          Alt. #1         Alt. #2
MARGINAL              5" BAM              6" P.C.C.
LAND ACCESS           1 ½" Class I Surf. (15' Plain Jts) ----------
Residential           12" Lime Stab.      12" Lime Stab.
                      Subgrade            Subgrade
                      5" BAM              6" P.C.C.
LOCAL                 1 ½" Class I Surf. (15' Plain Jts) ----------
Residential           12" Lime Stab.      12" Lime Stab.
                      Subgrade            Subgrade
                      6 ½" BAM           6" P.C.C.       6" P.C.C.
COLLECTOR             1 ½" Class I Surf. (15' Plain Jts) 12" Lime Stab.
Residential           12" Lime Stab.      12" Lime Stab.  Subgrade
                      Subgrade            Subgrade        U.L. (15' Plain Jts)
                                          7" S.R.P.C.C.   7" P.C.C.
                      4" BAM              (Commercial)    (Commercial)
LOCAL                 2" Class I Bind.    8" S.R.P.C.C.   8" P.C.C.
Commercial and        1 ½" Class I Surf. (Industrial)    (Industrial)
Industrial            12" Lime Stab.      (15' Plain Jts) 12" Lime Stab.
                      Subgrade            12" Lime Stab.  Subgrade
                                          Subgrade        U.L. (15' Plain Jts)
                                          8" S.R.P.C.C.
                      6" BAM              (Commercial)
COLLECTOR             2 ½" Class I Bind. 10" S.R.P.C.C.
Commercial and        1 ½" Class I Surf. (Industrial)    ----------
Industrial            12" Lime Stab.      (15' Plain Jts)
                      Subgrade            12" Lime Stab.
                                          Subgrade
NOTE:   Equivalent pavements in addition to those shown above shall be
determined by the City Engineer. The Lime Stabilized Subgrade shall extend
under the curb/gutter to one (1) foot beyond the bak of the curb for all
roadway classifications.
 
ABBREVIATIONS:
Cr. St.      =   Crushed Stone
BAM      =   Bituminous Aggregate Mixture
U.L         =   Underlayment
P.C.C.      =   Unreinforced Portland Cement Concrete
S.R.P.C.C.   =   Standard Reinforced Portland Cement Concrete
 
MAXIMUM LIFT THICKNESS:
BAM      =   5"
Class I Binder   =   2 ½"
Class I Surface   =   1 ½"
 
 
10-5-4-4:    APPENDIX A:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/82d59b1d98f58ba66fb2fa4f0f9f44ff85990e81/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1335.png]
 
10-5-5:    BLOCKS:
   A.   Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2) tiers
of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district regulations;
provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent to local
collector or collector streets, railroads, or watercourses.
(2006 Code § 35-5-25)
   B.   Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand four hundred feet
(1,400') nor shorter than five hundred feet (500'). Wherever practicable,
blocks along collector streets shall not be less than one thousand feet
(1,000') in length.
(2006 Code § 35-5-26)
   C.   Crosswalks: Crosswalks not less than ten feet (10') wide may be
required through the center of blocks more than one thousand feet (1,000') long
where necessary to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities.
(2006 Code § 35-5-27)
10-5-6:   SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Required:
      1.   Sidewalks shall be required:
         a.   On the recommendation of the Board of Appeals that sidewalks are
needed to ensure public safety;
         b.   Along collector streets, near schools, and in shopping areas and
similar public places.
      2.   These requirements shall not be waived unless the Board of Appeals
advises the City Council that in the area in question, sidewalks are not needed
to ensure public safety, and/or that topographical conditions make the
installation of sidewalks impractical. The City Council must waive this
requirement by affirmative majority vote.
      3.   All sidewalks constructed within the City shall meet IDOT Roads and
Bridges Standard Specifications.
(2006 Code § 35-5-29)
   B.   Construction Standards:
      1.   Relationship To Curb: The street side edge of every sidewalk shall
be located at least six feet (6') from the curb to allow sufficient space for
tree planting.
      2.   Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide.
      3.   Thickness Of Concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of
concrete at least four inches (4") thick; except, that across driveways, the
thickness shall be increased to six inches (6") and/or number six (6)
reinforcing mesh shall be used.
      4.   Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than six
percent (6%).
      5.   Ramps At Intersections: When sidewalks are required, curbs shall be
cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the
mobility of persons with disabilities.
(2006 Code § 35-5-30)
10-5-7:   STREETLIGHTS:
   A.   Intersection Lighting: Streetlights shall be provided at each
intersection of streets (or alleys) within a subdivision and at each cul-de-
sac, but in no event shall there be less than one streetlight per four hundred
feet (400') (or portion thereof) of street frontage between intersections, or
between a street intersection and the terminus of a dead end street.
Additionally, in multi-family dwelling subdivisions, lighting shall be provided
within parking areas at a minimum rate of one light per twenty five (25)
parking spaces or any fraction thereof.
(2006 Code § 35-5-32)
   B.   Streetlight System Standards:
      1.   The design and installation of the streetlight system in every
subdivision shall be reviewed by the Administrator and the appropriate electric
utility company.
      2.   The lighting intensity of each streetlight shall be equivalent, at a
minimum, to a one hundred seventy five (175) watt lamp or six thousand eight
hundred (6,800) mercury luminary lamp. Each streetlight standard (post) shall
be at least sixteen feet (16') high.
(2006 Code § 35-5-33)
10-5-8:   STREET NAME SIGNS:
Street name signs of the size, height, and type approved by City Council shall
be supplied and placed by the developer at all intersections within or abutting
any subdivision. Street names shall be sufficiently different in sound and
spelling from other street names in the City so as to avoid confusion. The City
Clerk shall maintain a list of existing street names for reference. A street
which is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same
name.
(2006 Code § 35-5-35)
10-5-9:   EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements Required: At locations within the subdivision where utilities
and drainage facilities are not to be constructed within public rights-of-way,
the subdivider shall make provision for easements for such installations.
Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the electric, gas, and telephone
companies for their input regarding utility easements. All utilities, including
cable television, shall be installed underground.
(2006 Code § 35-5-37)
   B.   Utility Easements: Utility easements not less than twenty feet (20')
wide for sanitary sewers and water mains and not less than fifteen feet (15')
wide for gas, electric, telephone, and cable television shall be provided where
necessary. Normally, in the case of abutting lots, an equal amount should be
taken from each lot. Property owners may (at their own risk) plant shrubbery or
hedges or install fences on the easement areas. Utilities (private and public),
however, in order to have access for repair shall have the election to destroy
said improvements and restore the area only by grading and seeding, or to have
alternate access through the owner's property.
(2006 Code § 35-5-38)
   C.   Drainage Easements: Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall be
established along any natural drainage channel and in such other locations as
may be necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum
widths of such easements shall be approved by the City Engineer.
(2006 Code § 35-5-39)
10-5-10:   WATER FACILITIES:
   A.   Water Supply Required: An adequate supply of potable water shall be
provided to every platted lot in accordance with Illinois Department of Public
Health regulations. If the public water system is reasonably accessible, each
lot shall be properly connected thereto at the property line. All water
distribution lines shall be approved by the City Water Department.
(2006 Code § 35-5-42)
   B.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants of the type approved by the Water and
Sewer Department Manager shall be installed in every subdivision as part of the
water distribution system. The distance from any lot to a hydrant, measured
along the centerline of the public right-of-way, shall not be greater than four
hundred feet (400').
(2006 Code § 35-5-43)
10-5-11:   SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   Compliance With Regulations: All proposed sanitary sewer facilities
shall comply with the regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health
and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the
City. All water and sewer lines must be constructed as per Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Mains, State of Illinois, 4th Edition, or as
amended.
(2006 Code § 35-5-45)
   B.   Planned Public System: In areas where the public sanitary sewerage
system is not reasonably accessible but where plans for the installation of
said system have been approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
sanitary sewers shall be provided in accordance with such plans and temporarily
capped. To serve the subdivision until the time when connection to the public
system becomes available, an approved private central sewage disposal system
shall be installed, or individual sewage disposal systems may be used.
(2006 Code § 35-5-46)
   C.   Alternate Methods Of Disposal: In the event it is not possible for the
subdivider to extend the public sewer system into the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider has the right to petition the City to allow the installation of an
alternative method of sewage disposal. Any such petition shall be considered on
an individual basis with each case standing on its own merit. No subdivision
shall be approved without the City’s approval of the method of sewage disposal.
      1.   Private Central Sewage Systems: Upon specific approval of the City
Council, the subdivider may install a private central sewage system. The City
shall reserve the right to review and approve or reject the detailed plans for
such a system. Approval of the plans by the City shall in no way be construed
as acceptance of the design or operation or maintenance responsibility for said
installation. Such installation shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
and the Illinois Department of Public Health. The subdivider shall assume
perpetual operational and maintenance responsibilities for such installation
unless arrangements to the contrary are provided for in a formal written
agreement between home owners and the subdivider.
      2.   Individual Disposal Systems: Upon written approval of the City
Council, the subdivider may install individual sewage disposal systems
providing the lot size is in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. If
such installations are permitted, they shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the requirements and regulations
of the “Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code” of the Illinois
Department of Public Health (225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.)
(2006 Code § 35-5-47)
CHAPTER 6: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS
Section
10-6-1:   Policy And Purpose
10-6-2:   Stormwater Runoff Control
10-6-3:   Erosion And Sedimentation Control
10-6-4:   Affidavit Of Disclosure Of Property Interest
10-6-1:   POLICY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the policy of the City to protect and promote the public health,
safety and general welfare. The criteria for stormwater detention will reduce
the possibility of damage to public and private property, will reduce the
erosion on land and creek channels, will assist in the attainment and
maintenance of water quality standards, and will preserve and enhance the
environmental quality of the watercourses in the City.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall not recommend the approval of any plat
unless, after consultation with the City Engineer, they determine that the
proposed provisions for stormwater drainage are adequate.
(2006 Code § 35-6-1)
10-6-2:   STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL:
Ordinance 403, an ordinance providing for the control of stormwater runoff from
areas undergoing development, is hereby incorporated by reference, and its
criteria must be met in the platting of subdivisions (See
title 8, chapter 13 of this Code).
(2006 Code § 35-6-1)
10-6-3:   EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
Ordinance 402, an ordinance providing for the control of soil erosion and
sediment runoff from areas undergoing development is hereby incorporated by
reference, and its criteria must be met in the platting of subdivisions (See
title 8, chapter 12 of this Code).
(2006 Code § 35-6-2)
10-6-4:   AFFIDAVIT OF DISCLOSURE OF PROPERTY INTEREST:
The effective acreage for a site is not limited to a fractional part of the
total. If a project is to be developed in phases or small plats, the total
acreage of the project site must be considered. At the time the owner of any
development submits a preliminary plat or preliminary plan, he shall also
identify to the City all contiguous property or property in the watershed that
he has interest in.
(2006 Code § 35-6-3)
 
