VILLAGE OF HERRICK, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 328, passed 9-9-2025
State legislation current through ALS 2025 Pamphlet No. 1
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS OF
HERRICK, ILLINOIS
VILLAGE BOARD
Mayor     Debra Allen
Trustee   Tashina Calame
Trustee   Thomas Calame
Trustee   Laura Kay Kramer
Trustee   Derek Sarver
Trustee   Megan Sarver
Trustee   Joshua Smith
Treasurer Karen Pierce
Clerk     Karen Pierce
          
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Herrick shall be designated as
the Code of Herrick and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Herrick.
   COUNTY. Shelby County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Shelby County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   DWELLING. A permanent building used primarily for human habitation but does
not include facilities for the housing of transient residents, nor to include
tents, recreational vehicles or other non-permanent type shelters.
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the Village of Herrick.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE FORCE. Include such persons in the employ of a village as members of
the Department of Police, who are or shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as
POLICE OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Herrick.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in § 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   VILLAGE, MUNICIPALITY, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. The Village of Herrick,
irrespective of its population or legal classification.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)    An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord”.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(Ord. 328, passed 9-9-2025)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and
the Board may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the Board.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
or a certain village officer or employee to make additional regulations for the
purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all regulations of a
similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and not
inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
      (2)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
         § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            The village shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act.
         Statutory reference:
            Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
32.   INVESTMENT POLICY
      
33.   SEXUAL HARASSMENT; PROHIBITION
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Officials
   
30.01   Water Clerk
   
30.02   President Pro Tem
Committees
   
30.15   Established
   
30.16   Members
   
30.17   Term
   
30.18   Purpose
   
30.19   Power
   
30.20   Meetings
   
30.21   Reports
Policies
   
30.35   Employee Ethics Act
   
30.36   State Municipal Retirement Fund
   
30.37   Reimbursement of travel, meal and lodging expenses policy
   
30.38   Authorization and oversight for purchases
   
30.39   Prevailing wage rates
 
   
30.99   Penalty
OFFICIALS
§ 30.01 WATER CLERK.
   (A)   The Water Clerk for the village shall have the following duties and
obligations:
      (1)   To maintain office hours in the Village Hall on every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.;
      (2)   To send out bills to customers after the Water Commissioner reads
the meters and prior to the first of each month;
      (3)   To enter the meter readings received from the Water Commissioner
into the village computer;
      (4)   To receive payments from water customers in payment of their bills
and to enter those payments into the village computer;
      (5)   To administer the process of providing service to new customers and
have them fill out a customer information sheet;
      (6)   To notify the water customers whose bills are delinquent after the
fifteenth of the month that their water will be shut off unless the bill is
paid by noon on the Monday before the first Tuesday of the next month;
      (7)   To transmit to the Water Commissioner the name of any customer
whose water is to be shut off;
      (8)   To notify the Water Commissioner when full payment has been
received from a customer whose water was shut off and that the water may be
turned on for that customer;
      (9)   To receive and answer all questions about past due water bills; and
      (10)   To perform any other duties assigned by the Board from time to
time by ordinance.
   (B)   The compensation of the full-time Water Clerk shall be set by the
Board at the time that a Water Clerk is employed.
   (C)   A person is hereby employed as the Temporary Water Clerk on a month to
month basis at the pleasure of the Board.
   (D)   The Temporary Water Clerk shall be paid $10 per hour.
(Ord. 2009-261, passed 11-3-2009)
§ 30.02 PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   (A)   In accordance with the law of the State of Illinois the Board may
elect one of their members to serve as President Pro Tem when the Mayor is
temporarily absent due to an incapacity to perform official duties.
   (B)   The Board may elect a President Pro Tem prior to the temporary absence
or incapacity of the Mayor; however, such President Pro Tem shall not perform
the duties or possess the rights and powers of the Mayor unless the Mayor shall
formally communicate to the Village Clerk that the Mayor is or will be
temporarily absent because of an incapacity and unavailable to perform official
duties and such communication shall designate the date such absence or
incapacity shall begin and the date such absence or incapacity shall terminate.
   (C)   The President Pro Tem shall perform the duties and possess all the
rights and powers of the Mayor during the period of lime designated in the
communication from the Mayor to the Village Clerk.
   (D)   In the event the Mayor is incapacitated or disabled to such an extent
that the Mayor cannot communicate the dates of incapacity, absence, or
disability to the Village Clerk, then the Board may, by a majority vote,
determine the period of incapacity or disability which shall continue until the
Mayor is able to communicate his capacity and ability to perform his or her
official duties at which time the President Pro Tem shall no longer perform the
duties and possess all of the rights and powers of the Mayor.
(Ord. 126, passed 4-5-2016)
COMMITTEES
§ 30.15 ESTABLISHED.
   The Board hereby establishes the following committees:
   (A)   Finance;
   (B)   Employees;
   (C)   Streets/Alleys/Buildings;
   (D)   Water/Sewer; and
   (E)   Parks/Community Center.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007, Ord. 2015-301, passed 9-1-2015)
§ 30.16 MEMBERS.
   The members of all committees shall be Trustees on the Village Board and
shall be appointed by a duly passed motion and recorded in the minutes of a
meeting of the Board. All committees shall have at least two members.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 30.17 TERM.
   All committee members shall serve at the pleasure of the Board. Committee
members can be removed by a duly passed motion of the Board.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 30.18 PURPOSE.
   Committees are to advise the Mayor and Board in regard to all matters
assigned to them, and to report to the Mayor any problems that come to the
attention of the Committee in between regularly scheduled meetings of the
Board. The Board shall not be bound by any recommendation or advice received
from a Committee.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 30.19 POWER.
   Committees shall not have any power to act on behalf of the Board unless
directed to do so by ordinance. Committees shall be advisory only as to matters
assigned to the Committee by a duly passed motion and recorded in the minutes
of a meeting of the Board.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 30.20 MEETINGS.
   Committees shall hold all meetings at the Village Hall on dates and at times
as set by the committee members. The public shall be given notice pursuant to
the Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120/1 of all committee meetings. The Mayor
and other Board members may attend committee meetings in their discretion.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
§ 30.21 REPORTS.
   All committees are to issue written reports of committee meetings to the
Board at regular or special meetings, as the case may be. If problems come to
the attention of a committee in between regular meetings of the Board, the
committee involved shall hold a meeting and issue a written report to the
Mayor. The Mayor shall thereafter take appropriate action in regard to the
designated problem if immediate action is required and the problem cannot wait
to be resolved by the Board at a regular meeting.
(Ord. 2007-239, passed 6-5-2007)
POLICIES
§ 30.35 EMPLOYEE ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   Regulations.
      (1)   The regulations of § 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5 ILCS
430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5
ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this subchapter)
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the village to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
      (2)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
      (3)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
      (4)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act,
by an officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
      (5)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (B)   Repealer. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify
any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of the village
officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or
policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of
this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5
(a).
   (C)   Amendment. Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering,
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal action
by the Board.
(Ord. 227-2004, passed 5-4-2004) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.36 STATE MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund.
   (B)   The standard for IMRF participation shall be a position normally
requiring performance of duty for 600 hours per year.
(Ord. 225, passed 3-9-2004)
§ 30.37 REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The village will reimburse employee and officer travel, meal,
and lodging expenses incurred in connection with approved travel, meal, and
lodging expenses incurred on behalf of the village. Employees and officers are
expected to exercise the same care in incurring expenses for official business
as a prudent person would in spending personal funds.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT. The maximum amount that may be
reimbursed for travel, meal, and lodging expenses, which is set at $2,000 per
travel event.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the village involving reimbursement to travelers or direct
payment to private agencies providing transportation or related services.
   (C)   Authorized types of official business. Travel, meal and lodging
expenses will be reimbursed for employees and officers of the village only for
purposes of official business conducted on behalf of the village. These include
but are not limited to off-site or out-of-town meetings related to official
business and approved seminars, conferences and other educational events
related to the employee's or officer's official duties. If you are unsure
whether an expense is reimbursable, please contact the President.
   (D)   Categories of expenses.
      (1)   Airfare. Travelers are expected to obtain the lowest available
airfare that reasonably meets business travel needs. Travelers are encouraged
to book flights at least 30 days in advance to avoid premium airfare pricing.
Only coach or economy tickets will be paid or reimbursed. The traveler will pay
for the difference between higher priced tickets and coach or economy tickets
with his or her personal funds.
      (2)   Personal automobiles. Mileage reimbursement will be based on
mileage from the work location office to the off-site location of the official
business, not from the employee's or officer's residence. When attending a
training event or other off-site official business directly from an employee's
or officer's residence, no reimbursement will be made if the distance is less
than the mileage of a normal commute to the workplace. If the distance is
higher than the employee's or officer's normal commute, reimbursement will be
paid based on the differential of the commute less the mileage of a normal
commute to the workplace. An employee or officer will be reimbursed at the
prevailing IRS mileage rate. The traveler will only be reimbursed up to the
price of a coach airfare ticket if they drive to a location for which airfare
would have been less expensive.
      (3)   Automobile rentals. Travelers will be reimbursed for the cost of
renting an automobile including gasoline expense only as provided in this
section. Travelers using rental cars to conduct official business are required
to purchase insurance through the rental agency. Car rental insurance will
cover the vehicle during personal use, e.g., using the vehicle after the
conference has ended. Compact or mid-size cars are required for two or fewer
employees or officers traveling together and a full-size vehicle may be used
for three or more travelers. The traveler must refuel the vehicle before
returning it to the rental company.
      (4)   Public transportation. In the case of local training or official
business where an employee or officer chooses to use public transportation,
reimbursement for use of public transportation is based on mileage from the
agency office to the training site (not from the traveler's residence),
regardless of the transportation method chosen. When attending training or
business directly from an employee's or officer's residence, no reimbursement
will be made if the distance is less than the mileage of a normal commute to
the workplace. If the distance is higher than the traveler's normal commute,
reimbursement will paid at the differential of the commute less the mileage of
a normal commute to the workplace.
      (5)   Other transportation. The traveler should utilize hotel shuttle
service or other shuttle services, if available. If none are offered, the use
of the most economic transportation is encouraged.
      (6)   Hotel/motel accommodations. The traveler will be reimbursed for a
standard single- room at locations convenient to the business activity. In the
event of a change in plans or a cancellation, the traveler must cancel the
hotel/motel reservation so as not to incur cancellation charges. Cancellation
charges will not be reimbursed by the village unless approved by a vote of the
Board.
      (7)   Meals. Meal reimbursement is limited to the current U.S. General
Services Administration (GSA) regulations in place at the time the expense is
occurred. Prior approval by the Board and submission of receipts are required
for per diem allowances. Meals provided by the conference or seminar should be
deducted from the per diem allowance. Partial reimbursement may be made for
departure and return days based on time. Meals during in-state travel that is
not an overnight stay will be reimbursed for actual cost not to exceed the GSA
regulations.
      (8)   Vacation in conjunction with business travel. In cases where
vacation time is added to a business trip, any cost variance in airfare, car
rental, lodging and/or any other expenses must be clearly identified on the
travel, meal, and lodging expense report form and paid by the traveler.
      (9)   Accompanied travel. When a traveler is accompanied by others not on
official business, any lodging, transportation, meals or other expenses above
those incurred for the authorized traveler will not be reimbursed by the
village.
      (10)   Parking. Parking fees at a hotel/motel, conference center, or
other site will be reimbursed only with a receipt.
      (11)   Entertainment expenses. No employee or officer of the Village
shall be reimbursed for any entertainment expense, unless ancillary to the
purpose of the program, event or other official business.
   (E)   Approval of expenses.
      (1)   Expenses for members of the Board. All travel, meal, and lodging
expenses incurred by any member of the Board must be approved by roll call vote
at an open meeting of the Board.
      (2)   Expenses for officials or employees other than members of the
board. Travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by any official or employee
not covered by division (E)(1) that is in excess of the maximum allowable
reimbursement, as defined in division (B), must be approved by roll call vote
at an open meeting of the Board.
      (3)   Advanced expenses. Travel, meal, and lodging expenses advanced as a
per diem to any employee or official of the village must be approved by roll
call vote at an open meeting of the Board prior to payment. Documentation of
expenses must be provided in accordance with division (C), (D), and (F), and
any excess from the per diem must be repaid.
      (4)   Other expenses. All other expenses that do not fall within division
(E)(1), (E)(2), or (E)(3) are subject to the President's approval.
   (F)   Documentation of expenses.
      (1)   Before an expense for travel, meals, or lodging may be approved
under division (E), the following minimum documentation must first be
submitted, in writing, to the President on a travel, meal, and lodging expense
form:
         (a)   An estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if expenses
have not yet been incurred or a receipt of the cost of the travel, meals, or
lodging if the expenses have already been incurred;
         (b)   The name of the individual who received or is requesting the
travel, meal, or lodging expense;
         (c)   The job title or office of the individual who received or is
requesting the travel, meal, or lodging expense; and
         (d)   The date or dates and nature of the official business for which
the travel, meal, or lodging expense was or will be expended.
      (2)   All documents and information submitted in connection with this
policy are public records subject to disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act.
   (G)   Travel, meal, and lodging expense report form. The village hereby
adopts as its official standardized form for the submission of travel, meal,
and lodging expenses the travel, meal, and lodging expense report form.
(Ord. passed - -2016)
§ 30.38 AUTHORIZATION AND OVERSIGHT FOR PURCHASES.
   (A)   This section shall govern the non-emergency spending of all the
village employees and all elected and appointed officials.
   (B)   No single non-emergency purchase, lease or lease-purchase costing more
than $150 shall be made without the prior approval of the Mayor and at least
two Trustees of the village.
   (C)   Authorization for purchase shall be documented on purchase consent/
order form (attached to Res. 127). Information concerning the purchase shall
also be documented on said form. Receipt for purchase shall be attached to the
purchase consent form.
   (D)   The Mayor and two Trustees who granted approval for purchase requested
will be required to acknowledge consent by signature on purchase consent form.
(Res. 127, passed 12-20-2016)
§ 30.39 PREVAILING WAGE RATES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by the Act, the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
the construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the village
is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in Shelby County as determined by the Department of Labor of
the State of Illinois (the "Department") which are in effect on June 1, 2016.
If the Department adopts different rates after June 1, 2016 during the month of
June, 2016, a copy of that determination will be appended hereto and
incorporated herein by reference when it is available from the Department. As
required by said Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by
the Department shall supersede the Department's June determination and apply to
any and all public works construction undertaken by the village. The definition
of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in the Act shall be
the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained is intended to apply nor shall be construed
to apply said prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or
employment performed on behalf of this village except public works construction
to the extent required by the Act.
(Ord. 306, passed 6-7-2016)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The penalties for violations of §
30.35 shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for
similar violations of the Act.
(Ord. 227-2004, passed 5-4-2004)
CHAPTER 31: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
31.01   Established
   
31.02   Employment
   
31.03   Residency
   
31.04   Supervision
   
31.05   General duties
   
31.06   Rules and regulations
   
31.07   Conduct
   
31.08   Compensation
 
   
31.99   Penalty
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Police Department for the village which shall
consist of such employees as may be provided for by the Board.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.02 EMPLOYMENT.
   The employees of the Department shall be employed by the Village Mayor, by
and with the consent of the Board. The Village Mayor, by and with the consent
of the Board, may designate one such employee of the Department as the Chief of
Police. Employees of the Department shall work such hours each week as
designated by the Village Mayor, but not to exceed the maximum number of hours
established by the Board or Village Mayor, unless previously specifically
authorized in writing by the Village Mayor.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.03 RESIDENCY.
   Employees of the Department shall not be required to be residents of the
village.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.04 SUPERVISION.
   Employees of the Department shall be under the supervision and control of
the Village Mayor, pursuant to authority granted herein; provided that if a
Chief of Police is designated, the Chief shall be responsible for the
supervision of the other employees of the Department.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.05 GENERAL DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the employees of the Department to see to the
enforcement of all of the ordinances of the village and all statutes applicable
therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof and to perform such other duties as the Village Mayor and
Board shall prescribe for the preservation of the peace and the observance and
enforcement of the ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village Mayor and Board may prescribe such rules and regulations as
shall be deemed advisable for the operation of the Department.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.07 CONDUCT.
   It shall be the duty and obligation of every employee of the Department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times, to
obey the directions of his or her supervisor, and to avoid the use of
unnecessary force.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.08 COMPENSATION.
   Employees of the Department shall be paid such compensation as determined by
the Village Mayor and Board.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any provision of
this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as
set by the Board.
(Ord. 215-2002, passed 6-4-2002)
CHAPTER 32: INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
   
32.01   Policy
   
32.02   Scope
   
32.03   Prudence
   
32.04   Objective
   
32.05   Delegation of authority
   
32.06   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
32.07   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
32.08   Authorized investments
   
32.09   Collateralization
   
32.10   Safekeeping and custody
   
32.11   Diversification
   
32.12   Maximum maturities
   
32.13   Internal controls
   
32.14   Performance standards
   
32.15   Reporting
   
32.16   Savings clause
   
32.17   Investment policy adoption
§ 32.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the village to invest public funds in a manner which
will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while
meeting the daily cash flow demands of the entity and conforming to all state
and local statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.02 SCOPE.
   This investment policy applies to the investment of available assets of all
village funds under the direct management of the Village Treasurer.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.03 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgement and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, that persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with written
procedures and the investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be
relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or
market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a
timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.04 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   Funds of the village will be invested in accordance with the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, these policies, and written administrative procedures.
   (B)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality. The village’s investments will be in compliance with all
federal, state, and other legal requirements;
      (2)   Safety. Investments of the village will be taken in a manner that
seeks to ensure the preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity. The village’s investments will remain sufficiently
liquid to enable the village to meet all operating requirements that might be
reasonably anticipated; and
      (4)   Yield. The village’s investments will be designed with the
objective of attaining market rates of return.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.05 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Village Treasurer who, under the delegation of the
Village Board, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the
investment program.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.06 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.07 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services.
   (B)   In addition, a list will also be maintained of approved security
brokers/dealers selected by credit worthiness.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.08 AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds. Among the authorized
investments are:
      (1)   Non-negotiable certificates of deposit and other collateralized
evidence of deposits with qualified public depositories;
      (2)   Obligations of the United States government, its agencies and
instrumentalities. However, this authorization shall specifically exclude
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMOs), Real Estate Mortgage Investment
Conduits (REMICs), and other Principal Only (POs) and Interest Only (IOs)
obligations that are secured with mortgages issued by any federal agency,
instrumentality, or private firm;
      (3)   Public Treasurers’ Investment Pool established by § 17 of the State
Treasurer Act, 15 ILCS 505/17; and
      (4)   Any investments authorized by the Public Funds Investment Act (30
ILCS 235.01 et seq.).
   (B)   Investments are to be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the
fund type being invested.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.09 COLLATERALIZATION.
   (A)   Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit, and the
like) in excess of FDIC limits must be secured. So as to anticipate market
changes and provide an adequate level of security for all funds, the
collateralization level will be 110% of market value of principal. Acceptable
collateral is limited to obligations of the United States government, its
agencies, and instrumentalities.
   (B)   Collateral will always be held by an independent third party
institution in the name of the village. A clearly marked evidence of ownership
(safekeeping receipt) must be supplied and retained.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.10 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase
agreements, entered into by the village shall be conducted on a delivery-
versus-payment (DVP) basis. Securities will be held by an independent third
party custodian designated by the Village Treasurer and evidenced by
safekeeping receipts and a written custodial agreement.
   (B)   Investment officials shall be bonded to protect the village against
loss due to possible embezzlement and malfeasance.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.11 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The village shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based
on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in, and length of maturity.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.12 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the village shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the village will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than three years from the date of purchase.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities not to exceed five years.
The maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.13 INTERNAL CONTROLS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining
an internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the entity
are protected from loss, theft, or misuse. The internal control structure shall
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met.
   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control or collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.14 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the
parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a
comparable rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable
interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared to benchmarks with
similar maturity, liquidity, and credit quality of the portfolio.
   (B)   MARKET YIELD (BENCHMARK). Current 90-day treasury bill rate.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.15 REPORTING.
   The Treasurer shall prepare quarterly written reports of investment
activities for submission to the Board. The reports shall include information
regarding securities in the portfolio by class, book value, income earned, and
market value, as of the report date.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.16 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   (A)   In the event any state or federal legislation or regulation should
further restrict instruments or institutions authorized by this policy, such
restrictions shall be deemed to be immediately incorporated in this policy.
   (B)   If new legislation or regulation should liberalize the permitted
instruments or institutions, such changes shall be available and included in
this policy only after written notification to the Village Board and its
subsequent approval of said changes.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
§ 32.17 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.
   The village’s investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the
Village Board. The policy should be reviewed on an annual basis by the Village
Treasurer and any modifications made thereto must be approved by the Village
Board.
(Ord. passed - -1999)
CHAPTER 33: SEXUAL HARASSMENT; PROHIBITION
Section
   
33.01   Background
   
33.02   Policy
   
33.03   Prohibited conduct
   
33.04   Employee rights
   
33.05   Retaliation prohibited
   
33.06   Filing complaints
   
33.07   Adjudication
   
33.08   Responsibility
   
33.09   False accusations
§ 33.01 BACKGROUND.
   Harassment on the basis of a person's sex by a supervisor, co-worker or
other person is a discriminatory practice which violates Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and regulations passed by the United States Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and Illinois Human Rights Act. Aside from being illegal,
sexual harassment undermines the integrity of individual work relationships and
damages the morale of the entire work force.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.02 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the village that all employees are entitled to work in
an environment free from all forms of illegal discrimination including
discrimination based upon a person's sex. Accordingly, any practice or activity
that constitutes sexual harassment is strictly forbidden within village work
places and shall, if substantiated in accordance with this policy, result in
disciplinary action.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   Definition. SEXUAL HARASSMENT is defined as an unwelcome sexual
advance, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of a person's employment;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a
basis for employment decisions affecting that person;
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with a person's work performance; or
      (4)   Such conduct creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work
environment.
   (b)   Sanctions. Sexual harassment is a serious violation of the work rules
of the village and, if proven, shall be grounds for the imposition of
discipline. Potential sanctions for the offense shall range from a minimum of a
five days suspension without pay to termination, depending upon the following:
      (1)   The individual facts of any given case; and
      (2)   The employment record of the person committing such harassment.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.04 EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.
   Any employee who believes that another employee is engaging in sexual
harassments shall file a complaint as hereafter provided within a reasonable
period of time, but not more than 180 days, after the event.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.05 RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   No person filing a complaint under this policy or who legitimately assists
another in the prosecution of any such complaint shall be subjected to
retribution or retaliation of any kind for doing so.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.06 FILING COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Filing of complaints. All complaints of sexual harassment shall be
filed with either an immediate supervisor or department head, or in the
alternative, with the Mayor or Village Attorney.
   (B)   Investigation.
      (1)   Complaints filed under this policy shall be promptly and thoroughly
investigated by the department head or an individual designated by the Mayor in
the event the department head is unable to perform this function due to
circumstances surrounding the complaint.
      (2)   Upon completion of the investigation, the person conducting the
investigation shall prepare a report addressing all allegations in the
complaint and objectively documenting all relevant factual findings of the
investigation. The investigatory report shall contain neither conclusions
concerning the complaint nor recommendations as to disposition.
      (3)   The investigative report shall be presented to the Mayor upon
completion and within 15 days after receipt of the complaint. This time
requirement may be extended by the Mayor, in writing, upon request of the
investigator and good cause shown for such an extension.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.07 ADJUDICATION.
   (A)   All complaints of sexual harassment shall be adjudicated by the Mayor,
or the personnel committee in the event the Mayor is unable to discharge this
duty. Such adjudicative hearing shall be closed to the public.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the completed investigative report, the Mayor shall
conduct an administrative hearing at which the report shall be presented and
considered. Hearings shall be conducted before a court reporter empowered to
take testimony under oath. The court reporter shall require all witnesses to
provide testimony under oath and shall prepare a verbatim transcription or
recording of the proceedings which shall serve as the official record of the
hearing.
   (C)   The accused employee shall be notified, in writing, at least ten days
before the hearing of the complaint and the underlying allegations. The accused
employee may request one postponement of the hearing upon receipt of the notice
in order to obtain legal counsel, however, the delay occasioned by such request
shall not exceed 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice by the accused
employee.
   (D)   The accused employee shall be entitled to attend the hearing and
testify in his or her own behalf, and shall be entitled to confront and cross-
examine the employee who filed the complaint. In the event that the complainant
elects not to attend the administrative hearing and upon objection from the
accused to the complainant's absence, the complaint shall be dismissed and the
accused deemed innocent of the allegations.
   (E)   The accused employee shall be entitled to call witnesses in his or her
own behalf and to introduce evidence which bears upon the issues presented by
the complaint and investigative report.
   (F)   At the conclusion of the hearing, or within five days thereafter, the
Mayor shall make findings concerning the innocence or guilt of the accused to
the offense of sexual harassment.
   (G)   A finding of guilt must be supported by substantial, credible evidence
that:
      (1)   The facts alleged by the complaint to have occurred are true; and
      (2)   Those facts constitute sexual harassment within the meaning of this
policy; and
      (3)   The accused is the person who committed the acts amounting to
sexual harassment.
(Ord. passed - - 2017)
§ 33.08 RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Supervisors. Each supervisor has a responsibility to maintain the work
place free of sexual harassment. This duty includes discussing this policy with
all employees and assuring them that they are not to endure insulting,
degrading or exploitative sexual treatment.
   (B)   Village. It is the responsibility of the village to:
      (1)   Provide information to managers and supervisors regarding this
policy specifically, and sexual harassment generally; the gravity of such
behavior; and the procedure to be employed in the event a complaint of sexual
harassment is made or conduct amounting to sexual harassment is observed.
      (2)   Provide necessary training to managers and supervisors in order to
reduce the likelihood of sexual harassment in the workplace.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 33.09 FALSE ACCUSATIONS.
   Due to the serious and private nature of this offense, false accusations of
sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a disciplinary offense and will
result in the same level of punishment as that applied to one who engages in
such behavior.
(Ord. passed - -2017)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   SEWER
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Application for service
   
50.02   Deposits
   
50.03   Connection charge
   
50.04   Ownership by village and liability
   
50.05   Customer obligation
   
50.06   Location of village water lines
   
50.07   Turning on water
   
50.08   Meters required
   
50.09   Shut-off valves required
   
50.10   Extensions of mains
   
50.11   Voluntary termination of service
   
50.12   Charge for reconnection
   
50.13   Testing meters
   
50.14   Underground leaks
   
50.15   Tapping private lines prohibited
   
50.16   Lien for delinquent charges
Rates
   
50.30   Monthly charges
   
50.31   Water meter fee
   
50.32   Bulk water
   
50.33   Bills for service
   
50.34   Minimum charge
   
50.35   Water and sewer rate increase
Cross-Connections
   
50.50   Purpose
   
50.51   Application
   
50.52   Policy
   
50.53   Definitions
   
50.54   Public water supply system
   
50.55   Cross-connection prohibited
   
50.56   Survey and investigations
   
50.57   Type of protection required
   
50.58   Backflow prevention devices
   
50.59   Inspection and maintenance
   
50.60   Booster pumps
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Water service shall be furnished by the village upon the filing of an
application with the Village Clerk on a form furnished by the Clerk.
Connections to a water main shall only be made after 24 hours’ notice. All such
connections shall be made by the village at the expense of the applicant.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.02 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Every new customer of the village waterworks system shall pay a
deposit to the Village Clerk with his, her, or its application for service in
the amount of $100 plus a non-refundable connection/turn on fee of $25. Upon
permanent disconnection from the water service, this deposit shall be used to
pay any outstanding bill with any balance being returned to the customer
without interest. This deposit shall not be used to pay a delinquent bill
unless service is being terminated on a permanent basis.
   (B)   Any customer who has had his or her water shut off and the $100
deposit was returned shall pay a $100 deposit again if water service is
requested.
   (C)   Any customer who has had his or her water service terminated by the
village twice in any 12-month period shall pay a deposit of $100 to the Village
Clerk before water service will be turned on unless there is a record in the
village office that the customer has paid the $100 deposit previously.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.03 CONNECTION CHARGE.
   Every person, firm, or organization desiring to connect his, her, or its
premises to the village waterworks system shall pay a connection fee of $450.
The village’s Water Department shall furnish all labor and material including
the meter to bring a water line from the water main to the premises of the
customer. In the event that a boring under a street must be made in order to
bring a water line to the premises of a customer, there shall be an additional
charge of $250.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.04 OWNERSHIP BY VILLAGE AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   The village shall install, own, and be responsible for the maintenance
of the service line from the main to the meter and the complete meter assembly.
   (B)   The village reserves the right to shut off water at any time in the
mains for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with or
extensions of the same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the
village in case of fire, and for restricting the use of water in case of
deficiency in supply, including the suspension of the use of water for
sprinkling lawns or gardens. No claims shall be made against the village by
reason of breaking of any service pipe or service cock, or damage arising from
shutting off the water for repairing, laying, or relaying mains, hydrants, or
other connections or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of
the water supply, or by increasing or decreasing the water pressure at any
time, or from concentrated or restricted use of water as above.
   (C)   All water service supplied by the village shall be upon the express
condition that the village shall not be liable nor shall any claims be made
against the village for damages or injury caused by reason of the breakage of
any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus, appurtenances connected with said
system, or any part or portion thereof, or for any interruption of the supply
by reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations,
extensions, or renewals.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.05 CUSTOMER OBLIGATION.
   The water customer shall pay for, install, and maintain the service line
from the location of the meter to his or her premises.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.06 LOCATION OF VILLAGE WATER LINES.
   No village water lines will be located on private property and the village
will not assume maintenance for lines on the customer side of the meter without
an agreement with the landowner and/or customer and the conveyance to the
village of an easement.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.07 TURNING ON WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn the water on for service at any
premises except an employee of the village’s Water Department.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 METERS REQUIRED.
   All premises using the village water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter furnished by the village. Before any premises are
occupied, or new construction is commenced, a water meter shall be installed as
herein required or no water shall be furnished to such premises.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.09 SHUT-OFF VALVES REQUIRED.
   All customers are required to install shut-off valves on their main service
line where it enters the building.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.10 EXTENSIONS OF MAINS.
   (A)   If a request is made to extend a water main, the feasibility of same
shall be studied by the village. If it appears that from an economical
standpoint that the extension will pay for itself in a reasonable time and if
the funds are available, the village will extend the main.
   (B)   In the event that the village does not find the request for the
extension to be feasible or does not have sufficient funds to pay for the
extension, then the owners of the property may extend the mains at their
expense and under the direction and supervision of the village’s Water
Department. After the mains are laid, they shall become the property of the
village and shall be of the type material and size as specified by the village.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.11 VOLUNTARY TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
   Any customer requesting a termination of water service shall give written
notice to the Village Clerk ten days prior to the time that such termination of
service is desired. At that time, the meter shall be read by the village and a
bill rendered to the customer requesting the termination of the service.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.12 CHARGE FOR RECONNECTION.
   (A)   If water service to a customer is disconnected due to non-payment of a
bill, service will only be reconnected after payment of the past due bill and a
$25 reconnection fee.
   (B)   When water service is disconnected at the request of the customer for
whatever reason, service will only be reconnected upon payment of a $10
reconnection fee.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.13 TESTING METERS.
   Any water meter shall be taken out and tested upon complaint of the
customer, upon payment of a fee of $15. If upon testing the meter is not within
3% accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced and the $15 fee returned to the
customer.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.14 UNDERGROUND LEAKS.
   In case of an underground leak on the customer’s side of the meter that has
been verified by a village employee of the Water Department, which leak causes
a monthly water bill of more than twice the average monthly water bill (based
on bills for the prior 12-month period), the customer’s monthly water bill
shall be adjusted to be twice the average monthly water bill. A water bill
adjustment for a leak shall only be allowed every three years per customer.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.15 TAPPING PRIVATE LINES PROHIBITED.
   The village will not allow water taps for connections to water mains which
are not under the control, operation, and maintenance of the village.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.16 LIEN FOR DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   Delinquent charges for water and sewer service shall be a lien upon the
premises as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water and sewer service
becomes delinquent, as provided herein above, the Village Clerk may file with
the County Clerk of Shelby County a notice of lien. If the water customer whose
bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, notice of delinquency and
termination of service shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if his or
her addresses is known to the Clerk, prior to filing a notice of lien. The
failure of the Clerk to record such notice of lien or to mail such notice or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the village’s
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as provided by law.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
RATES
§ 50.30 MONTHLY CHARGES.
   (A)   Established; use and service.
      (1)   There are hereby established monthly charges for the use and
service of the village water system and service.
      (2)   These charges are as follows:
         (a)   Fifteen dollars and sixty-seven cents for the first 1,000
gallons consumed; and
         (b)   Six dollars per 1,000 gallons, or fraction thereof, consumed
above the first 1,000 gallons.
   (B)   Surcharge for storm water improvements. 
      (1)   There is hereby imposed a monthly surcharge of $1.89 on each water
and sewer customer within the village to be used for storm water improvements
within the village.
      (2)   All monthly surcharge receipts collected pursuant to this division
shall be kept in a separate fund and shall be applied first in the payment and
discharge of the principal and interest on any money borrowed and used in the
construction of storm water improvements within the village. Any surplus may be
applied in such manner as the corporate authorities may direct.
      (3)   The surcharge imposed pursuant to this division shall be added to
the monthly water bill of each and every water and sewer customer within the
village and shall be collected in the same manner as water bills are collected
pursuant to the Illinois Municipal Code and ordinances of the village.
      (4)   This division shall be in full force and effect upon its passage,
approval, and publication in pamphlet form (which publication is hereby
authorized) as provided by law. Fee is to start on August 1, 2016.
(Ord. 302, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 303, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 306, passed 7-6-
2016)
§ 50.31 WATER METER FEE.
   There is hereby established a monthly water meter fee of $2. Such fee shall
be added to each customer’s monthly water bill and shall be shown as a separate
line item on the bill.
(Ord. 302, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 303, passed 3-1-2016)
§ 50.32 BULK WATER.
   There is hereby established a charge of $10 per 1,000 gallons, or fraction
thereof, for bulk water purchased at the waterworks plant. All other water and
sewer rates and charges not amended by this subchapter shall remain in full
force and effect.
(Ord. 302, passed 3-1-2016; Ord. 303, passed 3-1-2016)
§ 50.33 BILLS FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
water and sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the
village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and
user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
   (B)   Bills for water and sewer service shall be sent out by the Village
Clerk on the first day of the month following the period for which the service
is furnished. Bills for water and sewer service shall be due on the same date.
   (C)   All water and sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent
out. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day
after they have been rendered. Bills may be paid in two monthly payments
without penalty if both payments are received by the fifteenth day.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.34 MINIMUM CHARGE.
   All customers of the village waterworks and sewer system shall pay the
minimum monthly water usage charge even if no water is used during the month.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
§ 50.35 WATER AND SEWER RATE INCREASE.
   The water and sewer rates shall increase 5% retroactive to January 1, 2012
and on January 1 of each year thereafter.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 50.50 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.51 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the village.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.52 POLICY.
   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage
of contaminants through the customer’s water service connection. If, in the
judgement of the Maintenance Supervisor or his or her authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Maintenance Supervisor shall give
notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install
such approved device or devices at his or her own expense; failure, refusal, or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing, and repair as required in
§
50.56(D)(4) below for a period of at least five years. The Maintenance
Supervisor may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection
report to the (name of public water supply) to assist in determining whether or
not service line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections
shall be conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by
the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.53 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(MISSING MATERIAL)
   AGENCY. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances, and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water that does not meet drinking water quality standards
specified in the Pollution Control Board’s rules titled Primary Drinking Water
Standards, and is not suitable for human consumption or culinary use, or is of
unknown quality. See 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.120.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration, or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley, or
at the curb to, within, and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work, or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work, or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
(225 ILCS 320/2)
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that meets drinking water quality standards specified
in the Pollution Control Board’s rules titled Primary Drinking Water Standards
and is suitable for human consumption or culinary use. See 77 Ill. Admin. Code
890.120.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
(MISSING MATERIAL)
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.54 PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
(MISSING MATERIAL)
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the
point where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water
system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.55 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited, except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.56 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises and
testing, repair, and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer’s premises.
   (B)   On request by the Superintendent of Water or his or her authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer’s premises. The consumer’s
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent of Water
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other
plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
(MISSING MATERIAL)
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.57 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under Sections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 of
these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard;
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard; or
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under Section 6.4 and 6.5 of these
regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source; and/or
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
to the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.58 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control
and Hydraulic Research, a Division of the University of Southern California,
American Water Works Association, ASSE International, or NSF International, or
certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with
applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.59 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed
(MISSING MATERIAL)
inspection, tests, maintenance, and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or by
passed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by division (A) above.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed, or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.60 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 158, passed 8-19-1991)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any
provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.16,
50.33,
50.34, or
50.35 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
      (2)   Each day a person fails to comply with the provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.16,
50.33,
50.34, or
50.35 constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 2013-284, passed 5-7-2013)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Required use of sewers
   
51.03   Private sewage disposal
   
51.04   Building sewers and connections
   
51.05   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.06   Village responsibility and liability
   
51.07   User responsibility
   
51.08   Extension of mains
Use of Public Sewers
   
51.20   Unpolluted drainage
   
51.21   Prohibited discharges
   
51.22   Village options to handle prohibited discharges
   
51.23   Sand interceptors
   
51.24   Preliminary treatment
   
51.25   Control manhole
   
51.26   Testing
   
51.27   Special agreement
   
51.28   Sewage works protected
Rates and Charges
   
51.40   Basis for service charges
   
51.41   Measurement of flow
   
51.42   Debt service charge
   
51.43   Basic user rate
   
51.44   Surcharge rate
   
51.45   Computation surcharge
   
51.46   Computation of wastewater service charge
   
51.47   Change in occupancy
   
51.48   Initial and minimum charges whether sewer used or not
   
51.49   Bills
   
51.50   Delinquent bills
   
51.51   Lien; notice of delinquency
   
51.52   Foreclosure of lien
   
51.53   Revenues
   
51.54   Accounts
   
51.55   Notice of rates
   
51.56   Access to records
   
51.57   Appeals
 
   
51.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Application for sewer permits
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Village of Herrick.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of the organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from the soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters)
outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, stormwater, surface water, and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Include transit, lodging, retail, and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole will have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal, and coverage of (loan, bond, and the like) outstanding
and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of
users connected to the wastewater facilities.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Title II of the Clean
Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., Grants for Construction of
Treatment Works, of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pre-treatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Include establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances
into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial,
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Include schools, hospitals, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);
or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissible.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in 1.000
milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts
per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results
of water and wastewater analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants under 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   ORDINANCE. Ordinance 153.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
   PPM. Parts per million by weight.
   PRE-TREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary (or combined sewer system), even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, and groundwaters
or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE and WASTEWATER. Are inter-changeable.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water, and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewage system.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
Water Environment Federation, and the American Water Works Association.
   STATE ACT. The Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
   STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Anti-Pollution Bond Act,
being 30 ILCS 405/1 et seq., and for making such grants as filed with the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water, and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in §
51.04.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or industrial waste and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
the treatment works will be operated and shall be 30 years from the date of
start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state grant.
   USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer
system.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint, of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The SERVICE CHARGE shall be computed as
outlined in §
51.04 and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the debt service
charge, and a surcharge, if applicable.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. The regulations of the Illinois Pollution Control
Board captioned Water Quality Standards that appear in 35 Ill. Admin. Code Part
302.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.02 REQUIRED USE OF SEWERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village , any human or
animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated in the village
and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer
of the village, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
60 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer
is within 300 feet (91 meters) of the property line.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
51.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   (1)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the village.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
village, (reference Appendix A) which the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
village. A permit and inspection fee, in an amount as set by the Board, shall
be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
      (2)   Sewer service shall be furnished only to users upon the filing of
an application upon a form to be supplied by the village.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
village. Such authority shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
village when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the
receipt of written notice by the village.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq., and Code and with the State
Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system which utilizes subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than 5,000 square feet (465 square meters).
No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
51.02(D), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable materials.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local health
officer.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.04 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   When sewer service is desired, the owner or the owner’s agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the village. (Reference
Appendix A below.) The permit application shall be supplemented by any
specifications, plans, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the village. A permit and inspection fee, in an amount as set by
the Board, for a building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time
the application is filed.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations, and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front of the building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found to be sound and serviceable, on examination and test by the
village.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
International (formerly known as the American Society for Testing Materials),
the latest edition of the Water Environmental Foundation’s publication
Activated Sludge (Manual of Practice No. 9) and the latest edition of the
Illinois Society of Professional Engineers’ publication Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with division (C) above, and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before
installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the village or its
representative.
   (M)   All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.05 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The village and the duly authorized employees of the village, the
state’s Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
village or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers, waterways, or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the village or duly authorized employees of the village,
the state’s Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by the village employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in §
51.25.
   (C)   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the village holds an easement for the purposes
of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair,
and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.06 VILLAGE RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Ownership, installation, and maintenance. The village shall install,
own, and maintain the complete sewer system, sewer mains, and service lines to
the property lines or a mutually agreed upon point subject to the Board
determination that a particular service is economically feasible to install.
   (B)   Refusal of service. The village may at any time refuse additional
services to any applicant if, in the judgement of the Board, the capacity of
the system will not permit such use.
   (C)   Liability. All sewer service supplied by the village shall be upon the
express condition that the village shall not be liable nor shall any claim be
made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the inability of any
user to use the sewer system during repairs, relocation, or expansion of any
part of the system, or failure of any part of the system.
   (D)   Use of sewer services on user premises. The user shall be responsible
for installation and maintenance of service lines between the manhole or sewer
main and the residence or business of the user. Such service lines must be
installed according to the specifications as required by the village. Service
lines must not be covered until they are inspected and approved by a duly
authorized village representative. The user will not connect any service line
or any plumbing connected with the service line until approved by the village.
The service line must meet any requirements of the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.07 USER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Installing and maintaining service lines. The user shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of service lines between the
manhole or sewer main and the residence or business of the user. Such service
lines must be installed according to the specifications as required by the
village. Service lines must not be covered until they are inspected and
approved by a duly authorized village representative. The user will not connect
any service line or any plumbing connected with the service line until approved
by the village. The service line must meet any requirements of the state’s
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (B)   Easements. The user shall give such easements and rights-of-way as
necessary to the village and allow access for the purpose of construction,
repair, maintenance, and relocation or expansion of the sewer system. The
necessity shall be determined by the Board.
   (C)   Damage to the village.
      (1)   No user shall tamper, adjust, damage, or in any manner interfere
with the components or operation of the sewer system owned by the village. The
penalty for tampering, damaging, adjusting, or in any manner interfering with
the components of the operation of the system shall be in an amount as set by
the Board and payable to the village. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days
after the amount is determined by the Village Board, the Village Board may shut
off the sewer service. The amount of penalty shall be determined by the Village
Board.
      (2)   In addition to the penalty, the user shall reimburse the village
for the actual cost of repairing any damage arising from the user’s act. The
user shall report any known evidence of tampering, adjusting, damaging, or
interference with operation of the system, owned by the village, to the Village
Mayor and Village Board. Any malicious act or damage to the system that is not
appropriately punishable by the foregoing shall be prosecuted through a court
of law.
   (D)   Specified uses. Users may discharge into the sewage collection
facility of the village only waste which is produced in the ordinary domestic
or farm use upon the premises of the user, provided:
      (1)   No user shall charge another person for the discharge of waste
through the user’s property.
      (2)   Each dwelling, apartment, business, and livestock tap is a separate
unit. The user must make application for service for each unit, and each unit
shall have a separate service line, unless otherwise approved by the Village
Board. Each user shall pay the minimum monthly rate and other rates and fees
hereby established for each unit.
      (3)   Uses other than ordinary domestic and farm use may be approved by
the Village Board upon such specific terms and conditions as may be set forth
by the Village Board in each case.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.08 EXTENSION OF MAINS.
   (A)   Determination of who pays expense of extension.
      (1)   The Village Board shall first determine if an extension of a sewer
main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and
the number of existing potential users that will be served by the extension.
      (2)   If the extension is economically feasible, then the village may
install and pay the cost of the extension at the discretion of the Board.
      (3)   If the village elects not to pay the cost of extending the sewer
main, then the person or persons desiring sewer service shall install the
extension at his, her, or their own personal expense upon written consent by
the Board.
      (4)   The village shall not pay for any extension to an undeveloped area
such as a subdivision being developed unless there are sufficient existing
residents or businesses to make the extension economically feasible.
   (B)   Requirement if extension is installed by someone other than the
village.
      (1)   The village must approve all plans and specifications for any
extensions.
      (2)   Before any extensions are installed, the plans and specifications
must be reviewed and approved by the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
      (3)   Ownership, rights-of-way, and title must be conveyed to the village
for all extensions installed by anyone other than the village. The village will
maintain the mains thereafter.
      (4)   No extension will be permitted if, in the opinion of the Board, the
system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the proposed extension.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.20 UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged on approval of the village to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.21 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; or
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the village, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory
agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (or
65.56°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65.56°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval by the village;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degrees that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such a half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of the agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 VILLAGE OPTIONS TO HANDLE PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
51.21(C), and/or which are in violation of the standards for pre-treatment
provided in 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and any amendments thereto, and which in the
judgement of the village may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pre-treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
   (B)   If the village permits the pre-treatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.23 SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the village, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.24 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.25 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.26 TESTING.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
      (2)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than
once per year. The industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state,
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be deemed in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken, at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.27 SPECIAL AGREEMENT.
   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the village for treatment, subject to payment thereof, in accordance with §§
51.40 through
51.46, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with
federal and state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost
recovery system.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.28 SEWAGE WORKS PROTECTED.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest undercharges of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990) Penalty, see §
51.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.40 BASIS FOR SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user
charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge,
and a surcharge, if applicable.
   (B)   The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding loans by the number of users. Through further
divisions, the monthly debt service charge can be computed.
   (C)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
      (1)   A five day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l; and
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
   (D)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement
and shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories;
      (2)   Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by
volume, suspended solids, and BOD, if possible;
      (3)   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated; and
      (4)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of normal sewage
strength for BOD and SS.
   (E)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS
respectively. Section
51.45 specifies the procedure to compute surcharge.
   (F)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit
report. The wastewater service charge shall be evaluated yearly and revised as
necessary to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and
maintenance costs.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.41 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of
100 gallons.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part or all of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her own expense, water meters of a type
approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (C)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed without the consent of the
village.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.42 DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.
   A debt service charge, in an amount as set by the Board, to each user of the
wastewater facility of the village is hereby established.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.43 BASIC USER RATE.
   There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge for
operation, maintenance, and replacement and a basic user rate for the use of
and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village.
   (A)   A minimum charge, in an amount as set by the Board, for operation,
maintenance, and replacement shall be applied to all users whose water
consumption does not exceed 1,000 gallons per month.
   (B)   A basic user rate, in an amount as set by the Board, for operation,
maintenance, and replacement shall be applied to all users for water
consumption in excess of 1,000 gallons per month.
   (C)   Additionally, a charge, in an amount as set by the Board, shall be
assessed all sewer users living outside the village limits.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.44 SURCHARGE RATE.
   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:
   (A)   Twenty-five cents per pound of BOD; and
   (B)   Twenty-five cents per pound of SS.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.45 COMPUTATION SURCHARGE.
   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as
may be deemed necessary by the village and shall be binding as a basis for
surcharges.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.46 COMPUTATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following
formula:
      CW = CD + CM + (Vu - X) CU + CS
   (B)   Where:
      (1)   CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period;
      (2)   CD = Debt service charge (§
51.42);
      (3)   CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance, and replacement (§
51.43);
      (4)   Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period;
      (5)   X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (§
51.43);
      (6)   CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance, and replacement (§
51.43); and
      (7)   CS = Amount of surcharge (§§
51.44 and
51.45).
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.47 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Notice to village. Any user requesting a termination of service shall
give written notice to the village ten days prior to the time such termination
of service is desired.
   (B)   Responsibility for payment of services already consumed.
Responsibility for payment of sewer service prior to the date of termination
shall be with the property owners as well as the user.
   (C)   Charges for change. There shall be no charge for transferring the
sewer service to the subsequent user.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.48 INITIAL AND MINIMUM CHARGES WHETHER SEWER USED OR NOT.
   (A)   The rates as shown in the rates schedule in §§
51.42 through
51.46 shall be paid by each customer who has signed a user contract, beginning
at the time the village makes the service available to the customer.
   (B)   The minimum rate will be paid by those customers not using the service
even though he or she may not be connected to the system; provided the service
is available from the village.
   (C)   There will be a charge in an amount as set by the Board per sewer
service tap for service to each property for which an application and sewer
user agreement has been filed.
   (D)   In addition to the above charges, a deposit in an amount as set by the
Board plus a turn on fee, in am amount as set by the Board, shall be paid by
each user to guarantee payment of sewer bills. The deposit shall be returned to
each user without interest upon termination of sewer service and all accounts
of that user being paid.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.49 BILLS.
   (A)   Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly.
   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the
services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
   (C)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village Treasurer on
the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is
billed. Bills for sewer service shall be due on the same date that bills for
water service are due.
   (D)   All sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent out. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after
they have been rendered.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.50 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village's form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the village
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
§ 51.51 LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 45 days after it
has been rendered, the Village Treasurer shall file with the County Recorder of
Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice
that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the Village Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises if his or her address is known to the Treasurer, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has been rendered. The
failure of the Village Treasurer to record such lien or to mail such notice or
the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.52 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of that sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting the costs, as is the case in foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by the lien to be foreclosed in the manner as
provided by law. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid 45 days after it has been rendered.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.53 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and
apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds
of the village and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed
by the Village Mayor and Village Board.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incidental to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the village. Said
Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
the statute of the Revised Cities and Villages Act, 65 ILCS 20/0.01 et seq.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.54 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statement, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year; and
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.55 NOTICE OF RATES.
   (A)   A copy of §§
51.47 through
51.57 properly certified by the Village Treasurer shall be filed in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds of Shelby County and shall be deemed notice to all
owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of said village on
their properties.
   (B)   Also, each system user shall be notified annually in conjunction with
a regular bill of any rate change, showing costs attributable to debt service,
operation and maintenance, replacement, and surcharges.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.56 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The state’s Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records of the village
which are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state
grant.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.57 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in §§
51.42 through
51.46 shall be made available to user within 15 days of receipt of a written
request for such. Any disagreement over the method used, or in the computation
thereof, shall be remedied by a third party selected by both parties within 90
days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.08 or
51.20 through
51.27 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any
permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A)(1) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount as set by the Board for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
51.01 through
51.08 or
51.20 through
51.28 shall become liable to the village by reason of such violation.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of §§
51.40 through
51.57 shall be fined in an amount as set by the Board for each offense.
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR SEWER PERMITS
(A)   Residential or commercial building sewer application.
   A.   The UNDERSIGNED, being ___________ property located at
___________________________ ___________________________. DOES HEREBY REQUEST a
permit to install and connect a building sewer to serve the
______________________________ at said location.
      1.   The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed
building sewer:
            NUMBER      FIXTURES         NUMBER      FIXTURES
            _________      Kitchen Sinks         _________      Water Closets
            _________      Lavatories         __________      Bath Tubs
            _________      Laundry Tubs         _________      Showers
            _________      Garbage Grinders      __________      Urinals
            Specify other fixtures:
________________________________________________________
      2.   A maximum of ____________________________________ people will use
these fixtures.
      3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
is _________
______________________________________________________________________________.
      4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are
attached hereto.
   B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED
AGREES:
      1.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Village Code of the
Village of Herrick, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the future;
      2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the Village of
Herrick; and
      3.   To notify the Village of Herrick when the building sewer is ready
for inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of
the work is covered.
   DATE:_________________   SIGNED:
______________________________________________
                  ______________________________________________
                     Address of Applicant
   $_________ Connection fee paid;      $_____________ Inspection fee paid
   Permit issued ___________________;
__________________________________________________
                     Village Official
(B)   Private sewage disposal application.
   A.   The UNDERSIGNED, being the __________ property located at
___________________________ ___________________________. DOES HEREBY REQUEST a
permit to install sanitary sewage disposal facilities to serve the
______________________________ at said location.
      1.   The proposed facilities include:
_____________________________________, which is to be built in complete
accordance with the plans and specifications attached hereto.
      2.   The area of the property is ___________________________square feet.
      3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
is ________________.
      4.   A maximum of _________________ persons will use the above facility.
      5.   The locations and nature of all sources of all private and public
water supplies within one hundred feet of any boundary of the property are as
shown on the plat attached hereto.
   B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED
AGREES:
      1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the project that
is requested by the Village of Herrick;
      2.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Village Code of the
Village of Herrick, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the future;
      3.   To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered
by this application in a sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all
requirements of the Village of Herrick and at no expense to the Village of
Herrick; and
      4.   To notify the Village of Herrick at least twenty-four hours prior to
commencement and again at least twenty-four hours prior to the covering of any
portions of the installation.
      DATE:_______________ SIGNED:
_______________________________________________
                     _______________________________________________
                        Address of Applicant
      $ ______________ Inspection fee paid.
      Permit issued this ___________________;
___________________________________________
                        Village Official
(Ord. 153, passed 7-9-1990)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   VEHICLE REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: VEHICLE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Damaging traffic signs
Parking
   
70.15   Near a stop sign
   
70.16   In the street
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DAMAGING TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure/move, or interfere
with any official traffic signs erected pursuant to Ord. 144.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING
§ 70.15 NEAR A STOP SIGN.
   No vehicle shall be parked closer than 15 feet to any stop sign.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 IN THE STREET.
   No person shall park any vehicle, trailer, or farm implement on the travel
portion of any of the traveled streets of the village so as to obstruct or
unreasonably interfere with vehicle traffic on said street.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Anyone violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined no less than
$50 and no more than $500 for each offense.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
All-Terrain Vehicles, Motorcycles, and Snowmobiles
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Use prohibited
Golf Carts and Utility Task Vehicles
   
71.15   Definitions
   
71.16   Operation on streets
   
71.17   Required equipment
   
71.18   Lights
   
71.19   Transfer of title
   
71.20   Age of operator; license
   
71.21   Hours of operation
   
71.22   Speed limit
   
71.23   Vehicle code application
   
71.24   Village permit
   
71.25   Mandatory insurance
   
71.26   Revocation of permit
 
   
71.99   Penalty
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device including, but not
limited to, vehicles commonly called a “4-wheeler”, “3-wheeler”, and “go cart”,
50 inches or less in width, having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 600 pounds or
less, traveling on three or more low-pressure tires, designated with a seat or
saddle for operator use and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control.
   LICENSED. Having current license plates and certificate of registration.
   MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE. Those motorcycles commonly called “motor scooter”,
“motorbike”, “minibike”, and “moped” with less than 150 cubic centimeter piston
displacement.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
operator and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, and upon or by which any person, persons, or property may be
transported, but excluding a farm tractor.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Any motorcycle designed to travel primarily off-
highway including the vehicle commonly called a “dirt bike”.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by skis,
belts, or cleats.
(Ord. 212-2001, passed 12-4-2001)
§ 71.02 USE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any all-terrain
vehicle, motor driven cycle, off-highway motorcycle, or snowmobile which is not
licensed at any place within the village, except on property owned by the
person operating the vehicle, on property owned by the parent or guardian of
the person operating the vehicle, or upon property which the operator of the
vehicle has been given permission by the owner to operate the vehicle. No more
than two of the vehicles mentioned in this section shall be operated at the
same time on any person’s property.
(Ord. 212-2001, passed 12-4-2001) Penalty, see §
71.99
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY TASK VEHICLES
§ 71.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
   UTILITY TASK VEHICLE. Also known as a “side-by-side ATV” (among other
terms), a UTV has side-by-side seating, in some cases carries multiple
passengers, typically has a passenger compartment space, and often includes an
open bed located behind the driver and passengers (like a pickup truck). The
vehicle is similar to an ATV in its typical off-road purposes although with an
arguably greater focus on work activities.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.16 OPERATION ON STREETS.
   It shall be lawful to operate a golf cart on village streets only, no
operation is allowed on sidewalks in the village, subject to the requirements
and regulations of this subchapter, except it shall be unlawful to operate said
golf cart or UTV on Broadway Street, other than to cross this route while
traveling on a village street.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014; Ord. 2015-298, passed 7-7-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   In order for a golf cart or UTV to be operated on village streets, the
following equipment shall be in good working conditions at all times:
   (A)   Brakes;
   (B)   Steering apparatus;
   (C)   Tires;
   (D)   Rearview mirror;
   (E)   Red reflectorized warning device on front and rear;
   (F)   Slow moving emblem as required by 625 ILCS 5/112-709, attached to the
rear of the vehicle;
   (G)   A head lamp that emits white visible light from at least 500 feet;
   (H)   A tail lamp that emits red visible light from at least 100 feet;
   (I)   Brake lights on the rear; and
   (J)   Turn signals on the front and rear of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.18 LIGHTS.
   A golf cart or UTV operated on the village streets shall have the head
lights and tail lights on at all times during operation on village streets.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.19 TRANSFER OF TITLE.
   Golf cart/UTV operators are required to notify the village in the event of
sale or transfer of ownership of golf carts or UTVs.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.20 AGE OF OPERATOR; LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a golf cart/UTV on village streets unless the
operator is at least 18 years of age and has a valid Illinois driver’s license.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.21 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Golf carts/UTVs shall only be allowed to be operated within the village
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.22 SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall operate a golf cart/UTV on village streets in excess of 20
mph.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.23 VEHICLE CODE APPLICATION.
   The operator of a golf cart on village streets shall obey all ordinances of
the village and the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100
et seq., as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.24 VILLAGE PERMIT.
   No person shall operate a golf cart/UTV on a village street unless the golf
cart has been issued a permit by the village.
   (A)   A person desiring a permit shall make application to the village on
forms provided by the village. A person will provide a driver’s license and an
insurance card to the village.
   (B)   The permit will be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance. Prior to the issuance, a fee of $20 shall be paid to the village by
the applicant.
   (C)   The applicant must present the vehicle to any Trustee of the Village
Board or officers of the village for inspection to determine whether the
vehicle may be operated on village streets. If the applicant and the vehicle
are qualified, a permit will be issued.
   (D)   This permit sticker will be affixed on the rear of the vehicle and
shall not be removed. Annual application, inspection, and fee of $20 is
required. If a sticker is misplaced, there will be a fee of $8 for replacement
permit sticker.
   (E)   The permit issued by the village is non-transferrable.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014; Ord. 2015-298, passed 7-7-2015) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.25 MANDATORY INSURANCE.
   No person shall operate, and no owner shall permit another person to
operate, a golf cart/UTV on village streets unless:
   (A)   The golf cart/UTV is covered by a liability insurance policy as
required by § 7-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/7-601); and
   (B)   The operator of the golf cart/UTV carries with him or her proof of
insurance as required by § 7-602 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/7-
602).
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.26 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The license of an operator of a golf cart, issued pursuant to §
71.24, may be revoked by the Village Board or designee if:
      (1)   There is any material misrepresentation made by the applicant on
the application;
      (2)   The required liability insurance is no longer in full force and
effect;
      (3)   There is evidence that the license holder can no longer safely
operate the vehicle; or
      (4)   There is evidence that the operator no longer possesses a valid
driver’s license.
   (B)   The village shall issue a notice of revocation of a permit in writing
and either hand deliver the notices to the permit holder or send the notice by
certified mail to the address on the application. The revocation of the permit
shall be effective immediately after personal service or on the third day after
the postmark of the certified mail receipt.
(Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any
provision of §
71.02 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as set by
the Board.
      (2)   Each day a person fails to comply with the provisions of §
71.02 constitutes a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any
provisions of §§
71.15 through
71.26 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as set by
the Board.
      (2)   Each day a person fails to comply with the provisions of §§
71.15 through
71.26 constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 212-2001, passed 12-4-2001; Ord. 2014-289, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedules
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Stop streets
   
III.   Street closure
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The speed limit of 25 mph is established for all streets within the
village limits, except as follows.
   (B)   Thirty-five mph speed zones:
      (1)   Fayette-Shelby County Line Road between Moon Avenue and Myers
Avenue;
      (2)   Fayette-Shelby County Line Road between Burrus Avenue and East
Street;
      (3)   Moon Avenue between North Street and North Third Street; and
      (4)   North Third Street between Moon Avenue and Myers Avenue.
   (C)   Speed limit signs shall be erected on Broadway, Fayette-Shelby County
Line Road, Moon Avenue, and North Third Street stating the speed limit and the
signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible to the drivers of motor
vehicles on these streets, avenues, and roads. No person shall drive a motor
vehicle on that portion of said street, avenue, or road at a speed greater than
the established limits.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987)
SCHEDULE II. STOP STREETS.
   (A)   General provisions.
There shall be erected stop signs at the entrance to Broadway from all streets
in the village, running at right angles to Broadway, requiring all vehicles to
stop before entering upon or crossing Broadway.
There shall be erected stop signs at the entrance to the Fayette-Shelby County
Line Road from all streets in the village, running at right angles to the
Fayette-Shelby County Line Road, requiring all vehicles to stop before entering
upon or crossing the Fayette-Shelby County Line Road.
There shall be erected stop signs at the entrance to North Third Street from
all streets in the village, except at Moon Avenue, running at right angles to
North Third Street, requiring all vehicles to stop before entering upon or
crossing North Third Street.
There shall be erected four-way stop signs at the intersection of North Second
Street and Adams Avenue requiring all vehicles to stop before entering or
crossing said intersection.
There shall be erected stop signs at the entrance to East Street from all
streets in the village, running at right angles to East Street, requiring all
vehicles to stop before entering upon or crossing East Street.
Stop signs shall be erected and placed in full force and effect at the
intersection of Myers Street and North Street, whereby the east-west traffic on
North Street shall be required to stop and yield to traffic on Myers Street.
Stop signs shall be erected at the intersection of East Street and North Street
so as to control northbound and southbound traffic on East Street.
Four stop signs shall be erected at the intersection of Main Street and Myers
Avenue.
 
   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of
any provisions of division (A) above is guilty of a petty offense and shall be
fined in an amount as set by the Board.
(Ord. 144, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. 175, passed 2-7-1995; Ord. 98-189, passed 11-
3-1998; Ord. 214-2002, passed 3-5-2002)
SCHEDULE III. STREET CLOSURE.
   (A)   Myers Avenue shall be and is hereby closed to all traffic from 9:00
a.m. to 2:30 p.m. on every day the Mid-America Preparatory School is in
session. School authorities shall provide the Village Clerk with a copy of a
school calendar for each succeeding year not less than seven days before the
first day of school.
   (B)   Street signs shall be obtained by the village that set forth the hours
the street shall be closed on school days and shall be installed at each end of
Myers Avenue.
   (C)   School officials shall obtain “Road Closed” signs and barricades and
shall place such signs and barricades at each end of Myers Avenue at 9:00 a.m.
and shall remove the signs and barricades at 2:30 p.m. every day school is in
session.
(Ord. 2009-260, passed 8-4-2009)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91.   NUISANCE; HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
92.   FAIR HOUSING
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   ANIMALS
CHAPTER 90: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Title
   
90.02   Definition
   
90.03   Public nuisance
   
90.04   Prohibition
   
90.05   Notice of violation
   
90.06   Exceptions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Herrick Inoperable Motor Vehicle
Chapter”. This chapter revokes and takes the place of any previous ordinances.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 90.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or part thereof which has been
rendered inoperable so that the vehicle or any part thereof is incapable of
being driven under its own motor power for a period of at least seven days, or
any motor vehicle or part thereof that has become inoperable; whereby said
motor vehicle or any part thereof harbors or maintains an environment
susceptible to snakes, rodents, wild animals, or insects. INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLE also includes any unlicensed or unregistered motor vehicle which, under
the laws of the State of Illinois, is required to be licensed or be registered
in order to be operated on public highways within the state.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996; Ord. passed - -2017)
§ 90.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is hereby declared that all inoperable motor vehicles located within the
corporate limits of the village, whether or public or private property, are
nuisances and the owning, keeping, or maintaining of such inoperable motor
vehicle is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 90.04 PROHIBITION.
   The maintaining, keeping, or possessing of an inoperable motor vehicle by
anyone within the corporate limits of the village, whether on public or private
property, is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The corporate authorities, or such person as may be designated by the
Village Mayor and the Board shall give written notice to anyone maintaining
such inoperable motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the village that
the existence of such inoperable motor vehicle is a public nuisance and that
they are required to abate said nuisance within ten days after receiving such
notice by removing or causing said inoperable motor vehicle to be removed from
the village.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 90.06 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept within
a building when not in use.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation failing and refusing to abate said nuisance
after having been given notice to do so shall be fined in an amount as set by
the Board for each offense, and the existence of such nuisance on each separate
day shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, the village may remove the
inoperable vehicle at the cost of the party responsible for said nuisance ten
days after receipt of notice pursuant to §
90.05.
(Ord. 96-181, passed 12-3-1996)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCE; HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Weeds, Garbage, and Debris
   
91.01   Title
   
91.02   Accumulation of garbage and debris
   
91.03   Notice to person
   
91.04   Service of notice
   
91.05   Abatement
   
91.06   Lien
Open Burning
   
91.20   Definitions
   
91.21   Prohibition
   
91.22   Exemptions
 
   
91.99   Penalty
WEEDS, GARBAGE, AND DEBRIS
§ 91.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited the “Herrick Weed, Garbage,
and Debris Subchapter.”
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992)
§ 91.02 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND DEBRIS.
   No person shall permit any garbage or debris to accumulate on his or her
premises or private property or allow weeds and vegetation over seven inches
high to remain uncut. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be
unlawful for the owner of real estate to refuse or neglect to remove the
garbage or debris or to cut such weeds and vegetation.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992; Ord. 2015-299, passed 8-4-2015) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 NOTICE TO PERSON.
   The Village Clerk, upon order of the Board, may issue a written notice for
the removal of garbage or debris and for the cutting of weeds. This garbage or
debris shall be removed by the owner and weeds and vegetation cut within seven
days after such notice has been duly served.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992)
§ 91.04 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Service of notice, as provided herein, may be effected by a letter to the
owner of the premises by mailing such notice to the last known address of the
owner; service of notice may also be effected by certified mail with restricted
delivery, return receipt requested or, in the event that the owner’s name or
whereabouts are unknown, then by posting on the premises. In the event there
are multiple owners, service upon one shall be sufficient.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992)
§ 91.05 ABATEMENT.
   If the owner does not abate the nuisance within 15 days after receiving
notice, the village may proceed to abate the nuisance and the reasonable costs
thereof shall be assessed to the violator.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992)
§ 91.06 LIEN.
   (A)   This cost is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if within 60 days after
such cost and expense is incurred the village, or person performing the service
by authority of the village, in his, her, or its own name, files notice of lien
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Shelby County. The notice shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the
cost and expenses incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates
when such cost and expense was incurred by the village.
   (B)   However, the lien of such village shall not be valid as to any
purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
removal of the garbage and debris or cutting of weeds and vegetation and prior
to the filing of such notice; and the lien of such village shall not be valid
as to any mortgagee, judgement creditor, or other lienor whose rights in and to
such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the
cost and expense by the owner of, or persons interested in, such property after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of
record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by
proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanic’s liens. An action
to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after the date of
filing notice of lien.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992)
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated
on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production practices including such
items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and crop residues,
but excluding landscape waste.
   BURN BARREL. A 55-gallon steel barrel.
   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS.
      (1)   Non-hazardous, uncontaminated materials resulting from the
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of utilities, structures, and
roads, limited to the following: bricks, concrete, and other masonry materials;
soil, rock, wood, including non-hazardous painted, treated, and coated wood and
wood products; wall coverings plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, non-asbestos
insulation, roofing shingles and other roof coverings, reclaimed asphalt
pavement, glass, plastics that are not sealed in a manner that conceals waste;
electrical wiring and components containing no hazardous substances and piping
or metals incidental to any of those materials; and
      (2)   CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS does not include uncontaminated
soil generated during construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of
utilities, structures, and roads; provided, the uncontaminated soil is not
commingled with any general construction or demolition debris.
   GARBAGE. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation,
cooling, cooking, spoiling, and consumption of food and food products, table
leftovers, plastic packaging, and diapers.
   HOUSEHOLD WASTE. Waste generated from a single home, including refuse, but
does not include landscape waste, garbage, construction or demolition debris,
used furniture, appliances, automobile parts, or trade waste.
   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any vegetable or plant refuse, except garbage and
agricultural waste. The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps,
brush, weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings. The term excludes
household waste, garbage, and trade waste.
   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the products
of the combustion are emitted to the open air without originating in or passing
through equipment for which a permit could be issued under 415 ILCS 51/9(b) and
(c) of the Environmental Protection Act.
   REFUSE. All discarded or abandoned matter that is not garbage.
   TRADE WASTE. Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade,
business, industry, commercial venture, utility, or service activity, and any
government or institutional activity, whether or not for profit. The term
includes landscape waste but excludes agricultural waste.
(Ord. 2010-265, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 91.21 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Except as allowed as an exception in §
91.22(A), it shall be unlawful to burn agricultural waste, garbage, household
waste, refuse, trade waste, construction or demolition waste, and/or other
materials of any kind within the limits of the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to start, kindle, cause, allow, or maintain any
form of open burning of any materials on private or public property or to allow
the accumulation or existence of combustible material that constitutes or
contributes to open burning.
(Ord. 2010-265, passed 7-6-2010) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following activities are not in violation of this subchapter:
      (1)   The burning of leaves or other landscape waste and paper in a burn
barrel between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday;
provided, that there shall be no burning on Sunday or on any state holiday as
that term is defined in § 1-6 of the Elections Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-6;
      (2)   The burning of charcoal, clean untreated wood, and other cooking
fuels customarily used in an outdoor grill, traditional food cooking devices,
or campfires;
      (3)   Fires used for recreational or ceremonial purposes such as school
pep rally fires, the celebration of scout activities, or wiener roasts provided
that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Only clean untreated wood or charcoal shall be used. Paper or
petroleum products can be used for ignition purposes only;
         (b)   The fire shall not be ignited more than two hours before the
recreational activity is to take place and shall be extinguished upon the
conclusion of the activity;
         (c)   The pile to be burned shall be less than 1,000 cubic feet (for
example: ten feet by ten feet by ten feet);
         (d)   The local Fire Department shall be notified 24 hours in advance
if the pile to be burned is more than 125 cubic feet (for example: five feet by
five feet by five feet);
         (e)   The fire shall not be for disposal purposes; and
         (f)   The fire shall not be within 25 feet of a pipeline, fuel storage
area, or propane tank.
      (4)   The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when
reasonably necessary in the judgment of the Fire Chief of the village’s Fire
Department;
      (5)   The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational, and
cooking purposes, or in domestic fireplaces, in areas when such burning is
consistent with other ordinances of the village and the laws of the state;
provided, that no garbage or refuse shall be burned in such cases;
      (6)   The burning of waste gases, provided that all such flares shall be
equipped with smokeless tips or comparable devices to reduce pollution;
      (7)   Small open flames for heating tar, welding, acetylene torches,
highway safety flares, and the like;
      (8)   Open burning conducted in accordance with a permit granted by the
state’s Environmental Protection Agency; or
      (9)   The open burning of household waste in a burn barrel between 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday; provided, that there shall be no
burning on Sunday or on any traditional holiday including, but not limited to,
Easter, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.
   (B)   The following conditions apply to all exemptions:
      (1)   Burning shall be done during safe weather conditions. Burning shall
not occur during high winds, temperature inversions, air stagnation, or when
atmospheric conditions will not readily dissipate contaminants;
      (2)   Fires must be attended at all times until completely extinguished;
      (3)   Fires must be extinguished if they create a fire hazard, nuisance,
pollution problem, or threat to public health;
      (4)   Fire lighting equipment adequate for the size of the fire shall be
on-site and nearby during times of burning;
      (5)   Burning shall not be for disposal purposes;
      (6)   All burning shall comply with other federal, state, and local laws,
rules, and ordinances;
      (7)   The burning does not create a visibility hazard on streets, alleys,
and public walkways;
      (8)   The burning does not become a nuisance, annoyance, or discomfort to
any other person by reason of the emission of smoke, fumes, fly ash, dust,
soot, or noxious odor; and
      (9)   Burn barrels shall not be located within 25 feet of a building,
propane tank, gas tank, or any other combustible materials.
(Ord. 2010-265, passed 7-6-2010)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Where a person has been found to have violated §§
91.01 through
91.06 regarding accumulation of weeds, garbage, debris, and certain nuisances,
the violator may be fined in an amount as set by the Board per violation, and
each day after receiving notice, as herein provided, the nuisance continues, it
shall be deemed a separate violation not to exceed $500.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any
provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.22 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as set by
the Board.
      (2)   Each day a person fails to comply with the provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.22 constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 162, passed 3-3-1992; Ord. 2010-265, passed 7-6-2010)
CHAPTER 92: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
92.01   Declaration of policy
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Prohibited acts
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its Constitution
and other laws; in order that the safety and general welfare, peace, and health
of all the inhabitants of the village may be ensured, it is hereby declared the
policy of the village, to assure equal opportunity to all residents, regardless
of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or physical
disability to live in decent, sanitary, healthful standard living quarters.
   (B)   It is the policy of the village that no owner, lessee, sublessee,
assignee, managing agent, or other person, firm, or corporation having the
right to sell, rent, lease (or otherwise control) any housing accommodation
and/or real property within the village, or any agent of these shall refuse to
sell, rent, lease, or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group of
persons such housing accommodations and/or real property because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such
person or persons, or discriminate against any person or persons because of
race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability
in the conditions, terms, privileges of the sale, rental, or lease of any
housing accommodation and/or real property or in the furnishing of facilities
and/or services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Relocation shall be carried out in a manner that will promote maximum
choice within the community’s total housing supply; lessen racial, ethnic, and
economic concentrations; and facilitate desegregation and racially inclusive
patterns of occupancy and use of public and private facilities.
(Ord. 283, passed 3-5-2013)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECENT, SANITARY, HEALTHFUL STANDARD LIVING QUARTERS. Housing which is in
sound, clean, and weather-tight condition in conformance with applicable local,
state, and national codes.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. Any difference expressed in any way toward a
person or persons in the terms of the sale, exchange, lease, rental, or
financing for housing accommodation and/or real property in regard to such
sale, exchange, rental, lease, or finance because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of such person.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person, institution, or business entity of any
kind which loans money to persons and receives as security for said loans a
secured interest of any kind in the real property of the borrower.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Includes any building, structure, or portion thereof
which is used or occupied, maintained, arranged, or designed to be used or
occupied as a home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more human beings,
or any real estate so used, designed, or intended for such use.
   OWNER. Any person/persons who hold legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who hold legal or equitable title
to shares of, or hold any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property and/or housing accommodations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, and/
or agent thereof who, for a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange,
or rental of a housing accommodation and/or real property of another, or
collects rent for the use of housing accommodation and/or real property of
another.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building, structure, or housing
accommodations within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 283, passed 3-5-2013)
§ 92.03 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real estate, lessee, sub-lessee,
real estate broker or salesman, financial institution or employee of the
financial, advertiser, or agent of any or all of the foregoing, to discriminate
against any person or persons because of their race, color, religion, national
origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability with regard to the sale, exchange
or rental, or any dealing concerning any housing accommodation and/or real
property.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, it shall also be unlawful for any real
estate broker or employee thereof, owner or other person, or financial
institution dealing with housing or real property in the village:
      (1)   To discriminate against any person in the availability of or the
price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any king relating to the sale,
rental, lease, or occupancy of any housing accommodation or real property in
the village, or in furnishing of any facilities or services in connection
therewith;
      (2)   To publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated,
any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to announce a policy or to use any
form of application for the purchase, lease, rental, or financing of real
property, or to make any record of inquiry in connection with the prospective
purchase, rental, or lease of such real estate, which expresses directly or
indirectly any discrimination as to race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of any person;
      (3)   To discriminate in connection with lending money, guaranteeing
loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise obtaining or making available funds for
the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance
of any housing accommodation and/or real property;
      (4)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for the sale or lease, of
any housing accommodation and/or real property on the grounds of loss of value
because of the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person
or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry, sex, creed, or disability;
      (5)   To distribute or cause to be distributed written material or
statements designed to induce any owner or any housing accommodation and/or
real property to sell or lease his or her property because of any present or
prospective change in the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
sex, creed, or disability of persons in the neighborhood;
      (6)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or
the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any housing accommodation and/
or real property for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale
or listing for sale of any housing accommodation and/or real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or
disability in the area will or may result in the lowering of property values in
the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located;
      (7)   For an owner to solicit any real estate broker to sell, rent, or
otherwise deal with such owner’s housing accommodations and/or real property
with any limitation on its sale based on race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability; and/or
      (8)   For an owner to refuse to sell, rent, or otherwise deal with any
housing accommodation and/or real property because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry, sex, creed, or disability of the proposed buyer or
tenant.
(Ord. 283, passed 3-5-2013) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,500.
Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   This section shall in no way abrogate or impair the right of the
village to specifically enforce, by any legal means, any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 283, passed 3-5-2013)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Tom Davis Memorial Park
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 TOM DAVIS MEMORIAL PARK.
   The Tom Davis Memorial Park shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until
10:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. No person shall be on the park grounds
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday.
(Ord. 231-2005, passed 4-12-2005) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as
set by the Board.
(Ord. 231-2005, passed 4-12-2005)
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
   
94.01   Village Clerk and Animal Control Officer: enforcement and duties
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Rabies vaccination
   
94.04   Collars
   
94.05   Dogs prohibited from running loose, impounding
   
94.06   Restraint required
   
94.07   Quarantine
   
94.08   Interfering with officer
   
94.09   Fierce dogs: impounding, removing
   
94.10   Female dogs
   
94.11   Animals disturbing the peace prohibited
   
94.12   Service by mail
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 VILLAGE CLERK AND ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: ENFORCEMENT AND DUTIES.
   The village hereby appoints the Village Clerk to have supervision of dogs in
the village and the Animal Control Officer shall have the duty of seeing to the
enforcement of regulations as to dogs in the village as are hereinafter set
forth, established and approved for the village and that the following rules
and regulations be and they are hereby adopted for the village with reference
to the enforcement of said regulations for the said village.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG. All members of the canine family.
   FIERCE OR VICIOUS DOGS. Any dog that can be proved to have bitten one or
more persons.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws, so that the person
or thing seized has been nipped or gripped, or has been wounded or pierced, and
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of skin.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as
approved by the Department of Agriculture, of Canine Antirabic Vaccine approved
by the Department of Agriculture.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or
harbors a dog, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him
or her.
   PERSON. A person, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal that barks, howls, cries, or makes any other
loud or unusual noises for a period of time in excess of 15 minutes.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987; Ord. 292, passed 9-9-2014)
§ 94.03 RABIES VACCINATION.
   All dog owners shall cause each dog owned or kept by them to be vaccinated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian once each calendar year.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 COLLARS.
   Every owner of a dog shall keep a substantial collar around the dog's neck
and shall keep the rabies tag firmly attached thereto.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 DOGS PROHIBITED FROM RUNNING LOOSE, IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any dog to run at large at
any time within the corporate limits of the village with or without a collar.
Such dogs may be taken up by the Animal Control Officer and placed in the
Village Kennel.
   (B)   The owner of any dog taken by the Animal Control Officer to the
Village Kennel for the first time may redeem his dog at no charge if the dog
has been registered with the county and has had the vaccinations required by
law.
   (C)   A fee of $25 must be paid to the Village Clerk for a second occasion
the same dog is taken to the Village Kennel; $50 for a third occasion; $75 for
a fourth occasion and an additional $25 for each succeeding occasion.
   (D)   The owner of a dog taken to the Village Kennel shall not be allowed to
take possession of the dog after paying the appropriate fee if the dog has not
been registered with the county and/or has not had the required vaccinations.
All such dogs will be taken by the Shelby County Animal Control Officer to the
County Pound. The owner will then be required to redeem the dog from the
county.
   (E)   All dogs that have been taken to the Village Kennel afer regular
business hours of the Village Clerk cannot be redeemed by the owner until the
following day; provided however, that any dog taken to the Village Kennel after
hours on Friday or a holiday may not be redeemed by the owner until the next
business day of the Village Clerk.
   (F)   Any dog taken to the Village Kennel sowing evidence of mistreatment,
starvation or improper shelter shall be taken by the Shelby County Animal
Control Officer to the County Pound. The owner will be required to redeem the
dog from the county.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987; Ord. 2010-267, passed 6-8-2010) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 RESTRAINT REQUIRED.
   All dogs shall be kept under restraint. A dog shall be deemed to be under
restraint if on the premises of its owner or if accompanied by a responsible
person and under that person's control, on leash, in pen or in residence.
Furthermore, the dog's pens shall be kept clean, sanitary and humane by owner
or keeper.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 QUARANTINE.
   All dogs that have bitten any person shall be quarantined by the Animal
Control Officer for a period of ten days after the date of the bite. The owner
or keeper of such dog or dogs that have bitten someone shall keep the dog
confined at all times during the quarantine period, either in an enclosure from
which escape is impossible or on a leash or chain of other indestructible
material. Any dog owner who fails to comply with this quarantine requirement
after being notified to do so shall surrender such dog or dogs to the Animal
Control Officer who will keep the dog impounded at the pound. Such a dog may be
redeemed at the end of the ten day quarantine period by its owners or keeper
after complying with §
94.03 and upon paying to the pound keeper an impounding fee of $15.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987)
§ 94.08 INTERFERING WITH OFFICER.
   No person or persons shall resist or molest the Village Clerk, Animal
Control Office, Dog Catcher or Pound Keeper or any Police Officer while engaged
in the discharge of any duty enjoined upon him, her or them by any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 FIERCE DOGS: IMPOUNDING, REMOVING.
   Any fierce dog running at large in the streets or public places of the
village, or upon private premises of any other person than the owner or keeper,
is hereby declared a nuisance, and such dog shall be taken up and impounded in
the manner provided by this chapter for the impounding of dogs; provided,
however, that if any fierce dog so found at large cannot be safely taken up and
impounded , such dog may be slain by any policeman or Animal Control Officer in
a humane manner.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987)
§ 94.10 FEMALE DOGS.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any female dog to run at large at
any time during her period of estrum or heat. Such dogs may be taken up and
placed in the pound as provided under §
94.05.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 ANIMALS DISTURBING THE PEACE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for owners to allow their animals to become a public nuisance
at any time during the day or night. In the event an animal is deemed a public
nuisance, the owner of the animal shall be issued a citation by an authorized
agent of the Village Hall and be subject to penalties described in §
94.99
(Ord. 292, passed 6-9-2014)
§ 94.12 SERVICE BY CERTIFIED MAIL.
   In all actions for violation of any provision of this chapter, where the
find imposed would not be in excess of $200 and no jail term may be imposed,
service of summons or notices may be by certified mail, return receipt
requested, whether service is to be within or without the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $200 for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during,
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Section 94.11. Any person found liable for violating the provision of
§
94.11 shall be subject to fines in accordance with the following schedule:
      (1)   First violation will result in the issuance of a notice to owner
that a complaint has been filed in the Village Hall concerning the nuisance.
      (2)   A fine of not less than $5 nor more than $25 for the second
violation;
      (3)   A fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50 for each and every
subsequent violation within one year after the first notice was issued.
      (4)   Fines are to be paid at the Village Hall.
(Ord. 143, passed - -1987; Ord. 292, passed 6-9-2014)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS TAXATION
      
111.   JUNK YARDS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS TAXATION
Section
Telecommunications Tax
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax
   
110.03   Collection of tax by retailers
   
110.04   Returns to Department
   
110.05   Resellers
Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
110.20   Established
   
110.21   Report
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in this
municipality, regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services, and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service of the costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case
credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
GROSS CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each
channel point within this municipality, charges for the channel mileage between
each channel point within this municipality, and charges for that portion of
the interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois. However, GROSS
CHARGE shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
         (a)   The tax imposed by this subchapter;
         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.;
         (c)   The tax imposed by 26 U.S.C. § 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code;
         (d)   911 surcharges; or
         (e)   Charges added to customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of
§§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/9-221, 5/9-222
and 5/9-222.1, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’ bills by
retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
      (2)   Charges for a sent collection telecommunication received outside of
such municipality;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of such data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment, and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under § 9-222.1
of the Public Utilities Act,
being 220 ILS 5/9-222.1, to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax imposed
under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer, and only to the
extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation
rendering such service;
      (7)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices; or
      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption, or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section. The Department may, it is discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such RETAILER to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Includes any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration to persons other than the federal and state
governments, state universities created by statute, and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, SERVICE ADDRESS means the customer’s place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, 35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.
For air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location
of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
telephone number, authorization code, or location in the state where bills are
sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by ordinance.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points of wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this subchapter, PRIVATE LINE
means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that
entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel
or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use on inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For purposes of this section,
PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that term as defined in § 2-27 of
the Retailers’ Occupations Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/2-27.
(Ord. 221-2003, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 110.02 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges.
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual muti-state taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this division (B), any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality.
(Ord. 221-2003, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 110.03 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this subchapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 221-2003, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 110.04 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   On or before the last of every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this
subchapter on telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate
forms and information as required by the Department pursuant to § 5-50 of the
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to implement the
Act.
(Ord. 221-2003, passed 8-5-2003)
§ 110.05 RESELLERS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this subchapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided herein above in this section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 221-2003, passed 8-5-2003)
RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 110.20 ESTABLISHED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of 0.75% of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while
this subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1.
(Ord. 102, passed 7-17-1967)
§ 110.21 REPORT.
   (A)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
the report required by § 3 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, 35 ILCS 120/3,
as amended.
   (B)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible property during the preceding month.
(Ord. 102, passed 7-17-1967)
CHAPTER 111: JUNK YARDS
Section
   
111.01   Limitations
   
111.02   Definitions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 LIMITATIONS.
   The Village Board hereby declares junk yards, as defined in the Junkyard
Act, 415 ILCS 95/0.01 et seq., to be nuisances and prohibits the establishment,
location, operation, maintenance, or use of any junk yard on any property
located within the corporate limits of the village unless the junk yard is
completely enclosed on all sides and under roof, is fully screened from view
from adjacent property and Broadway Street, and has been approved by the
Village Board.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-14-2014) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined in accordance
with the Junkyard Act, 415 ILCS 95/0.01 et seq., as follows.
   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment or place of business which is
maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked,
scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
   JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, or parts
thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
   JUNK YARD. An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the
maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term shall include
garbage dumps and sanitary fills.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-14-2014)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a fine not to exceed
$750. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs or continues to occur.
(Ord. 293, passed 10-14-2014)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Curfew
   
130.01   Established
   
130.02   Parents’ and guardians’ responsibility
Misdemeanors
   
130.15   Purpose
   
130.16   Prohibited conduct
   
130.17   Assault
   
130.18   Battery
   
130.19   Reckless conduct
   
130.20   Disorderly conduct
   
130.21   Disturbing the peace
   
130.22   Littering
   
130.23   Public drinking
   
130.24   Illegal transportation of liquor
   
130.25   Reckless driving
   
130.26   Concealed weapons
   
130.27   Illegal discharge of firearms
   
130.28    Camping prohibited outside a campground
 
   
130.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 130.01 ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway at
the following times, unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible companion at least 18 years of age, approved by
a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or occupation which
the laws of this state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform:
      (1)   Between 10:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day; and
      (2)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, inclusive and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (B)   A citation for violation of division (A) of this section may be issued
by a police officer only if the officer reasonably believes that a violation
has occurred and none of the defenses enumerated in this division (B) apply. It
is a defense to a violation under this section that the person engaged in the
prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
   (C)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, including any
investigation that a reasonable person would deem necessary, none of the
exceptions enumerated in this section apply.
(Ord. 187, passed 10-6-1998) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PARENTS’ AND GUARDIANS’ RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate §
130.01.
(Ord. 187, passed 10-6-1998) Penalty, see §
130.99
MISDEMEANORS
§ 130.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define various offenses and to provide
punishment therefor. The term OFFENSE means a violation of the provisions of
this subchapter. For the purpose of this subchapter, the words and phrases used
herein shall have the same meaning designated for said words and phrases in the
Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/2.05 et seq.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968)
§ 130.16 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person to commit within
the corporate limits of the village any of the offenses hereinafter described
in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.17 ASSAULT.
   A person commits an assault when without lawful authority he or she engages
in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.18 BATTERY.
   A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly, without
legal justification, and by any means causing bodily harm to an individual or
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.19 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual, by any means, commits reckless conduct if he or she performs
recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they are
otherwise lawful or unlawful.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.20 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   With the intent to annoy another makes a telephone call whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of the village a false
alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there was no
reasonable ground for believing that such fire exists.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.21 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   A person commits the offense of disturbing the peace when he or she
knowingly:
   (A)   Drives or operates a motor vehicle without a muffler or with a
defective muffler, or drives or operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to
cause unreasonable and unnecessary loud noises; or
   (B)   Operates a motor vehicle in such a manner as to unreasonably or
unnecessarily cause the wheels of said motor vehicle to spin and throw rocks or
gravel or injure the surface of any public street in the village.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.22 LITTERING.
   A person commits littering when he or she throws, deposits, or discards beer
cans, bottles, trash, or garbage on any public street, sidewalk, or alley
within the village or upon the property of another without his or her consent.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.23 PUBLIC DRINKING.
   A person commits the offense of public drinking when:
   (A)   He or she has in his or her possession any intoxicating liquor, except
in the original package or container with the seal or container unbroken.
   (B)   As the owner or owners of any place of public accommodation,
restaurant, or café, permits or allows persons in said place to have in their
possession any intoxicating liquor, except in the original package or container
with the seal or container unbroken.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.24 ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION OF LIQUOR.
   A person commits the offense of illegal transportation of intoxicating
liquor when he or she transports in a motor vehicle or has in his or her
possession in a motor vehicle any intoxicating liquor, except in the original
package with the seal unbroken and the container unopened.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.25 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   A person commits reckless driving who drives any vehicle with a willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.26 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapon in the village in
violation of the laws of the state.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.27 ILLEGAL DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms within the
village; provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer
of the law or municipal officer from discharging a firearm in the performance
of his or her duty, nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully
defending person or property.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.28 CAMPING PROHIBITED OUTSIDE A CAMPGROUND.
   No person shall dwell or use a tent, recreational vehicle or other non-
permanent type shelter as a dwelling unit unless such tent, recreational
vehicle or other non-permanent type shelter is erected, maintained and located
within a lawfully licensed campground. This section shall not prohibit the
occasional and sporadic use of a tent, recreational vehicle or other non-
permanent type shelter as an accessory use of a residential dwelling unit,
provided such tent, recreational vehicle or other non-permanent type shelter is
used no more than 20 days per year for dwelling purposes.
(Ord. 328, passed 9-9-2025)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§
130.01 and
130.02 shall, in addition to any other penalties and remedies provided by law,
be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an amount as set by the
Board and court costs. Each day that §§
130.01 and
130.02 is violated shall constitute a separate violation. In addition to, or
instead of the fine imposed by this section, the court may order a parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of §
130.02 to perform community service as determined by the court.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
130.15 through
130.27 shall be subject to a fine in an amount as set by the Board.
(Ord. passed 5-7-1968; Ord. 187, passed 10-6-1998)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   MOBILE HOMES
CHAPTER 150: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
150.01   Definitions
   
150.02   Designation of inspectors
   
150.03   Permit
   
150.04   Size of site
   
150.05   Connection to water and sewer system
   
150.06   Concrete pads and blocks
   
150.07   Tie down
   
150.08   Living space
   
150.09   Electrical
   
150.10   Skirting
   
150.11   Fire Extinguisher
   
150.12   Yard setbacks
   
150.13   Appearance of mobile homes
   
150.14   Certificate of compliance
   
150.15   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.16   Abandoned mobile homes
   
150.17   Application to existing mobile homes
   
150.18   Adoption by reference
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOBILE HOME. A mobile home that has no owner currently residing in
the mobile home or authorized tenant of the owner currently residing in the
mobile home to the best knowledge of the municipality; has had its electricity,
natural gas, sewer, and water payments declared delinquent by the utility
companies that are providing such services; and for which the Mobile Home
Privilege Tax, imposed under the Mobile Home Local Services Tax Act, being 35
ILCS 515/1 et seq., is delinquent for at least three months.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Public Health.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure which has self-contained toilet and bath or shower
facilities, and which is designed for habitation and so constructed as to
permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its
frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent
location, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupants thereof as a dwelling place for one or more persons. The
term MOBILE HOME shall include manufactured homes constructed after June 30,
1976, in accordance with the Federal National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.). A MOBILE HOME
shall also include a tiny house, being a dwelling unit that is 500 feet or less
in floor area excluding lofts and may be built on trailers and/or placed on a
foundation.
   PLUMBING CODE. The minimum code of standards for plumbing and amendments
thereto as promulgated by the Illinois Department of Public Health (225 ILCS
320/35), hereinafter called the PLUMBING CODE.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001; Ord. 327, passed 1-21-2025)
§ 150.02 DESIGNATION OF INSPECTORS.
   The Board shall, from time to time, designate three persons to serve as
inspectors for the purpose of determining that all mobile homes already within
the village limits, and those for which an application for permit has been
filed with the Village Clerk, are in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.03 PERMIT.
   (A)   No mobile home shall be placed within the limits of the village
without first securing a permit from the designated village inspectors. An
application form for such permit shall be obtained from the Village Clerk or
inspectors. The completed form shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall
contain the following:
      (1)   Description of the mobile home, including year, model, and
identification number;
      (2)   Area of the lot in square feet;
      (3)   Size of mobile home, length and width;
      (4)   Lot number, block number, and name of the subdivision on which the
mobile home will be placed;
      (5)   Description of the type of underpinning to be used;
      (6)   Type of sanitary sewer connection;
      (7)   Type of wiring and electrical system;
      (8)   Type of material to be used for skirting;
      (9)   Date of fire extinguisher last inspection;
      (10)   A scale drawing showing the location of the mobile home on the lot
and the setback measurements;
      (11)   A photograph of the mobile home; and
      (12)   A list of all defects in the exterior covering including, but not
limited to, holes, dings, rust, scratches, flaking paint, missing covering, and
broken windows and screens.
   (B)   A fee in an amount as set by the Board shall be paid to the village
inspectors at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   If the village inspectors approve the application, then they shall
issue the applicant a permit on a form supplied by the Village Clerk and a copy
of which shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
   (D)   All applicants shall be given a copy of this chapter with the
application form.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 SIZE OF SITE.
   Each space or site on which a mobile home is located shall have a minimum
area of 5,000 square feet and shall not be less than 50 feet wide by 100 feet
long for each mobile home installed. Double-wide mobile homes are permissible;
provided, that the manufacturer’s specifications require adjoining the two
sections of the double-wide mobile home and the point at which the two halves
are joined is not visible once joined. The installation of two separate mobile
homes on one lot is not permissible.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.05 CONNECTION TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   All mobile homes shall be connected to the village sanitary sewer
system by a water- and odor- tight connection which complies with the Illinois
Plumbing Code at 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.120 and is approved by the village
inspectors.
   (B)   All mobile homes shall be connected to the village water system by a
connection which complies with the Illinois Plumbing Code at 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890.120 and is approved by the village inspectors.
   (C)   No water and sewer hookup shall be allowed without the prior issuance
of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.06 CONCRETE PADS AND BLOCKS.
   (A)   Mobile homes shall be installed on concrete pads which are one and
one-half feet by one and one-half feet square by two and one-half feet deep and
with not more than eight feet between centers of each pad. The mobile home
shall rest on concrete blocks set on the concrete pads. (No substitute for the
concrete blocks.) The proposed pad locations shall not be poured with concrete
until approved by the village.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A) above, mobile homes may be installed
on a concrete slab. The slab shall be the width and length of the mobile home.
The slab shall be a minimum of four inches thick, except that directly below
the steel I-beams of the mobile home the concrete shall be six inches thick and
18 eighteen inches wide the full length of the slab.
   (C)   As an alternative to divisions (A) and (B) above, mobile homes may be
installed on concrete runners. The runners shall be located directly below the
steel I-beams of the mobile home. The runners shall be 18 inches wide and six
inches thick.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001; Ord. 224-2003, passed 9-2-2003)
§ 150.07 TIE DOWN.
   Each mobile home shall be tied down in accordance with the Illinois Mobile
Home Tiedown Act (210 ILCS 120) and the rules and regulations of the Department
promulgated pursuant thereto. The tie downs and anchors shall be installed
prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance and shall be approved by the
village inspectors.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.08 LIVING SPACE.
   Each mobile home shall contain at least 500 square feet of living space.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001; Ord. 224-2003, passed 9-2-2003)
§ 150.09 ELECTRICAL.
   Each mobile home shall be wired to the circuit breaker box only with copper
wire and shall be approved by the village inspectors. The service from the
utility company to the mobile home shall be in compliance with the rules of the
utility company.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.10 SKIRTING.
   Each mobile home shall have a skirting enclosure around its entire
perimeter. The type and material shall be approved by the village inspectors.
The skirting shall be in place prior to issuance of the certificate of
compliance.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001; Ord. 224-2003, passed 9-2-2003)
§ 150.11 FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
   All mobile homes within the village shall be equipped with a dry chemical
classification A, B, C fire extinguisher in working order at all times. The
village inspectors may require the owner or occupant of a mobile home to
produce for inspection the required fire extinguisher at any reasonable time.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.12 YARD SETBACKS.
   All mobile homes shall comply with the following setback requirements which
are to be measured from the property line to the side of the mobile home:
   (A)   Front yard: minimum of 15 feet;
   (B)   Side yard: minimum of five feet; and
   (C)   Rear yard: minimum of ten feet.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.13 APPEARANCE OF MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   Owners, tenants, and residents of mobile homes that were within the
village limits prior to the effective date of this chapter shall maintain their
mobile home and lot(s) in the same condition, or better, as of the effective
date of this chapter.
   (B)   Owners, tenants, and residents of other mobile homes shall maintain
the mobile home in the same condition, or better, as of the date of issuance of
the certificate of occupancy.
   (C)   All windows and screens shall be in good repair.
   (D)   The village inspectors may require any defect in the exterior of the
mobile home to be repaired.
   (E)   The exterior appearance of a mobile home shall be approved by a
majority of the inspectors prior to the issuance of a permit. The issuance of a
permit shall be approval of the appearance.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.14 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The owner or occupant shall have 30 days after the application is
filed to bring the mobile home into compliance with this chapter. Extensions of
time not longer than 30 days may be granted by the village inspectors. The
owner or occupant shall contact the village inspector when a final inspection
is desired to determine that the mobile home is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If the village inspector determines that the mobile
home is in compliance, he or she shall issue to the applicant a Certificate of
compliance on a form supplied by the Village Clerk. The village inspector shall
file a copy of the certificate of compliance with the Village Clerk.
   (B)    If the mobile home is not in compliance with this chapter within 60
days after the application is filed, then the water shall be shut off. If the
village opts to terminate service, service shall not be terminated until the
owner or occupant is given notice of the same and the opportunity to contest
the charge prior to termination of service. The water will not be turned back
on until after the mobile home is in compliance. The owner or occupant shall be
charged the usual and customary fee to restore water service to the mobile
home.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001; Ord. 2011-274, passed 3-14-2011)
§ 150.15 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   The owner or occupant shall have 30 days after the permit is issued to hook
the mobile home to village sewer and water. Extensions of time may be granted
by the village inspectors. The applicant shall notify the village inspectors
when the mobile home is connected to the water and sewer system of the village.
The inspectors shall then make a final inspection. The mobile home shall not be
occupied as a residence until the final inspection is completed and a
certificate of occupancy is issued to the applicant on a form supplied by the
Village Clerk. The village inspectors shall file a copy of the certificate of
compliance with the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.16 ABANDONED MOBILE HOMES.
   The village shall have authority to remove and dispose of any abandoned
mobile home found within the village limits pursuant to the provisions of the
Abandoned Mobile Home Act (210 ILCS 117).
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.17 APPLICATION TO EXISTING MOBILE HOMES.
   Except for §§
150.03,
150.14, and
150.15, the provisions of this chapter shall be retroactive and apply to all
mobile homes within the limits of the village on the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.18 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The minimum code of standards for plumbing and any amendments thereto
promulgated from time to time by the state’s Department of Public Health is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.120, of the village
by reference.
   (B)   The Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act (210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) is
hereby adopted by the village by reference.
   (C)   The Abandoned Mobile Home Act (210 ILCS 117/1 et seq.) is hereby
adopted by reference.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   When a mobile home is found to violate any provision of this chapter,
the village may refuse to provide water and sewer services.
   (B)   Any such mobile home failing to comply shall constitute a public
nuisance and shall be promptly removed from the village by the owner and at the
owner’s expense. The owner shall be responsible for all costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the village to secure abatement of such
public nuisance. If the nuisance is not remedied within 30 days after the
village inspectors serve written notice of the violation, the owner, tenant, or
resident shall be subject to the penalties set forth in division (C) below.
   (C)   Any person violating or aiding or abetting the violation of any
provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined in an
amount as set by the Board.
   (D)   If the village opts to terminate service, service shall not be
terminated until the owner or occupant is given notice of the same and the
opportunity to contest the charge prior to termination of service.
   (E)   Each day a person fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 211-2001, passed 8-4-2001)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   PROPERTY TRANSFERS AND VACATIONS
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
138           10-10-1944  Franchise agreement with power company
-             3-14-1978   Agreement with the Lions Club
136           3-6-1984    Franchise agreement for cable television
159           9-3-1991    Approving an intergovernmental agreement for mutual
                          aid and assistance in law enforcement
160           9-18-1991   Authorizing a power company to construct an electric
                          utility system
167           1-5-1993    Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League
                          Risk Management Association
196           6-15-1999   Authorizing the construction of a telephone plant and
                          system
197           7-6-1999    Extension of cable television franchise agreement
208-2001      7-10-2001   Lease purchase agreement with Deere Credit Inc.
226           4-13-2004   Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League
                          Risk Management Association
2008-247      4-1-2008    Authorizing execution of a contract for remodeling
                          work at Village Hall
2015-300      9-1-2015    Franchise fee for cable television company
                         
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY TRANSFERS AND VACATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
-             5-7-1984    Lease of property to Beck’s Cable Television
147           4-10-1989   Vacation of an alley
95-178        12-5-1995   Directing the sale of real estate
96-179        2-6-1996    Accepting bid for real estate
97-186        10-20-1997  Directing the sale of real estate
99-191        6-15-1999   Condemning railroad right-of-way
99-192        6-15-1999   Property transfer to Tom Hayes
99-193        6-15-1999   Property transfer to Tom Hayes
191           8-25-1999   Purchase of real property for public purposes
202           3-14-2000   Authorizing the conveyance of real estate
210-2001      8-20-2001   Annexing a certain territory to the village
                          Providing for the addition of the municipal street
223           1-6-2004    from the village limits east along County Highway 13
                          to Broadway Street
Res. 04-05    1-14-2004   Providing for the deletion of County Highway 13 from
                          the west village limits to Broadway Street
-             - -2008     Lease agreement with Jack Porter
245-08        2-7-2008    Authorizing the execution of a lease with Jack Porter
246-08        3-11-2008   Authorizing the execution of a lease with Larry Beck
                          Jr. and Christina Beck
249-08        5-6-2008    Authorizing the execution of lease of contract with
                          Hofnet Communications, Inc.
2008-248-1    6-2-2008    Declaring property abandoned and directing the sale
                          of the property
252           7-1-2008    Authorizing execution of lease agreement with Alva
                          Allen and Debra Allen
-             - -2009     Agreement for warranty deed concerning the abandoned
                          Norfolk and Western Railway Company right-of-way
-             3-3-2009    Agreement for warranty deed concerning property owned
                          by D.G. Conway
                          Declaring the abandoned Norfolk and Western Railway
2009-255      3-3-2009    Company right-of-way and directing the sale of the
                          property
2009-256      3-3-2009    Real estate exchange with D.G. Conway
2009-257      3-3-2009    Declaring certain real estate owned by the village as
                          excess and directing the sale of the property
2009-263      12-1-2009   Vacating Whittington Avenue
2010-264      3-2-2010    Vacating a portion of Burrus Avenue
2010-269      9-14-2010   Vacating Railroad Avenue
2011-272      3-14-2011   Vacating Sutton Avenue between North Third Street and
                          North Second Street
2011-273      3-14-2011   Vacating many alleys
2012-278      4-3-2012    Vacating portions of North Street and Burrus Avenue
2012-280      7-10-2012   Approving a lease with the Herrick Food Pantry
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
ILCS Cites                     Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.02                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.03                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.04                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.05                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.10                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                 10.03
5 ILCS 70/1.12                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                 10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                    10.03
5 ILCS 120/1                   30.20
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.         30.35
5 ILCS 430/5-15                30.35
5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40 30.35
5 ILCS 430/50-5                30.99
5 ILCS 430/70-5                30.35
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)             30.35
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)             30.35
10 ILCS 5/1-6                  91.22
15 ILCS 505/17                 32.08
30 ILCS 235.01 seq.            32.08
30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.          51.01
35 ILCS 120/2-27               110.01
35 ILCS120/3                   110.21
35 ILCS 515/1 et seq.          150.01
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.          110.01
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.          110.01
35 ILCS 636/5-50               110.04
35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.          110.01
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1               110.20
65 ILCS 5                      10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                10.99
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1              10.99
65 ILCS 20/0.01 et seq.        51.53
210 ILCS 117                   150.16
210 ILCS 117/1 et seq.         150.18
210 ILCS 120                   150.07
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.         150.18
220 ILCS 5/9-221               110.01
220 ILCS 5/9-222               110.01
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1             110.01
225ILCS 225/1 et seq.          51.03
225 ILCS 320/2                 50.53
225 ILCS 320/3                 50.56
225 ILCS 320/35                150.01
415 ILCS 95/0.01 et seq.       111.01,
                               111.02
415 ILCS 51/9(b)               91.20
415 ILCS 51/9(c)               91.20
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.       71.23
625 ILCS 5/1-188               10.02
625 ILCS 5/7-601               71.25
625 ILCS 5/7-602               71.25
625 ILCS 5/112-709             71.17
720 ILCS 5/2.05 et seq.        130.02
                               
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
04-05    1-14-2004   TSO II
126      4-5-2016    30.02
127      12-20-2016  30.38
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
138        10-10-1944  TSO I
102        7-17-1967   110.20,
                       110.21
                       130.15—
-          5-7-1968    130.27,
                       130.99
-          3-14-1978   TSO I
136        3-6-1984    TSO I
-          5-7-1984    TSO II
                       94.01—
143        - -1987     94.10,
                       94.12,
                       94.99
                       70.01,
                       70.15,
144        3-18-1987   70.16,
                       70.99,
                       Ch. 72, Sch. I,
                       Ch. 72, Sch. II
147        4-10-1989   TSO II
                       51.01-
                       51.08,
                       51.20—
                       51.28,
153        7-9-1990    51.40—
                       51.49,
                       51.51—
                       51.57,
                       51.99,
                       Ch. 51, App. A
158        8-19-1991   50.50—
                       50.60
159        9-3-1991    TSO I
160        9-18-1991   TSO I
                       91.01—
162        3-3-1992    91.06,
                       91.99
167        1-5-1993    TSO I
175        2-7-1995    Ch. 72, Sch. II
95-178     12-5-1995   TSO II
96-179     2-6-1996    TSO II
                       90.01—
96-181     12-3-1996   90.06,
                       90.99
97-186     10-20-1997  TSO II
                       130.01,
187        10-6-1998   130.02,
                       130.99
98-189     11-3-1998   Ch. 72, Sch. II
-          - -1999     32.01—
                       32.17
99-191     6-15-1999   TSO II
99-192     6-15-1999   TSO II
99-193     6-15-1999   TSO II
196        6-15-1999   TSO I
197        7-6-1999    TSO I
191        8-25-1999   TSO II
202        3-14-2000   TSO II
208-2001   7-10-2001   TSO I
                       150.01—
211-2001   8-4-2001    150.18,
                       150.99
210-2001   8-20-2001   TSO II
                       71.01,
212-2001   12-4-2001   71.02,
                       71.99
214-2002   3-5-2002    Ch. 72, Sch. II
                       31.01—
215-2002   6-4-2002    31.08,
                       31.99
221-2003   8-5-2003    110.01—
                       110.05
                       150.06,
224-2003   9-2-2003    150.08,
                       150.10
223        1-6-2004    TSO II
225        3-9-2004    30.36
226        4-13-2004   TSO I
227-2004   5-4-2004    30.35,
                       30.99
231-2005   4-12-2005   93.01,
                       93.99
2007-239   6-5-2007    30.15—
                       30.21
-          - -2008     TSO II
245-08     2-7-2008    TSO II
246-08     3-11-2008   TSO II
2008-247   4-1-2008    TSO I
249-08     5-6-2008    TSO II
2008-248-1 6-2-2008    TSO II
252        7-1-2008    TSO II
-          - -2009     TSO II
-          3-3-2009    TSO II
2009-255   3-3-2009    TSO II
2009-256   3-3-2009    TSO II
2009-257   3-3-2009    TSO II
2009-260   8-4-2009    71.99
2009-261   11-3-2009   30.01
2009-263   12-1-2009   TSO II
2010-264   3-2-2010    TSO II
                       91.20—
2010-265   7-6-2010    91.22,
                       91.99
2010-267   6-8-2010    94.05
2010-269   9-14-2010   TSO II
2011-272   3-14-2011   TSO II
2011-273   3-14-2011   TSO II
2011-274   3-14-2011   150.14
2012-278   4-3-2012    TSO II
2012-280   7-10-2012   TSO II
                       92.01—
283        3-5-2013    92.03,
                       92.99
                       50.01—
                       50.16,
2013-284   5-7-2013    50.33—
                       50.35,
                       50.99
                       71.15—
2014-289   4-1-2014    71.26,
                       71.99
                       94.02,
292        9-9-2014    94.11,
                       94.99
                       111.01,
293        10-14-2014  111.02,
                       111.99
2015-298   7-7-2015    71.16,
                       71.24
2015-299   8-4-2015    91.02
2015-300   9-1-2015    TSO I
2015-301   9-1-2015    30.15
302        3-1-2016    50.30—
                       50.32
303        3-1-2016    50.30—
                       50.32
305        7-6-2016    50.30
306        6-7-2016    30.39
-          - -2016     30.37
-          - -2017     33.01—
                       33.09
-          - -2017     90.02
327        1-21-2025   150.01
328        9-9-2025    10.02,
                       130.28
                      
 
