HICKORY HILLS, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-23, passed 11-13-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
Mayor       Michael Howley
City Clerk     Joseph M. Stachnik
City Treasurer Alan T. Vodicka
City Attorney  Vincent Cainkar
Aldermen
Ward 1         Michael S. McHugh
              Brian A. Waight
Ward 2         Deborah H. Ferrero
              Patrick M. Purtill
Ward 3         Brian A. Fonte
              Henry J. Kman
Ward 4         Scott E. Zimmerman
              Steven Makropoulos
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 25-10
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF HICKORY HILLS, COOK
COUNTY, ILLINOIS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hickory
Hills (the "City") are inadequately arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the City and for the proper
conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the City is authorized to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council has authorized a general compilation, revision and
codification of the ordinances of the City of a general and permanent nature
and publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
City and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
general welfare thereof that this codification of the City's ordinances take
effect on July 1, 2025.
   BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Hickory Hills, Cook County, Illinois,
as follows:
   Section 1
   The general ordinances of the City as revised, amended, restated, codified,
and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the "Code
of Ordinances of the City of Hickory Hills" or the "Hickory Hills Municipal
Code."
   Section 2
   The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following Chapters:
   CHAPTER 1:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   CHAPTER 2:   CITY COUNCIL
   CHAPTER 3:   CITY GOVERNMENT
   CHAPTER 4:   POLICE DEPARTMENT
   CHAPTER 5:   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
   CHAPTER 6:   WATER SERVICE
   CHAPTER 7:   SANITARY SEWER SERVICE
   CHAPTER 11:   HEALTH
   CHAPTER 12:   NUISANCE
   CHAPTER 13:   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
   CHAPTER 14:   DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
   CHAPTER 15:   RETAIL FOOD STORES, FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD
DEALERS
   CHAPTER 16:   HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
   CHAPTER 17:   LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES
   CHAPTER 21:   PLANNING
   CHAPTER 22:   ZONING
   CHAPTER 23:   SUBDIVISIONS
   CHAPTER 24:   BUILDING CODE
   CHAPTER 25:   ELECTRICAL CODE
   CHAPTER 26:   PLUMBING CODE
   CHAPTER 27:   SWIMMING POOLS
   CHAPTER 28:   SIGNS
   CHAPTER 29:   FIRE PREVENTION
   CHAPTER 30:   HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
   CHAPTER 31:   LICENSES
   CHAPTER 32:   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   CHAPTER 33:   OCCUPATION AND USE TAXES
   CHAPTER 34:   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   CHAPTER 35:   SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND PEDDLERS
   CHAPTER 36:   TAXICABS
   CHAPTER 37:   VEHICLE LICENSES
   CHAPTER 38:   OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES
   CHAPTER 39:   TREES
   CHAPTER 41:   TRAFFIC
   CHAPTER 42:   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE, SAFETY AND MORALS
   Section 3
   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code of Ordinances; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory
stablishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places, zoning of
property or granting a variation or special use; nor shall such repeal affect
any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects
not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
   Section 4
   Such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Council. The City Clerk is hereby authorized
and ordered to file and maintain a copy of such Code of Ordinances in its
office.
   Section 5
   Such Code of Ordinances shall be in full force and effect as provided on
July 1, 2025, and such Code of Ordinances shall be presumptive evidence in all
courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings
and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6
   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
people of this municipality, and shall take effect on July 1, 2025.
   This ordinance was passed and deposited in the office of the City Clerk of
the City of Hickory
Hills this 26th day of June, 2025.
                        Joseph M. Stachnik /s/
                        JOSEPH M. STACHNIK, City Clerk
APPROVED by me this 26th day
of June, 2025
Michael Howley /s/              
MICHAEL HOWLEY, Mayor
   I DO HEREBY CERTIFY that this ordinance was, after its passage and approval,
published in pamphlet form by authority of the City of Hickory Hills, in
accordance with law, this 26th day of June, 2025.
                        Joseph M. Stachnik /s/
                        JOSEPH M. STACHNIK, City Clerk
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1.01   Municipal Code
   
1.02   Definitions
   
1.03   Repeal of Ordinances
   
1.04   Ordinances Repealed not Reenacted
   
1.05   Jurisdiction
   
1.06   Penalties
   
1.07   Violation Citations
   
1.08   Responsibility for Acts
   
1.09   Separability of Provisions
   
1.10   Effective Date
   
1.11   Alternative Penalties - Compliance Warning Tickets
§ 1.01 MUNICIPAL CODE.
   (a)   Title. This code of ordinances may be known and cited as the Hickory
Hills Municipal Code.
   (b)   Amendments. Any additions or amendments to this code are incorporated
in this code so that a reference to the Hickory Hills Municipal Code includes
such additions and amendments.
§ 1.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   Terms used in this code, unless specifically defined in this code,
have the meanings prescribed by the Illinois Revised Statutes for the same
terms.
   (b)   Terms used in this code have the following meanings:
      1.   City: City of Hickory Hills
      2.   County: Cook County
      3.   State: State of Illinois
      4.   City Council or Council: The City Council of the City of Hickory
Hills, Illinois
      5.   City Clerk: The City Clerk of the City of Hickory Hills
      6.   Officer: Any person appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
      7.   Person: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, trust, estate,
club, association, or corporation. As applied to partnerships or associations
the word includes the partners or members thereof; as applied to corporations
it includes the officers, agents or employees thereof who are responsible for
the act referred to. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes
the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
      8.   Illinois Revised Statutes: The latest edition of the Illinois
Revised Statutes, as amended.
      9.   Illinois Municipal Code: 65 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
§ 1.03 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (a)   All general ordinances or parts thereof heretofore adopted by the
Council and not included in this code are repealed, except the following which
are hereby continued in full force and effect:
      1.   Ordinances authorizing contracts or the issue of municipal notes or
bonds;
      2.   Ordinances levying taxes or making special assessments;
      3.   Ordinances appropriating funds or establishing salaries;
      4.   Ordinances granting franchises or rights to corporations;
      5.   Ordinances relating to the establishment, dedication, opening,
grade, naming, improvement, altering, widening or vacating of any streets,
alleys, or sidewalks, parks or public grounds;
      6.   Ordinances respecting the annexation of territory to the city, or
the conveyance or acceptance of real property or easements in real property;
      7.   Ordinances authorizing or relating to particular public
improvements;
      8.   Any other special ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of
this code.
   (b)   The provisions of this code, so far as they are the same in substance
as those of heretofore existing ordinances are continuations of such ordinances
and not new enactments. Any act done, offense committed, or right accruing or
acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior hereto
shall not be affected, but may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or
inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if the repeal had not been
effected.
§ 1.04 ORDINANCES REPEALED NOT REENACTED.
   No ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore repealed shall be
considered reordained or reenacted by virtue of this code, unless specifically
reenacted. The repeal of any curative or validating ordinance does not impair
or affect any cure or validation already effected thereby.
§ 1.05 JURISDICTION.
   Unless otherwise provided in this code, this code applies to acts performed
within the corporate limits of the city. Provisions of this code also apply to
acts performed outside the corporate limits and up to the limits prescribed by
law where the law confers power on the city to regulate such particular acts
outside the corporate limits.
§ 1.06 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Standard Penalty. Unless another penalty is specifically provided by
this code for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any
person violating any provision of this code, or any rule or regulation adopted
or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of any code adopted herein by
reference, shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more then $500 and
the costs of prosecution.
   (b)   Commitment. The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed for
violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city, upon
order of the court before whom the conviction is had, may be committed to the
city or county jail as provided by law, or to any other place provided by
ordinance for the incarceration of offenders until the fine, penalty, and costs
are fully paid. No imprisonment, however, shall exceed 6 months for any
offense.
   (c)   Incarceration, Bailable Offense. Any person incarcerated on a charge
of violating a bailable provision of this code or any ordinance, who does not
supply bail and against whom a fine is levied upon conviction of such offense,
shall be allowed a credit of $2 for each day so incarcerated prior to
conviction, but such credit shall not exceed the amount of the fine levied.
   (d)   Each Day of Violation. Each day of violation and each day upon which a
violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
   (e)   Applicability. The penalty provided by this section applies to the
amendment of any section of this code or a code adopted herein by reference
whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
   (f)   Reference to Sections. Reference to a section of this code shall be
understood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (g)   Failure of Officers to Perform Duties. The failure of an officer or
employee of the city to perform an official duty imposed by this code shall not
subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of this
code unless a penalty is specifically provided in the section creating the
duty.
§ 1.07 VIOLATION CITATIONS.
   (a)   Issuance of Citation. Wherever a police officer is authorized to
arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of this code or any
ordinance in respect of any of the following subjects:
      1.   Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a designated area;
      2.   Restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked;
      3.   Requiring the purchase and display of a vehicle sticker;
      4.   Regulating and licensing dogs;
      5.   Regulating and licensing businesses;
      6.   Regulating and licensing signs;
      7.   Regulating sprinkling;
      8.   Regulating swimming pools;
      9.   Regulating the construction of buildings and other structures;
      10.   Regulating weeds;
   the police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in
the first instance issue to such alleged violator, a citation:
      1.   Advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
      2.   Requesting him to make payment in the amount applicable to said
alleged violation as set forth in Section 1.07(e) as settlement of said
violation claim;
      3.   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be
filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County, charging him with such violation;
and
      4.   All violation citations shall be served by officers of the Police
Department or by auxiliary police when authorized to do so by the Chief of
Police. The heads of department in the city, including the Building
Commissioner, the Superintendent of Public Works and the Health Officer, shall
not issue or serve violation citations.
   (b)   Settlement of Claim. Pursuant to this citation, the person so accused
of the violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of
such violation by paying to the municipality the applicable amount as shown in
the schedule set forth in Section 1.07(e) of this code, within a period to be
specified in the citation, not more than 7 days of the time said alleged
offense was committed.
   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in
the aforesaid citation, at the office of the City Clerk, who shall issue a
receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said amount to the City
Treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
   (c)   Filing Complaint. In the event that the person to whom the citation is
issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the prescribed time,
or within a period of time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon
him) then the peace officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be
served upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to
prosecute the same in the Circuit Court of Cook County.
   (d)   Responsibility of Owner; Parking Violations. The fact that an
automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is registered
with the Secretary of State in the name of said alleged violator, or, in the
alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by the municipality has
been issued in the name of and to the alleged violator, shall be considered
prima facie proof that the alleged violator was in control of or was the
operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such alleged
violation.
   (e)   Schedule of Settlement Amounts. The violation claim described in the
citation, so to be issued pursuant to the terms of this Code, may be settled,
compromised and paid in the respective amounts set forth in the following
schedule:
      1.   In the event that said payment is made prior to the mailing by the
municipality or by the peace officer of a final notice, the following amounts
shall be accepted as settlement:
Improper parking                    $ 35
Overnight parking                   35
No dog license                      35
No animal rabies shots              35
Violation of sprinkling regulations 35
No business license                 35
Animal running at large             35
Illegal garbage burning             35
Nuisance ordinance                  35
No sign license                     35
No pool permit                      35
No valid vehicle sticker            35
Handicapped parking                 250
Food service/                       100
Chapter 15
 
      2.   In the event that payment has not been paid prior to the mailing of
such final notice, and in fact, final notice has been mailed and no hearing has
been requested or the defendant has failed to appear at the first hearing date,
the following amounts shall be accepted as settlement:
Improper parking                    $ 70
Overnight parking                   70
No animal license                   70
Violation of sprinkling regulations 70
No business license                 70
Animal running at large             70
Illegal garbage burning             70
Nuisance ordinance                  70
No sign license                     70
No pool permit                      70
No valid vehicle sticker            70
Handicapped parking                 500
Food service/                       200
Chapter 15
 
      3.   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in
the final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a complaint filed
in the Circuit Court of Cook County, the minimum fine for the following
enumerated offenses shall be as follows:
Improper parking                    $140
Overnight parking                   140
No animal license                   140
Violation of sprinkling regulations 140
No business license                 140
Animal running at large             140
Illegal garbage burning             140
Nuisance ordinance                  140
No sign license                     140
No pool permit                      140
No valid vehicle sticker            140
Handicapped parking                 750
Food service/                       300
Chapter 15
 
      4.   With regard to the third and subsequent offenses under Section
14.05, pertaining to dogs or cats at large, the payment amount under
subparagraph 1 shall be increased $70, the payment amount under subparagraph 2
shall be increased $140 and the payment amount under subparagraph 3 shall be
increased $210.
§ 1.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.
   Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this code,
whether he directly commits the act or prosecutes, counsels, aids, or abets in
its commission, may be prosecuted and on conviction is punishable as if he had
directly committed such act.
§ 1.09 SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Each section, paragraph, sentence, clause and provision of this code is
separable and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this code nor any part
thereof, other than that part affected by such decision.
§ 1.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code of ordinances shall take effect 10 days after passage and
publication in book form under the authority of the Council as provided by law.
§ 1.11 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES - COMPLIANCE WARNING TICKETS.
   (a)   Any person who is accused of a violation of any section of
Chapter 37 or
Chapter 41, pursuant to the issuance of a Compliance Warning Ticket, except a
traffic offense for which a court appearance is required pursuant to Supreme
Court Rule 551, may settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the City a
fee of $15.00 within 10 days from the date such alleged violation was committed
or by paying to the City the sum of $30.00 subsequent to said 10-day period and
prior to said person being issued a Uniform Traffic Complaint or Notice to
Appear.
   (b)   Compliance Warning Tickets shall be issued as a courtesy in lieu of
instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense. If the person accused of the
violation does not settle the claim, a Uniform Traffic Complaint or Notice to
Appear will be issued for that violation and that person shall be subject to
the general penalties set forth in Section
1.06.
CHAPTER 2: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
2.01   Wards
   
2.02   Aldermen
   
2.03   City Council
   
2.04   City Council Meetings
   
2.05   Order of business
   
2.06   Rules
   
2.07   Committees
§ 2.01 WARDS.
   There shall be four Wards within the City of Hickory Hills consisting of the
following territory:
   First Ward shall be comprised of all territory within the City of Hickory
Hills lying north of 91st Street and east of Roberts Road; lying south of 91st
Street and north of 95th Street east of 81st Avenue; and lying south of 95th
Street and east of 82nd Avenue.
   Second Ward shall be comprised of all the territory within the City of
Hickory Hills lying south of 89th Street and north of 91st Street west of 84th
Avenue and east of 88th Avenue; lying south of 91st Street and north of 95th
Street west of 81st Avenue and east of 88th Avenue; and lying south of 95th
Street lying west of 82nd Avenue and east of 88th Avenue.
   Third Ward shall be comprised of all the territory within the City of
Hickory Hills lying west of 88th Avenue.
   Fourth Ward shall be comprised of all the territory within the City of
Hickory Hills lying north of 87th Street east of 86th Avenue; lying south of
87th Street and north of 89th Street west of Roberts Road and east of 88th
Avenue; and lying south of 89th Street and north of 91st Street west of Roberts
Road and east of 84th Avenue.
   A map of the Wards to be effective for the 2013 Consolidated Election and
thereafter is attached to Ordinance No. 12-17.
§ 2.02 ALDERMEN.
   (a)   Number. The number of Aldermen for the City of Hickory Hills shall be
eight.
   (b)   Terms. Two Aldermen shall be elected to represent each ward for a term
of 4 years, and until their successors are elected and qualified. The term of
one of the Aldermen in each ward shall expire every two years.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   Eligibility for Other Office. No Alderman shall be eligible to any
office, except that of acting Mayor or Mayor pro tem, the salary of which is
payable out of the city treasury, if at the time of his appointment he is a
member of the City Council.
   (e)   Compensation. Alderman shall receive compensation as determined by
ordinance.
   (f)   Reimbursement. Alderman shall receive reimbursement for expenses as
determined by ordinance or other action of the City Council.
§ 2.03 CITY COUNCIL.
   (a)   Composition. The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and Aldermen.
   (b)   City Council as Judge of Election of its Members. The City Council
shall be the sole judge of the election to office of the Aldermen. It shall
also be the sole judge whether under the Illinois Municipal Code Aldermen are
eligible to their offices. However, a court shall not be prohibited from
hearing and determining a proceeding in quo warranto.
   (c)   Rules, Expulsion. The City Council shall determine its own rules of
proceeding and punish its members for disorderly conduct. With the concurrence
of two-thirds of the Aldermen elected, it may expel an Alderman, but not a
second time for the same offense.
   (d)   Quorum, Compelling Attendance. A majority of the City Council shall
constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from
time to time, and may compel the attendance of absentees under the penalty of a
fine of $10 to be assessed by a majority of the Aldermen holding office at a
regular meeting of the City Council.
   (e)   Mayor as Presiding Officer; Deciding Vote. The Mayor shall preside at
all meetings of the City Council. He shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution or motion except:
      1.   Where the vote of the Aldermen has resulted in a tie; or
      2.   Where one-half of the Aldermen elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or
      3.   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
required by the Illinois Municipal Code to adopt an ordinance, resolution or
motion.
   In each instance specified, the Mayor shall vote. Nothing in this subsection
shall deprive an acting Mayor or Mayor pro tem from voting in his capacity as
Alderman, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his capacity as
acting Mayor or Mayor pro tem.
   (f)   Chairman Pro Tem. In the absence of the Mayor, acting Mayor, or Mayor
pro tem, the City Council may elect an Alderman to act as a temporary chairman.
He shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right of vote in his
capacity as Alderman on any ordinance, resolution, or motion.
   (g)   Committee Report, Deferment. Upon the request of any Alderman present
at the meeting, any report of a committee of the City Council shall be
deferred, for final action thereon, to the next meeting of the City Council.
§ 2.04 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (a)   Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Mayor and the City Council
shall be held on the second and fourth Thursday of each month at 8:00 p.m. If
business has not been completed by 11:59 p.m. of the meeting date, the meeting
shall be adjourned and continued to the following Thursday at 8:00 p.m. upon
motion. In case any such meeting shall fall on a legal holiday, then such
meeting shall be held on the day preceding such holiday, unless otherwise
provided by motion.
   (b)   Special Meetings. The Mayor or any 3 Aldermen may call special
meetings of the City Council. Notice of special meetings shall be served in
writing at the residence of all members of the City Council at least 24 hours
in advance of such special meeting. The Police Department shall deliver all
written notices of specially called meetings.
§ 2.05 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order and manner of conducting business at meetings shall be as the City
Council determines. Any one or more rules for the conduct of business as set
forth in Section 2.06 may be waived or suspended, expressly or impliedly, by
the passage of any vote approved by a majority of the members of the City
Council voting upon that motion, resolution or ordinance.
§ 2.06 RULES.
   The following rules of order for conduct of business by the City Council of
Hickory Hills are hereby adopted:
   Rule 1. The Mayor shall, if present, take the chair at the hour appointed
for the meeting of the City Council. The meeting being called to order, the
roll of members shall be called, and if a quorum be present the presiding
officer shall cause the journal of the last preceding meeting or meetings to be
read unless such reading be dispensed with by vote of the City Council.
   Rule 2. The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum. He may speak to points
of order in preference to any member and shall decide points of order subject
to an appeal of the City Council members by any two members, on which appeal no
member shall speak more than once unless by leave of the City Council.
   Rule 3. Every question shall be distinctly stated by the Mayor before it is
open for debate. Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the Mayor or any
member shall so demand.
   Rule 4. The presiding officer may call on any member to perform the duties
of chairman; no such substitution, however, shall extend beyond the adjournment
of the particular meeting.
   Rule 5. Every member previous to speaking to any question shall audibly
address the presiding officer as “Mr. Mayor”. Such member shall not, however,
speak further until he is recognized and named; provided, however, that any
member shall be given the floor on request of any two members of the City
Council.
   Rule 6. All ordinances shall be presented in written form prior to vote
thereon.
   Rule 7. Every member present when a vote is taken shall vote unless excused
by the City Council or unless he shall be directly interested in the matter
pending in which case such member shall not vote.
   Rule 8. All committees to whom any matter may be referred shall report in
writing if requested by any member. Minority reports may be submitted signed by
the dissenting member or members.
   Rule 9. On the acceptance of a final report from a special committee, such
committee shall stand discharged without vote unless it be otherwise ordered.
All reports made by committees or officers of the city, all resolutions
adopted, all ordinances as presented and passed, all communications, petitions
and the like received, and generally all papers presented to be acted on shall
be filed and carefully preserved by the Clerk.
   Rule 10. All petitions or communications shall be addressed to the City
Council and shall be in writing and filed by the Clerk.
   Rule 11. When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution or other original matter, he shall briefly state its nature before
presenting the same.
   Rule 12. No person, except during the open portion of the meeting and except
a member of the City Council, shall be permitted to address the City Council
without the consent of the City Council.
   Rule 13. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order subject
to an appeal of the City Council by any two members, and in all cases not
covered by these rules, or where they are not applicable, the Board shall be
governed by Parliamentary Law as laid down in “Robert’s Rules of Order”.
   Rule 14. When a question is before the City Council no motions shall be in
order but to adjourn, lay on the table, previous question, postpone
indefinitely, postpone to a certain time, to commit, and amend. These motions
shall be privileged and have precedence in the order named.
   Rule 15. Any Alderman may object to the consideration or vote upon any main
motion regarding new business on the date said motion is first presented. If
there is any objection, said motion shall be deferred to the agenda of the next
meeting.
   Rule 16. When the meeting is open to the public, all persons wishing to
speak or pose any questions must identify themselves as to name and address. No
person shall be recognized by the chairman more than once at each meeting. Each
person recognized shall have the floor for three minutes.
   Rule 17. The journal of proceeding of the meetings shall be comprised of,
and limited to, the following:
   (a)   The date and place held;
   (b)   The names of the members and the city officials present;
   (c)   The nature and disposition of all motions;
   (d)   Copies of all ordinances and resolutions adopted and passed;
   (e)   Brief summaries of all reports submitted.
   Rule 18. Rules Governing Debate. Until a matter has been brought before the
City Council in the form of a motion proposing a specific action, it cannot be
debated. The motion must be made by an Alderman who has obtained the floor,
while no motion is pending, after which it must be seconded by another
Alderman. The term “debate” applies to the discussion in a deliberative
assembly on the merits of a pending motion. After the maker of the motion has
been given the opportunity to speak first if he wishes, other Aldermen of the
City Council may address the Chair to claim the floor for the purpose of
debate. No Alderman may speak more than twice to the same motion on the same
day. An Alderman may speak no longer than five minutes for each time he has the
floor to debate a motion. Rights in regard to debate are not transferable. No
Alderman may yield any unexpired portion of his time to another Alderman, or
reserve any portion of his time for a later time; that is, if an Alderman
yields the floor before speaking his full five minutes, he is presumed to have
waived his right to the remaining time. If a speaker yields to another Alderman
for an answer to a question, the time consumed by the answer to the question is
charged to the speaker. An Alderman who has spoken twice on the particular
motion on the same day has exhausted his right to debate that motion for that
day.
   Confining Remarks to the Merits of the Pending Question. In debate an
Alderman’s remarks must be germane to the motion before the City Council; that
is, his statements must have bearing on whether the pending motion should be
adopted.
   Refraining from Attacking an Alderman’s Motives. When a motion is pending, a
member can condemn the nature or likely consequences of the proposed measure in
strong terms, but he must avoid personalities, and under no circumstances can
he attack or question the motives of another Alderman.
   The measure, not the man, is the subject of debate. If an Alderman disagrees
with a statement by another in regard to an event which both witnessed, he
shall not state in debate that the other’s statement “is false”. But he might
say, “I believe there is strong evidence that the member is mistaken.” The
moment the Chair hears such words as “fraud”, “liar” or “lie” used about an
Alderman in debate or personal attacks on an Alderman, he must act immediately
and decisively to correct the matter and prevent its repetition. Speakers must
address their remarks to the Chair, maintain a courteous tone, and especially
in reference to any divergence of opinion should avoid injecting a personal
note into debate. To this end, the Alderman must never attack or make any
allusion to the motives of members.
   Rule 19. Rules for the Agenda of City Council Meetings. When a member of the
City Council wishes to present a communication, petition, order, resolution,
motion, ordinance or other original matter before the City Council for action
to be taken at the City Council meeting, he shall be required to present a
brief written statement of the nature of this item to the City Clerk’s office
at least two days prior to the City Council meeting.
   The City Clerk’s office shall accept the written statements submitted two
days prior to the City Council meeting and shall publish an agenda of items to
be acted on at the City Council meeting. This agenda shall be made available
for all members of the City Council the day before the City Council meeting.
§ 2.07 COMMITTEES.
   (a)   All standing and special committees of the City Council shall consist
of three or more Aldermen, and shall be appointed and confirmed by a majority
vote of the City Council. The City Council shall designate the chairman
thereof.
   (b)   The Mayor shall be ex-officio a member of all committees. The standing
committees to be appointed annually shall be:
      1.   Finance
      2.   Public Safety and Environmental Control
      3.   Public Works
      4.   Building
      5.   Social Services
      6.   Laws, Ordinances and Licenses
      7.   Health and Environmental Services
      8.   Facilities
      9.   Recycling
   (c)   Special committees may be appointed for the consideration of any
particular questions or matter.
CHAPTER 3: CITY GOVERNMENT
Section
   
3.01   Elections
   
3.02   Elective City Officers
   
3.03   Mayor
   
3.04   Mayor’s Powers and Duties
   
3.05   City Clerk
   
3.06   City Treasurer
   
3.07   Appointed Officers
   
3.08   Designation of Officers
   
3.09   Qualifications of Officers
   
3.10   Oath of City Officers
   
3.11   Bonds of City Officers
   
3.12   Salary of Elected Officials
   
3.13   Officers and Employees, Duties
   
3.14   Law Department
   
3.15   City Collector
   
3.16   Deputy City Clerk
   
3.17   Director of Public Works
   
3.18   Consulting Engineer
   
3.19   Board of Local Improvements
   
3.20   Reserved
   
3.21   City Seal
   
3.22   Fines and Forfeitures, Disposition
   
3.23   Fiscal and Municipal Year
   
3.24   Sale of Personal Property
   
3.25   Warrants
   
3.251   Issuance of Checks
   
3.26   Contracts Where Bidding Required
   
3.261   Expenditures and Purchases, Approval
   
3.27   Special Assessments
   
3.271   Unclaimed Rebate Fund
   
3.28   Youth Commission
   
3.29   Senior Citizens Commission
   
3.30   Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
3.31   Blood Donors Commission
   
3.32   Indemnification
   
3.33   Community Affairs Commission
   
3.34   Recycling Commission
   
3.35   Emergency Telephone System Board
   
3.36   Senior Housing Commission
   
3.37   Code Hearing Department (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.)
   
3.38   Code Hearing Department (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.)
   
3.39   Director of Public Safety
   
3.40   Racial or Gender Profiling
   
3.41   Ethical Conduct
§ 3.01 ELECTIONS.
   The Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-1) shall govern all elections.
§ 3.02 ELECTIVE CITY OFFICERS.
   (a)   Elected. There shall be elected in this city a Mayor, eight Aldermen,
a City Clerk, and a City Treasurer.
   (b)   City Clerk and City Treasurer. The City Clerk and the City Treasurer
shall be elected when the Mayor is elected.
   (c)   Other Offices. No Mayor, Alderman, City Clerk or City Treasurer shall
hold any other office under the city government during his term of office
except as otherwise provided by the Illinois Municipal Code.
   (d)   Term and Inauguration. The terms of the elected officials shall
commence at the time of their inauguration which shall be at the first regular
or special meeting in the month of May following the consolidated election in
April of every odd year. Elected officials shall serve until their respective
successors are elected, qualified and take office.
   (e)   Qualifications. No person shall be elected Mayor, Clerk or Treasurer
who is not a qualified elector of the City, who has not resided in the City for
one year immediately preceding his election, or who is a defaulter to the
municipality. No person shall be elected Alderman who is not a qualified
elector of the City, who has not resided in the City for one year immediately
preceding his election, who does not reside within the ward for which he is
elected, or who is a defaulter to the municipality.
§ 3.03 MAYOR.
   (a)   Term. The chief executive officer of the city shall be a Mayor. He
shall hold his office for 4 years, and until his successor is elected and has
qualified.
   (b)   Resignation; Vacancy. The Mayor may resign from his office. A vacancy
occurs in the office of Mayor by reason of resignation, failure to elect or
qualify, death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction of a
disqualifying crime, abandonment of office, or removal from office or by
removal of his residence form the city.
§ 3.04 MAYOR’S POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (a)   Release of Prisoners. The Mayor may release any person imprisoned for
violation of any city ordinance, and shall report the release, with the reasons
therefor, to the City Council at its first session thereafter.
   (b)   Examination of Records. The Mayor at all times may examine and inspect
the books, records, and papers of any agent, employee, or officer of the city.
   (c)   Calling Out Inhabitants and Militia. When necessary, the Mayor may
call on every male inhabitant of the city over the age of 18 years, to aid in
enforcing laws and ordinances. Subject to the authority of the Governor as
commander-in-chief of the militia, the Mayor may call out the militia to aid in
suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct, or to aid in carrying into
effect any law or ordinance.
   (d)   Designation of Person to Sign Instruments. The Mayor may designate
another to affix the signature of the Mayor to any written instrument which is
required to be signed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall send written notice of this
designation to the City Council, stating the name of the person whom he has
selected and what instrument the person will have authority to sign. A written
signature of the Mayor executed by the person so designated, with the signature
of the person so designated underneath, shall be attached to the notice. The
notice, with the signatures attached, shall be recorded in the journal of the
City Council and then filed with the City Clerk. When the signature of the
Mayor is placed on a written instrument at the direction of the Mayor in the
specified manner, the instrument, in all respects, shall be as binding on the
city as if signed by the Mayor in person.
   (e)   General Duties. The Mayor shall perform all the duties which are
prescribed by law and ordinances, and shall take care that the laws and
ordinances are faithfully executed.
   (f)   Messages to City Council. The Mayor from time to time may and annually
shall give the City Council information relative to the affairs of the city,
and may recommend for their consideration such measures as he believes
expedient.
   (g)   Civil Emergencies.
      1.   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      Civil emergency shall mean: (i) a riot or unlawful assembly characterized
by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if
accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting
together without authority of law; or (ii) any natural disaster, epidemic, or
manmade calamity, including outbreak of disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone,
tornado, earthquake or explosion, or eminent threat of any of those events
within the corporate limits of the city, resulting in or threatening the death
or injury of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that
extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
      Curfew shall mean prohibition against any person walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the city except
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to said civil emergency.
      2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Whenever a civil emergency exists, the
mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a local state of emergency by
means of a written declaration. The declaration shall be made under oath,
setting forth the facts which constitute the civil emergency, describe the
nature of the civil emergency, and declare that a local State of Emergency
exists in accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. The
declaration shall be filed with the city clerk as soon as practicable after
issuance.
      3.   Executive Orders. After the proclamation of a local state of
emergency, the mayor may, in addition to such other powers, take any or all of
the following actions by executive order during the state of civil emergency in
the interest of public safety and welfare, and to address the issues caused or
threatened by the civil emergency:
         A.   Impose a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of
the city or to the city as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable
during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of
the public safety and welfare;
         B.   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the city for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
         C.   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the
current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the city during the existence of the
local state of emergency;
         D.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns
and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
         E.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
         F.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
         G.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and,
         H.   Do all such other things reasonably necessary to respond to the
civil emergency.
      4.   Penalty. Violations of any executive order issued during a state of
local emergency shall be punishable by fine in an amount of not less than $250
and not more than $2,000 for each offense.
      5.   Duration of State of Emergency. A declaration herein authorized
shall be effective until the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting
of city council, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists.
      6.   Notice. As soon as is reasonably practicable following the issuance
of a proclamation of a local state of emergency, a copy thereof shall be: (i)
posted on the city’s website, and the city hall, and at the police station; and
(ii) provided to news media situated in the city.
(Ord. 20-8, passed 6-11-2020)
§ 3.05 CITY CLERK.
   (a)   Duties. The City Clerk shall in addition to the duties now imposed
upon that officer by statute perform the following duties:
      1.   He shall keep his office in the City Hall and maintain business
hours.
      2.   He shall issue notice of meetings to the Mayor and members of the
City Council, and when directed by that body, to the members of the different
committees of that body and to all persons whose attendance will be required
before that body or any such committee when so directed, he shall also issue
and cause to be served notices of the meetings.
      3.   He shall attest all the licenses granted under the ordinances of the
city.
      4.   He shall without delay deliver to the officers of the city and to
the various committees, all bills, resolutions, communications and other
documents referring to such officers and committees.
      5.   He shall without delay deliver to the Mayor all ordinances or
resolutions under his charge which may require approval or other action by the
Mayor with all papers and information on which the same were founded.
      6.   He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
Mayor and City Council and the ordinances of the city.
   (b)   Keeper of Seal and Records. The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal
and affix the same to all papers which require it. He shall keep all records
and papers belonging to the city and attend all meetings of the City Council,
and keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal. He shall prepare all
warrants for the payment of money, sign and deliver same when called for after
they have been countersigned by the Mayor, taking a proper receipt therefor. He
shall make proper copies of all papers duly filed in his office and make
transcripts from the journal and other records and files of his office,
certified by him under the corporate seal.
   (c)   Record of Ordinances. All ordinances passed by the City Council shall
be recorded by the Clerk in a book kept for that purpose before the next
regular meeting after they go into effect.
   If the ordinance requires publication, he shall cause the same to be
published. The Clerk shall note at the foot of the record of each ordinance a
memorandum of the date of its passage and approval or otherwise becoming
effective, and if published the date of the publication of such ordinances. The
original shall be filed in the office of Clerk with a certificate of
publication or posting attached to ordinance requiring publication.
   (d)   Notification of Persons Elected. It shall be the duty of the City
Clerk, within 5 days after the result of an election is declared or an
appointment made, to notify in writing all persons elected or appointed to
office. Unless such persons shall respectively qualify in 10 days after such
notice, the office shall become and be vacant.
   (e)   City Collector. The City Clerk may be appointed City Collector and if
so appointed, shall receive such compensation as annually determined by the
City Council in the appropriation ordinance.
   (f)   Record of Warrants. He shall, on the stubs of his warrant books, make
a full record of the dates, amounts and parties in each warrant issued and on
what fund issued; he shall also keep a record book showing, under separate
headings as to each fund, the same facts as to all warrants issued by him for
any purpose on such fund, and also showing the same are paid and cancelled by
the Treasurer, and the exact amounts of principal and interest actually paid
thereon.
   (g)   Petitions and Communications. All petitions, remonstrances, bids,
bills or other communications addressed to the City of Hickory Hills City
Council shall be received by the Clerk and read by him at the City Council
meeting next succeeding their receipt, unless otherwise ordered by the City
Council.
§ 3.06 CITY TREASURER.
   (a)   Duties.
      1.   The City Treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the city,
and shall keep his books and accounts in the manner prescribed by ordinance.
These books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of the Mayor
and any member of the City Council.
      2.   He shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and
the debits and credits belonging thereto.
      3.   He shall give every person paying money into the treasury a receipt
therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid. He shall
file copies of these receipts with the City Clerk with his monthly reports. If
he has in his possession money properly appropriated to the payment of any
warrant lawfully drawn upon him he shall pay the money specified in this
warrant to the person designated by the warrant.
   (b)   Monthly Statements, Warrants, Vouchers. At the end of every month, and
oftener if required by the City Council, the City Treasurer shall render an
account under oath to the City Council, showing the state of the treasury at
the date of the account and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall
accompany the account with a statement of all money received into the treasury,
and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him. On
the day he renders an account, these warrants, with all vouchers held by him,
shall be delivered to the City Clerk and filed, together with the account, in
the Clerk’s office. He shall return all warrants paid by him marked “paid.” He
shall keep a register of all warrants, which shall describe each warrant,
showing its date, amount, and number, the fund from which paid, the name of the
person to whom paid, and when paid.
   (c)   Personal Use of Funds. The City Treasurer shall keep all money
belonging to the city in his custody separate and distinct from his own money,
and he shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the city’s money or
warrants in his custody for his own use and benefit, or that of any other
person. Any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal
from office by the City Council, who may declare the City Treasurer’s office
vacant. In that case his successor shall be appointed, and he shall hold his
office for the remainder of the unexpired term of the Treasurer so removed.
   (d)   Report; Account of Receipts and Disbursements. The City Treasurer
shall report to the City Council monthly a full and detailed account of all
receipts and expenditures.
   (e)   Annual Accounts. Prior to the first day of September of each year the
City Treasurer shall prepare and file with the City Clerk an account of all
monies received and expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year. The
Treasurer shall show in such account:
      1.   All monies received by the city, indicating the total amounts, in
the aggregate, received in each account of the city, with a general statement
concerning the source of such receipts; provided, for the purposes of this
subparagraph the term “account” shall not be construed to mean each individual
taxpayer, householder, licensee, utility user, or such other persons whose
payments to the city are credited to a general account; and
      2.   All monies paid out by the city giving the name of each person to
whom paid, on what account paid, and the total amount, in the aggregate, paid
to each person from each such account; and
      3.   A statement showing the state of the city treasury at the close of
the fiscal year.
   The preceding fiscal year for which such account must be prepared is the
fiscal year of the city which ends during the 12 month period immediately
preceding May 1 of the year in which the report is filed.
   Upon receipt of such account from the City Treasurer, the City Clerk shall
publish the account at least once, in one or more newspapers published in the
city.
   (f)   Filing Annual Account. Prior to the first day of September of each
year the City Treasurer shall file with each town or country collector of taxes
who collects taxes levied by such city, a copy of annual account which is
required to be field with and published by the City Clerk, as provided in
Section 3.16, together with an affidavit of the City Clerk stating that such
copy is a true and correct copy of such annual account filed with him, that it
was published or posted as required by Illinois Municipal Code Section 3-10-
5.1, the date of such filing and publication, and the newspaper in which it was
published.
   (g)   Special Assessment Funds. All money received on any special assessment
shall be held by the City Treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the
payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and the money
shall be used for no other purpose, except to reimburse the city for money
expended for such improvement.
   (h)   Financial Administrator. The City Treasurer shall have the authority
and power to employ a Financial Administrator, which shall be a full-time
position in that office under such terms and conditions as are established by
the City Council. The Financial Administrator shall be responsible for
compiling, gathering and preparing computer information for collection or
disbursement of municipal revenue. The Financial Administrator shall administer
any and all insurance programs of the City of Hickory Hills and shall do all
things necessary in the administration of the various insurance programs. The
Financial Administrator shall compile all data, financial reports or other
related information requested by the City Council and shall implement any
financial or cash management programs as specified and directed by the City
Council by ordinance.
§ 3.07 APPOINTED OFFICERS.
   (a)   Appointment. Unless otherwise specifically provided by statute, all
officers of the city shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Vacancies in all such city offices may be filled
in the same manner.
   (b)   Duties. The City Council, by ordinance, may prescribe the duties,
define the powers, and fix the term of office of all such officers, but the
term of office, except as may otherwise be expressly provided in the Illinois
Municipal Code, shall not exceed that of the Mayor.
   (c)   Resignation; Vacancy. Any such officer of the city may resign from his
office. If such officer resigns he shall continue in office until his successor
has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a city
officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the
office shall continue in office until his successor has been chosen and has
qualified. If such officer ceases to perform the duties of or to hold his
office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction
of a disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of office, the Mayor
may appoint a temporary successor to the officer.
   (d)   Term of Appointed Officers. All such officers shall hold their
appointive offices until the first Monday of May in each year following their
appointments and until their successors shall have been appointed and
qualified.
   (e)   Failure of Officers; Elect to Qualify. If any person elected or
appointed to any office of the city shall fail to qualify by taking,
subscribing and filing the oath of office, statement of economic interest, and
making, executing, and filing his official bond, as herein provided, within 10
days after he is officially notified of his election or appointment, the office
shall become vacant.
§ 3.08 DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS.
   The following officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Aldermen:
      Director of Public Works
      City Health Officer
      Building Commissioner
      Plan Review Officer
      City Collector
      Inspectors in all Departments
      Auxiliary Policemen
      City Attorney
      City Prosecutor
      Chief of Police
      Coordinator of Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   All appointees may be removed from office by the Mayor on any formal charge
whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the city demand
removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City Council at a
meeting to be held not less than 5 nor more than 10 days after the removal.
Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should the City
Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected
disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office and shall
execute a new bond and oath. The removal of the Chief of Police shall be as
provided for in Section 4.02(c) of this code.
§ 3.09 QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS.
   Any person appointed to any office, board or commission shall have been a
resident of the City of Hickory Hills for not less than one year immediately
preceding the date of his or her appointment and shall, before assuming the
duties of his or her office, file with the City Clerk an affidavit reciting the
addresses at which the appointee has resided during the preceding five years.
This provision shall not apply to the offices of Engineer, City Attorney, or
City Prosecutor, if such office is provided for.
§ 3.10 OATH OF CITY OFFICERS.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices all city
officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the following
oath:
I do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United States,
and the constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of the office of
                                           according to the best of my ability.
   This oath so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 3.11 BONDS OF CITY OFFICERS.
   (a)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all city
officers, except Aldermen, shall execute a bond with security, to be approved
by the City Council. The bond shall be payable to the city in whatever penal
sum may be directed by resolution or ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money received
by such officer, according to law and ordinance.
   (b)   The bonds shall be filed with the City Clerk, except the bond of the
Clerk, which shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
   (c)   The amount of the officers’ bonds shall be as follows:
 
Mayor        $ 3,000
Clerk        10,000
Deputy Clerk 5,000
Treasurer    As required by statute.
Collector    50,000
 
   (d)   Increase in Amount. Should good cause exist in the judgment and
discretion of the City Council any officer may be required, from time to time,
to give additional bonds in such sum and within such time as the City Council
may by resolution direct.
   (e)   Execution of Bonds. The bond of each officer shall be executed to the
City of Hickory Hills with two or more sureties conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of his office the payment to the proper officer of
all moneys coming into his hands by virtue of his office. Each of said sureties
shall be freeholders of Cook County, and shall schedule real estate herein,
clear of all encumbrances and other legal obligations, in value not less than
the penal sum of said bond, which schedule shall be made separately by said
sureties and sworn to before some officer authorized to administer oaths, and
attached to the bond. Any officer may procure as surety upon any bond he may be
required to give, any responsible surety company or corporation. No member of
the City Council shall sign any bond in any case wherein in the City of Hickory
Hills is interested.
   (f)   Surety Bonds. Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the city is required
as a prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit or the exercise of any special privilege, the
surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by ordinance.
§ 3.12 SALARY OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The monetary compensation to be paid elected officials for the fiscal year
ending April 30, 2025, shall be:
 
Officer                                 Annual Compensation
Mayor/Local Liquor Control Commissioner $46,802.04
City Clerk/Collector                    $86,366.87
City Treasurer                          $27,279.48
Alderperson                             $13,505.04
 
   The rate of compensation shall increase annually, commencing upon May 1,
2025, and every subsequent May 1, by the increase in the Consumer Price Index
for the preceding calendar year, but in no event shall the annual increase
exceed 5%. Compensation shall be paid in installments in the same manner as for
employees of the City. The above rate of compensation does not include
benefits, such as IMRF, reimbursed itemized expenses incurred in the conduct of
City business, and health insurance coverage for full-time elected officials.
§ 3.13 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, DUTIES.
   (a)   Duties in General. Each officer, besides the specific duties which may
be required of him by virtue of his said office, shall also perform such other
and further duties, and be subject to such rules and regulations as the City
Council may, from time to time, require, or by ordinance provide and establish.
   (b)   Books, Papers Subject to Examination. All books, papers, vouchers,
warrants, entries, accounts and memoranda of each officer and employee of the
city may be examined at any time by the Mayor, and the City Council may by
resolution call upon any officer to make a report in writing of any subject
matter which the City Council may designate in such resolution and within such
time as the resolution may prescribe.
   (c)   Duty on Termination of Office. Any person having been an officer or
employee of the city whose term has expired or who has resigned or been removed
from office, shall within 10 days after notification and request, deliver to
his successor in office all property, books, and effects of every description
in his possession belonging to the city or appertaining to his office.
§ 3.14 LAW DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   City Attorney. There is hereby created the office of City Attorney who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Aldermen.
The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to all officers, employees, boards
and commissions of the city, except as otherwise provided in this section. The
City Attorney shall also prepare or revise ordinances and resolutions, shall
give his opinion upon legal matters, shall attend all City Council meetings and
committee meetings when requested by the City Council, shall prepare contracts
and other legal instruments and shall perform such other duties as the City
Council shall prescribe. The City Attorney shall be paid a reasonable
compensation which shall be determined by the City Council.
   (b)   City Prosecutor. There is hereby created the office of City Prosecutor
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Aldermen. The City Prosecutor shall prosecute all ordinance and traffic
violations. The City Prosecutor shall be paid a reasonable compensation which
shall be determined by the City Council.
   (c)   Local Liquor Control Commissioner, Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners and Civil Service Commission Attorneys. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and the Civil Service
Commission shall have the power to employ an attorney to advise them, provided
that an appropriation is made for such employment by the City Council. The
attorneys employed shall be paid a reasonable compensation which shall be
determined by the City Council.
   (d)   Prosecutions Before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, Civil
Service Commission, and Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The City Attorney
shall prosecute all cases before the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners,
Civil Service Commission, and Local Liquor Commissioner unless there exists a
conflict of interest with the attorney who represents the appropriate
commission.
   (e)   Special Legal Counsel. The City Council may hire an attorney or
attorneys to represent or advise the city, its officers, employees, boards or
commissions in certain designated business or legal matters whenever the City
Council deems the same expedient. Such Special Legal Counsel may handle matters
even if that matter would be ordinarily assigned or handled by one of the
aforementioned attorneys. Special Legal Counsel shall be paid a reasonable
compensation which shall be determined by the City Council.
§ 3.15 CITY COLLECTOR.
   (a)   General Duties. The City Collector shall preserve all warrants
returned to him, and he shall keep his books and accounts in the manner that
the City Council may prescribe. All of the City Collector’s warrants, books,
and vouchers, and all papers pertaining to his office, may be examined at any
time by the Mayor, City Clerk, or any member or committee of the City Council.
Weekly and oftener if required by the City Council, the City Collector shall
pay over to the City Treasurer all money collected by him from any source
whatever, taking the City Treasurer’s receipt therefor in duplicate and filing
one of the receipts immediately with the City Clerk. At that time, or on
demand, the City Clerk shall give the City Collector a copy of any receipt so
filed.
   (b)   Report; Annual Statement. When required by the City Council or by
ordinance, the City Collector shall make a written report to the City Council
or to any officer designated by the City Council, of all money collected by
him, the account whereon collected, or of any other official matter. Between
the first and tenth of April of each year the City Collector shall file with
the City Clerk a statement of (1) all the money collected by him during the
year; (2) the particular warrant, special assessment or account on which
collected; (3) the balance of money uncollected on all warrants in his
possession; and (4) the balance remaining uncollected at the time of the return
on all warrants which he returned to the City Clerk during the preceding fiscal
year. The City Clerk shall publish the statement at least once, within 10 days,
in one or more newspapers published in or with a general circulation in the
municipality.
   (c)   Detention of Public Money. The City Collector is prohibited from
keeping the city’s money in his possession, or in the possession of any person
for his use, beyond the time prescribed for its payment to the City Treasurer.
Any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from
office.
   (d)   Collection of Money and Transfer Thereof. The City Collector shall
collect all water bills, license fees, and special assessment monies, together
with all other monies due to the city from any source. The City Collector shall
turn over to the City Treasurer, or some other official or person designated by
the City Treasurer in writing and approved by the Mayor, all such monies
collected at such times as are necessary but not less than at least once a week
and shall take a receipt therefor in duplicate. The receipt so taken from the
Treasurer or other designated and approved official or person shall transfer
responsibility therefor to the City Treasurer.
   (e)   Special Assessment Funds. The City Collector shall perform all of the
duties required of him by the Statutes of the State of Illinois concerning the
collection and accounting of Special Assessment funds.
   (f)   Reports. The City Collector shall file with the City Clerk, between
the first and tenth of April of each year, a statement of (1) all the money
collected by him during the year; (2) the particular warrant, special
assessment, or account on which collected; (3) the balance of money uncollected
on all warrants in his possession; and (4) the balance remaining uncollected at
the time of the return on all warrants which he returned to the City Clerk
during the preceding fiscal year. The Clerk shall publish the statement at
least once, within 10 days, in one or more newspapers published in the
municipality, or if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more
newspapers with a general circulation with the municipality.
§ 3.16 DEPUTY CITY CLERK.
   (a)   Creation of Office. There is hereby created the office of Deputy
Clerk. The City Clerk is authorized to appoint a Deputy Clerk who shall have
the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to
be executed by the Clerk, and affix the seal of the city thereto whenever
required.
   (b)   Signing Documents. When signing any documents the Deputy Clerk shall
sign the name of the Clerk followed by the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s own
name and the words “Deputy Clerk”.
   (c)   Powers and Duties, When Exercised. The powers and duties herein
described shall be exercised by such Deputy Clerk only in the absence of the
City Clerk from his office in the City Hall, and only when either written
direction has been given by the Clerk to exercise such power, or the City
Council has determined by resolution that the City Clerk is temporarily or
permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
   (d)   Power and Authority. The Deputy Clerk shall have the authority and
power herein described, and such further power and authority as may be provided
by statute.
§ 3.17 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The powers and duties of the Director of Public Works shall be the
management of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, right-of-way, sanitary sewer
system, water system, storm sewer system and any public works owned or operated
by the City.
§ 3.18 CONSULTING ENGINEER.
   The Mayor shall retain the services of a qualified municipal engineer or
engineering firms, upon the advice and consent of the City Council and shall
enter into a contract for the term of no longer than one fiscal year for said
services after the approval and consent of the City Council. The engineering
services to be rendered shall be the regular attendance of City Council
meetings for consultation and information, and any other services that may be
requested by the City Council or the Mayor for the benefit of the city and its
residents.
§ 3.19 BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Members. The Mayor, all of the Aldermen and the Director of Public
Works shall constitute and act as the Board of Local Improvements of the City
of Hickory Hills. The Mayor shall be President and the City Clerk shall be
Secretary ex-officio of the Board. The Board shall retain the city’s attorney
as its attorney, and shall retain a consulting engineer, and they shall be paid
on a quantum merit basis for services rendered.
   (b)   Regular Meetings. The Board of Local Improvements shall meet on such
days and at such times as shall be necessary for the conduct of business.
§ 3.20 RESERVED.
§ 3.21 CITY SEAL.
   The city seal of the City of Hickory Hills shall be circular in form with
the words “Corporate Seal” in the inner circle and the words “City of Hickory
Hills, Illinois” in the outer circle.
§ 3.22 FINES AND FORFEITURES, DISPOSITION.
   All fines, penalties, and forfeitures for the violation of ordinances, when
collected, and all other money collected for the city shall be paid into the
city treasury.
§ 3.23 FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEAR.
   The fiscal and municipal year of the city shall commence on the first day of
May in each year and end on the day immediately preceding the succeeding first
day of May.
§ 3.24 SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   The Mayor may authorize the sale of personal property that is no longer
necessary or useful to, or for the best interest of the City. The Mayor may
authorize the sale with or without advertisement; may authorize any municipal
officer to convert that personal property into some other form that is useful
to the City by using the material in the personal property; or may authorize
any municipal officer to trade in the personal property as part payment on a
new purchase of a similar article. In the event that an item of personal
property has no value or the cost of selling the same would exceed the sale
price, the Mayor may authorize the donation or junking of such personal
property.
   No personal property may be sold or transferred to any officer or employee
of the City without advertisement and the acceptance of public bids. The Mayor
shall report in writing to the City Council with regard to any personal
property disposed of under the provisions of this section within 10 days after
sale or transfer.
§ 3.25 WARRANTS.
   All warrants drawn upon the Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk and must state the particular fund to which
same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and for what purpose the
same was drawn and no money shall be otherwise paid upon warrants so drawn.
§ 3.251 ISSUANCE OF CHECKS.
   All checks issued by the city for payment of money shall be issued over the
signature of both the Mayor and the Treasurer.
§ 3.26 CONTRACTS WHERE BIDDING REQUIRED.
   Any public improvement exceeding the amount required by § 8-9-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code for bidding (currently $10,000) shall be let to the
lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids unless the waiving of bids
is authorized by two-thirds of the City Council.
§ 3.261 EXPENDITURES AND PURCHASES, APPROVAL.
   All purchase of goods, services and supplies must be authorized as provided
herein. The department head shall have the authority to authorize any
expenditure of $5,000 or less, provided that it is in the budget. The chairman
of the Public Works Committee shall have the authority to authorize any
expenditure of $10,000 or less, provided that it is in the budget.
   The Mayor shall have the authority to authorize any expenditure of $20,000
or less, provided that it is in the budget or is an emergency. Any expenditure
in excess of $20,000, other than a reoccurring expenditure in the ordinary
course of business, shall be authorized by the City Council after receiving
proposals or quotes from more than one source, unless the expenditure is
unique, from a local or sole supplier, or waived by two-thirds vote of the City
Council.
§ 3.27 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The City of Hickory Hills hereby adopts the provisions of 24 ILCS 9-2 for
local improvements to be paid in whole or in part by Special Assessment.
§ 3.271 UNCLAIMED REBATE FUND.
   There is hereby established an unclaimed rebate fund into which shall be
transferred any undistributed and unclaimed monies which remain in the
possession of the city for a period of four years or more from the due date of
the last installment after notice is given as provided by Article 9 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 3.28 YOUTH COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created a new youth commission which shall be known as
the “Hickory Hills Youth Commission.”
   (b)   The commission shall consist of 7 members, all of whom shall be 19
years of age or older.
   (c)   All members shall by appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Aldermen.
   (d)   The term of each member shall be for 3 years.
   (e)   All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any member may be removed from office by the Mayor on any formal
charge whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the city
demand removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City Council
at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after the
removal. Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should
the City Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to
be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office.
   (f)   The commission shall exercise the following powers and shall perform
the following duties:
      1.   Defining problems of youth in the city.
      2.   Developing programs to deal with and solve youth problems.
      3.   Examining present programs and encouraging new programs of other
governmental agencies and private agencies.
      4.   Utilizing public and private facilities for youth programs.
      5.   Organizing and assisting new programs for youth development in areas
of employment, criminal awareness, recreation, and community participation.
      6.   Assisting the Coordinator of Federal and State Aid in securing
funding and grants for youth programs.
      7.   Sponsoring a “Junior Youth Commission” and assisting in creating new
programs which the youth of the city feel are beneficial to themselves.
      8.   Cooperating with all governmental agencies in the coordination of
youth programs in the city.
      9.   Acting as community resource for the Police Department and Probation
Department of Cook County to help alleviate criminal injustices.
      10.   Recommending the employment of personnel as authorized in the
appropriation ordinance.
      11.   Submitting an annual report in May of each year to the City Council
containing a synopsis of the past year’s activities, together with
recommendations for the next fiscal year.
   (g)   The City Council may hire an Executive Director who shall be an
employee of the city and shall have the following duties and functions:
      1.   Presiding over meetings of the commission.
      2.   Consulting with city departments on youth matters.
      3.   Developing and implementing programs designed to prevent
delinquency, to correct delinquency, and to rehabilitate youthful offenders.
      4.   Representing the commission in dealing with private and public
agencies whose concerns deal with the welfare of youths.
      5.   Cooperating with other governmental agencies.
      6.   Performing such other functions as shall be necessary or desirable
in meeting the ends established for the commission.
   (h)   The commission shall receive such annual appropriation as provided by
the City Council. The commission shall be empowered to solicit and receive
donations and grants from public and private resources. All such monies shall
be paid into the city treasury. The commission may expend such monies as are
approved by the City Council pursuant to procedures established thereby.
Nothing herein shall disqualify any member of the commission or the Executive
Director from being paid for services rendered provided that said compensation
is approved by the City Council.
   (i)   The commission shall meet at least monthly. Said meetings shall be
open to the public and shall comply with the open meetings law of the state.
The business of said meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order
unless the commission shall adopt its own rules of order. The commission shall
provide for its officers and the selection thereof.
§ 3.29 SENIOR CITIZENS COMMISSION.
   (a)   Created. There is hereby established for the city a Senior Citizen
Commission, which shall be known as “The Senior Citizen Commission of Hickory
Hills.”
   (b)   Membership. The commission shall consist of 5 members, all of whom
shall be senior citizens. The entire commission shall elect one of the
commission members as chairman; the chairman (or chairwoman) shall serve for a
period of one year.
   (c)   Appointment. All persons appointed to the commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor in the first month of the fiscal year with the advice
and consent of the City Council. All persons appointed to the commission shall
be residents of the City of Hickory Hills. Recommendations of prospective
commission members may be made by the commission to the Mayor.
   (d)   Terms of Office. The term of office for each adult member shall be for
a period of one year. However, a member may continue to serve until his or her
successor is duly appointed and qualified.
   (e)   Removal of Members. Any member of the commission may be removed by the
Mayor for cause shown, first having given such a member a copy of the charges
against him in writing and reasonable notice of the time and place where said
charges will be heard by the City Council. The member shall be given an
opportunity at such hearing to defend himself or herself.
   (f)   Powers and Duties of Commission. The commission shall coordinate the
providing of opportunities for the senior citizens of the city to:
      1.   Be assisted and advised in acquiring governmental and public
assistance where provided and when needed.
      2.   Socialize and to become better acquainted through mutual interests
and functions. The coordinating of leisure time and recreational programs shall
be initiated and sustained.
      3.   The commission shall cooperate with all municipal corporations who
have jurisdiction in the State of Illinois or who represent the federal
government.
      4.   The commission may act as a community resource where the subject of
concern is senior citizens.
      5.   The commission shall counsel the Mayor and the City Council
concerning such ordinances as may be needed for senior citizens.
      6.   The commission shall publish and submit to the Mayor and City
Council reports of its activities and pertinent financial information as may be
deemed by law at 6 month intervals.
      7.   The commission shall meet at least once per month and upon notice of
24 hours by the chairman of the commission.
      8.   The commission shall make expenditures of city money as authorized
by City Council and as may be authorized by appropriation in accordance with
city budgetary and accounting practices.
   (g)   Finances. The commission shall receive from the city an annual
appropriation as to be provided by the Mayor and City Council. The commission
shall be empowered to solicit, receive and obtain monies, funds, and grants
from public or private resources upon approval of the City Council. The
commission shall be responsible to the Mayor and the City Council for all
expenditures and shall submit reports as may be designated by the Mayor and the
chairman of the Finance Committee of the City Council.
   (h)   Robert’s Rules of Order. The business of the commission shall be
conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (i)   Definition of Senior Citizen. The definition of “senior citizen” which
shall apply only to the Senior Citizen Commission of Hickory Hills is any
person residing in the city who is of the age of 60 years or more. Special
exception may be provided with the concurrence of the Major and City Council.
§ 3.30 EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby created the City of Hickory Hills
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, hereinafter called the ESDA, to
prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from
disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from
natural or man-made disaster. This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and
such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator.
   (b)   Coordinator. The coordinator of the City ESDA shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and shall serve until removed by
the same. The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the Mayor as provided by statute. In the event of
the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the coordinator, the
Mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as coordinator until a
new appointment is made as provided in this section.
   (c)   Function. The City ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the
city as shall be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared
by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated
by the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid agreement with
any other political subdivision.
   (d)   Service as Mobile Support Team. All or any members of the city
organization may be designated as members of a Mobile Support Team created by
the director of the State ESDA as provided by law. The leader of such Mobile
Support Team shall be designated by the coordinator of the City ESDA
organization. Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a city employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the city while so serving, shall receive from the
state reasonable compensation as provided by law.
   (e)   Agreements with Other Political Subdivisions. The coordinator of ESDA
may negotiate Mutual Aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the
state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by
the City Council and by the State Director of ESDA.
   (f)   Emergency Action. If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency
exists in the event of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the
occurrence within the State of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from
enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from man-made or natural disaster,
it shall be the duty of the City ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA
and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
   (g)   Compensation. Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers
of the city, if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall
receive for the time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached
to the position held; members who are not such city employees or officers shall
receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the
City Council.
   (h)   Reimbursement by State. The State Treasurer may receive and allocate
to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the city for
expenses incident to training members of the ESDA prescribed by the State
Director of ESDA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a Mobile
Support Team while serving outside the city in response to a call by the
Governor or State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other
reimbursement made by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
   (i)   Purchases and Expenditures. The City Council may, or recommendation of
the city coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to
place the city in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from
the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the
public health and safety, protect, and provide emergency assistance to victims
in the case of such disaster, or from man-made or natural disaster.
   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the city coordinator of ESDA
is authorized on behalf of the city to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations.
   (j)   Oath. Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to an oath.
   (k)   Office. The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a building or
elsewhere, as may be provided for by the City Council for the City ESDA as its
office.
§ 3.31 BLOOD DONORS COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created the “Blood Donors Commission”.
   (b)   The commission shall consist of 6 members.
   (c)   All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the aldermen.
   (d)   The term of each member shall be for 6 years.
   (e)   All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any member may be removed from office by the Mayor on any formal
charge whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the City
demand removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City Council
at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after the
removal. Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should
the City Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to
be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office.
   (f)   The commission shall exercise the following powers and shall perform
the following duties:
      1.   Defining problems of blood donation in the City.
      2.   Developing programs to deal with and solve blood donation problems.
      3.   Examining present programs and encouraging new programs of other
governmental agencies and private agencies.
      4.   Utilizing public and private facilities for blood donation programs.
      5.   Disseminating public information on blood.
      6.   Serve as liaison with the American Red Cross.
      7.   Conduct and manage the City blood drives.
      8.   Cooperating with all governmental agencies in the coordination of
blood donation programs in the City.
      9.   Submitting an annual report in May of each year to the City Council
containing a synopsis of the past year’s activities together with
recommendations for the next fiscal year.
   (g)   The commission shall receive such annual appropriation as provided by
the City Council. The commission shall be empowered to solicit and receive
donations and grants from public and private resources. All such monies shall
be paid into the City treasury. The commission may expend such monies as are
approved by the City Council pursuant to procedures established thereby.
   (h)   The commission shall meet as they establish. Said meetings shall be
open to the public and shall comply with the open meetings law of the State.
The business of said meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order
unless the commission shall adopt its own rules of order. The commission shall
provide for its officers and the selection thereof.
§ 3.32 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (a)   The City shall, under the conditions, imposed herein:
      1.   Appoint counsel to appear and defend, or reimburse the fees of an
attorney who appears and defends; and
      2.   Pay all judgments, verdict, claims, and costs resulting from any
claim or lawsuit on behalf of any officer or employee of the City or any former
officer or employee of the City.
   (b)   The appointment of counsel, reimbursement for costs of counsel, and
payment of all judgments, shall be a matter of right, but shall cover only
those duties or actions committed by the employee or officer within the course
of employment within the scope of his duties, or by the nature of the office or
employment held if all conditions herein are met. The appointment of counsel to
defend or the reimbursement of other counsel shall be at the option of the City
Council.
   (c)   Any person desiring to avail themselves of the provisions of this
section must within 5 days after receiving a notice of claim, or summons,
whichever occurs first, notify the Mayor, City Council, and Attorney in writing
of the possible claim. Only claims by individuals other than City employees or
officers are covered by this section. Without limitation, this section does not
cover any claim against the City by an officer or employee, by the City against
any officer or employee, or by any fellow employee or officer against any
officer or employee.
   (d)   No person shall be entitled to any of the benefits of this section if
any action or inaction on his part was done with malice or willful misconduct,
where there is a finding of guilty against him in a criminal or quasi-criminal
action, or where there is a finding of malice or willful misconduct in any
civil action or civil rights action.
   (e)   The provisions of this section do not apply where there is insurance
coverage or where an insurance carrier appears and defends an action.
   (f)   No reimbursement for any attorney’s fees shall be paid until the City
Council is satisfied that the action being defended falls within the provisions
of this ordinance. Should attorney’s fees be reimbursed and the subsequent
decision of a court result in the employee or officer not being eligible under
the conditions of this section, then such monies shall be paid back to the City
within 30 days of a demand by the City. Any rate or fees paid to an attorney
shall have prior approval of the City, and reimbursement shall only be made at
such rate or fees as is approved by the City.
   (g)   No person who makes any settlement, compromise, or statement without
the knowledge of the City shall be eligible for any of the benefits of this
section.
   (h)   The provisions of this section shall apply to any lawsuit instituted
after the date of passage, or any claim or investigation instituted after the
date of its passage.
§ 3.33 COMMUNITY AFFAIRS COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created the “Community Affairs Commission”.
   (b)   The commission shall consist of 6 members.
   (c)   All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the aldermen.
   (d)   The term of each member shall be for 3 years.
   (e)   All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any member may be removed from office by the Mayor on any formal
charge whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the City
demand removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City Council
at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after the
removal. Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should
the City Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to
be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office.
   (f)   The commission shall exercise the following powers and shall perform
the following duties in planning and developing functions within the City of
Hickory Hills which include:
      1.   A comprehensive tree program which will assist our citizens in
obtaining trees to plant, also a tree planting program for City parkways, which
could be developed over a period of two to three years.
      2.   Be responsible for the holiday decorations on our main
thoroughfares.
      3.   Cooperate with all government agencies on all matters pertaining to
the planning of City functions by consulting department heads on the proper
procedures to follow.
      4.   Submit an annual report to the City Council each May containing a
brief outline of the past year’s activities and expenditures along with
recommendations for the next fiscal year.
   (g)   The commission shall receive such annual appropriations as provided by
the City Council. The commission shall be empowered to solicit and receive
donations and grants from public and private resources. All such monies shall
be paid into the City treasury. The commission may expend such monies as are
approved by the City Council pursuant to procedures established thereby.
   (h)   The commission shall meet as they establish. Said meetings shall be
open to the public and shall comply with the open meetings law of the State.
The business of said meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order
unless the commission shall adopt its own rules of order. The commission shall
provide for its officers and the selection thereof.
§ 3.34 RECYCLING COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created the “Recycling Commission”.
   (b)   The commission shall consist of 6 members.
   (c)   All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the aldermen.
   (d)   The term of each member shall be for 3 years.
   (e)   All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and
qualified. Any member may be removed from office by the Mayor on any formal
charge whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interest of the City
demand removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City Council
at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after the
removal. Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should
the City Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to
be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office.
   (f)   The commission shall exercise the following powers and shall perform
the following duties in developing programs to encourage the recycling and
reuse of materials in the City of Hickory Hills which should include:
      1.   Establishing a comprehensive recycling program with the cooperation
of scavenger companies servicing the City’s residential, multi-family,
commercial, and industrial uses.
      2.   Encouraging cooperation and developing programs with the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Department of Energy and
Natural Resources.
      3.   Promoting the aims and programs of the Solid Waste Planning and
Recycling Act, 415 ILCS 15.
      4.   Promoting public education and notification programs to foster
understanding of and encourage compliance with recycling programs.
      5.   Promoting the use of products made from recovered or recycled
materials.
      6.   Implementing recycling programs under any waste management plan
established by Cook County, the Southwest Conference of Local Governments or
the Southwest Cook County Solid Waste Advisory Committee.
      7.   Advising the City Council as to the expenditure of funds obtained
from the sale of recycled materials.
      8.   Submit an annual report to the City Council each may containing a
brief outline of the past year’s activities and expenditures, along with
recommendations for the next fiscal year.
   (g)   The commission shall receive such annual appropriations as provided by
the City Council. The commission shall be empowered to solicit and receive
donations and grants from public and private resources. All such monies shall
be paid into the city treasury. The commission may expend such monies as are
approved by the City Council pursuant to procedures established thereby.
   (h)   The commission shall meet as they establish. Said meetings shall be
open to the public and shall comply with the open meetings law of the State.
The business of said meetings shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order
unless the commission shall adopt its own rules of order. The commission shall
provide for its officers and the selection thereof.
§ 3.35 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD.
   (a)   There is hereby created the “Emergency Telephone System Board”
consisting of 7 members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the aldermen. The term of each member shall be for 3 years except that the
terms of the initial appointments shall be staggered so that 3 expire on May 1,
1995, 2 expire on May 1, 1994 and 2 expire on May 1, 1993. All members shall
possess the qualifications required under the Emergency Telephone System Act
(50 ILCS 750/0.01). The Mayor shall annually designate one of the members as
chairman.
   (b)   All members shall serve without compensation until their successors
are appointed and qualified. Any member may be removed from office by the Mayor
on any formal charge whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interest of
the City demand removal. He shall report the reason for the removal to the City
Council at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more than ten days after
the removal. Should the Mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or
should the City Council by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by
law to be elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to
office.
   (c)   The Board shall meet at least quarterly as they establish. Said
meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the Open Meetings
Act (5 ILCS 120/1.01). The business of said meetings shall be governed by
Robert’s Rules of Order unless the Board shall adopt its own rules of order.
The Board shall provide for its officers (except the Chairman) and the
selection thereof.
   (d)   The Board shall exercise the powers and shall perform the duties
authorized by the Emergency Telephone System Act including:
      1.   Planning a 9-1-1 system.
      2.   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems.
      3.   Receiving monies from the surcharge, and from any other source, for
deposit into the Emergency Telephone System Fund.
      4.   Authorizing all disbursements from the fund.
      5.   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system.
   (e)   The City Treasurer shall be custodian of the Emergency Telephone
System Fund. No expenditures may be made therefrom except upon approval of a
majority of all members of the Board. Expenditures may be made only to pay for
costs authorized under the Emergency Telephone System Act.
§ 3.36 SENIOR HOUSING COMMISSION.
   (a)   There is hereby created the “Senior Housing Commission” consisting of
three members, two of whom shall be the Aldermen of the First Ward and the
third shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Aldermen. Each member shall hold office for an indefinite term until their
successor is either elected or appointed. The Mayor shall designate one of the
members to serve as chairman. All members shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   The Commission shall meet as they shall establish, said meetings to be
open to the public and to comply with the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1.
   (c)   The City Council delegates to the Commission the right to exercise the
following powers of the City under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-29.3-1 with
respect to senior citizens housing:
      1.   To construct, manage, lease, reconstruct, improve, or rehabilitate
any real estate and to purchase or acquire personal property.
      2.   To employ or contract with others for management.
      3.   To accept grants, contributions, and gifts.
      4.   To charge rents and fees of tenants.
      5.   To enter into leases.
      6.   To expend municipal funds in the exercise of its powers hereunder
provided that any expenditure must be approved by a majority vote of the
Commission and all checks issued by the Commission must contain the signatures
of at least two of the three members.
      7.   To make all such contracts as may be necessary in the exercise of
its powers hereunder.
      8.   To issue a monthly report to the Treasurer of all funds received and
expended.
§ 3.37 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT (65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.).
   (a)   Establishment of Code Hearing Department. The City of Hickory Hills,
pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., hereby establishes a
Code Hearing Department to expedite the prosecution and correction of Code
violations. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
      1.   “Code” means any provision of the Municipal Code of the City of
Hickory Hills relating to or establishing construction, zoning, plumbing,
heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation, property maintenance or other
health or safety standards applicable to property or structures within the City
of Hickory Hills.
      2.   “Building Inspector” means any officer or employee of the City of
Hickory Hills whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures
or property in the City of Hickory Hills to determine whether a Code violation
exists.
      3.   “Property Owner” means the legal or beneficial owner of a structure,
or a person who contracts with the federal government, or any agency thereof,
to care for vacant residential real estate.
      4.   “Hearing Officer” means that person appointed to hear the
administrative adjudication of parking tickets as provided for in § 41.24(a) of
the Municipal Code of the City of Hickory Hills. The Hearing Officer shall have
all duties as provided for in 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1(d).
      5.   “Code Hearing Department” means the employees of the Hickory Hills
Police and Building Departments chosen by the Chief of Police and Building
Commissioner to process and maintain all records relating to the implementation
and enforcement of the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Instituting Code Hearing Proceedings. When a building inspector finds
a code violation while inspecting a structure, he shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address
of the structure owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time
the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the
address of the structure where the violation is observed. The violation report
form shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the Code Hearing
Department where a Docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report,
and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the
form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days after
the violation is reported by the building inspector. One copy of the violation
report form shall be maintained in the files of the Code Hearing Department and
shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be
returned to the building inspector so that he may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the report form shall be served by first class mail on the owner of the
structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing.
If the municipality in which the structure is situated has an ordinance
requiring property owners to register with the municipality, service may be
made on the owner by mailing the report and summons to the owner’s address
registered with the municipality. If the name of the owner of the structure
cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail,
service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation
report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found,
not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled.
   (c)   Subpoenas-Defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing
officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the building inspector
or the attorney for the City, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas
directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date
set for hearing the owners or his attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer
may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
   (d)   Continuances-Representation at Code Hearings. No continuances shall be
authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this section except in
cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the
owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this section shall not exceed
25 days. The case for the City may be presented by the building inspector, by
any other City employee or by an attorney designated by the City. However, in
no event shall the case for the municipality be presented by an employee of the
Code Hearing Department. The case for the dwelling owner may be presented by
the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative.
   (e)   Hearing Evidence. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-
existence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings
authorized by this Division.
   (f)   Eviction-Rights of the Occupants. No action for eviction, abatement of
a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding shall be
threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such
occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
   (g)   Defenses to Code Violation. It shall be a defense to a code violation
charged under this section if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or
representative proves to the hearing officer’s satisfaction that:
      1.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or
at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
      2.   The code violation has been caused by the current building occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations;
      3.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
   (h)   Findings, Decision, Order. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer’s
findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon
the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation
or dismissing the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a code
violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided
in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and
order shall be served on the owner within 5 days after they are issued; service
shall be in the same manner as the report form and summons are served pursuant
to subsection (b) above. Payment of any penalty or fine, and the disposition of
said monies, shall be in the same manner as provided for in the Municipal Code,
unless otherwise provided by the City Council.
   (i)   Review under Administrative Review Law. The findings, decisions and
orders of the hearing officer shall be subject to review under the
Administrative Review Law.
   (j)   Judgment on Findings. Any fine, cost, or other sanction imposed on a
property owner remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust,
judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law, or is affirmed
after appeal, shall be a debt due and owing the City of Hickory Hills and may
be collected in accordance with applicable law. The City may commence a
proceeding in the Circuit Court of Cook County for purposes of obtaining a
judgment on the finding, decision or order. The City of Hickory Hills is hereby
authorized to commence any such action in conformance with the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1 and the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. Any finding,
decision or order of the hearing officer shall attach to the property as well
as the property owner so that a finding of a code violation cannot be avoided
by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent
transferee or owner of the property takes subject to the finding, decision and
order of the hearing officer.
   (k)   Non-exclusivity of remedies. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, the City of Hickory Hills is not precluded from using any other
method authorized by law to enforce the provisions of its codes.
§ 3.38 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.).
   (a)   Establishment of Code Hearing Department. The City of Hickory Hills,
pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., hereby establishes a
code hearing department to expedite the prosecution and correction of any
violation of a municipal ordinance except for: building code violations that
must be adjudicated pursuant to the provisions of Section 3.37 of the Hickory
Hills Municipal Code; any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar
offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles; and
except for any reportable offenses under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
   “Code” means any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations
that must be adjudicated pursuant to section 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act and
(ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a
traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any
reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   “Hearing Officer” means a City employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
      1.   preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
      2.   hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
      3.   preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      4.   issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
   (b)   Hearing procedures not exclusive. The remedies provided for by this
section are not exclusive and the City has the option of prosecuting code
violations in any manner provided by law.
   (c)   Instituting hearing code proceedings. When a police officer or other
individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation to
exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice
and report form that indicates (i) the name and address of the defendant, (ii)
the type and nature of the violation, (iii) the date and time and the violation
was observed, and (iv) the names of the witnesses of the violation.
   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days
after the violation is reported.
   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
City in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code violation
for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the
report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a
summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing.
   (d)   Subpoenas; defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date, the
hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party,
direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date
set for the hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
   (e)   Continuances; representation at code hearings. No continuances shall
be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this section except
in cases where a continuance as absolutely necessary to protect the right of
the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this section shall not exceed
25 days. The case for the City may be presented by an attorney designated by
the City or by any other City employee, except that the case for the City shall
not be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for
the defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any
other agent or representative of the defendant.
   (f)   Hearing; evidence. At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside,
shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence
or non-existence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this section.
   (g)   Qualifications of hearing officers. Prior to conducting proceedings
under this section, the hearing officer shall successfully complete a formal
training program that includes the following:
      1.   instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
      2.   orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will administer;
      3.   observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
   In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois for at least three years.
   (h)   Findings, decision, and order. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision and order shall include (i) the hearing
officer’s findings of fact; (ii) a decision whether or not a code violation
exists based upon the findings of fact; (iii) and an order that states the
sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. A monetary
sanction for a violation under his section shall not exceed the amount provided
for in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be
served on the owner within 5 days after it is issued. Service shall be in the
same manner that the report form and summons are served under 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-
20. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be
in the same manner as provided by law.
   (i)   Review under Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision, and
order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of
the county in which the municipality is located. The provisions of the
Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision,
and order of a hearing officer under this section.
   (j)   Judgment on Findings.
      1.   A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the City and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the
code violation, the City may command a proceeding in the circuit court of the
county in which the City is located for purpose of obtaining a judgment on
findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City
from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in
such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the City shall file a
certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied
by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision, and order was issued in accordance with this section and the
applicable City ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition
may be by any method provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in
accordance with the requirements of this section and the applicable municipal
ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this
section and for judicial review as provided in this section:
         A.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the City and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
         B.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the City to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
§ 3.39 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (a)   Office Created, Appointment. There is hereby created the office of
Director of Public Safety who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Aldermen.
   (b)   Duties. The Director of Public Safety shall have the following duties:
      1.   Exercise direct charge and control over the Police Department, and
all personnel therein.
      2.   Act as liaison between Emergency Telephone System Board and the City
Council.
      3.   Act as liaison between the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
and the City Council.
      4.   Recommend budget expenditures to the Finance Committee for the
Police Department, the Emergency Telephone System Board, and the Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency.
      5.   Act as project manager for the construction of new police and
telecommunication facilities.
   (c)   Limitations. The Director of Public Safety shall not be a sworn police
officer or a conservator of the peace, shall not have the power of arrest and
shall not have authority to carry a concealed weapon.
   (d)   Compensation. The Director of Public Safety shall receive such
compensation and benefits as approved by the City Council.
§ 3.40 RACIAL OR GENDER PROFILING.
   It shall be unlawful for any employee, including any full-time, part-time or
auxiliary police officer, to engage in the practice of racial or gender
profiling while in the investigation or enforcement of any laws of the State of
Illinois or the City. For purposes of this Section, the term “racial or gender
profiling” shall mean any action taken during a traffic stop or the enforcement
of any law based upon racial, ethnic or gender stereotypes which has the effect
of treating that person differently than a non-minority person.
§ 3.41 ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   (a)   Definitions.   For purposes of this Section, the following terms shall
be given these definitions:
   “Campaign for elective office” means any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i)
relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that
are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   “Candidate” means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS
5/1-3).
   “Collective bargaining” has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   “Compensated time” means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
Section, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
“compensated time” includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   “Compensatory time off” means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   “Contribution” has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4
of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   “Employee” means a person employed by the Employer, whether on a full-time
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   “Employer” means the City of Hickory Hills.
   “Gift” means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
   “Leave of absence” means any period during which an employee does not
receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension
benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   “Officer” means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
   “Political activity” means any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining,
or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   “Political organization” means a party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk.
   “Prohibited political activity” means:
      1.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      2.   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      3.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      4.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      5.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      6.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      7.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      8.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      9.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      10.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      11.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      12.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      13.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      14.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      15.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   “Prohibited source” means any person or entity who:
      1.   is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      2.   does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii)
with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
      3.   conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      4.   has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
   (b)   Prohibited Political Activities.
      1.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the Employer
in connection with any prohibited political activity.
      2.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as
part of that officer or employee’s duties, (ii) as a condition of employment,
or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
      3.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the
form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in
any prohibited political activity.
      4.   Nothing in this paragraph (b) prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on
a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this paragraph (b).
      5.   No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for
which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the
Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to
grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure
solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of
a political party, or of a political organization or club.
   (c)   Gift Ban.
      1.   Except as permitted by this paragraph (c), no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or this paragraph (c). No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this paragraph (c).
      2.   The provisions of paragraph (c)(1) shall be not applicable to the
following:
         A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
         C.   Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election
Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
         D.   Educational materials and missions.
         E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         F.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée.
         G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
         H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on
the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For
the purposes of this Section, “catered” means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
         I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
         J.   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, “intragovernmental gift” means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and “inter-governmental gift” means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         K.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   Each of the exceptions listed above is mutually exclusive and independent of
every other.
      3.   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family
member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this paragraph (c)
if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
   (d)   Penalties.
      1.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of paragraph (b)
may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
      2.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of paragraph (c)
is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.
      3.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this Section to the local enforcement
authorities, the State’s Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
      4.   A violation of paragraph (b) shall be prosecuted as a criminal
offense by an attorney specially appointed by the Employer by filing in the
circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond
a reasonable doubt.
      5.   A violation of paragraph (c) may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney specially appointed by the Employer.
      6.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) is subject to discipline or
discharge.
CHAPTER 4: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
4.01   Creation
   
4.02   Chief of Police
   
4.021   Deputy Chief of Police
   
4.03   Fire and Police Commissioners
   
4.04   Appointment of Members
   
4.05   Police Pension Fund Members
   
4.06   Chief of Police, Duties
   
4.07   Members, Duties
   
4.08   Police Matron
   
4.09   Police Pension Board
   
4.10   Business Use of Auxiliary Police Services
   
4.11   Auxiliary Police Department
§ 4.01 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Police Department which shall consist of the Chief
of Police, one Deputy Chief of Police, six Lieutenants, four Sergeants,
nineteen Patrol Officers, and such other members as may be provided for by the
City Council. Appointment of a police officer holding a rank under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to the office of
Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police shall not create a vacancy in the
classified service rank.
§ 4.02 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (a)   Head of Department. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the
Police Department and have supervision over all other members thereof.
   (b)   Appointment. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (c)   Term. The Chief of Police shall be appointed for a term which shall
not exceed that of the Mayor at the time that the Chief is appointed. The Chief
of Police may be removed or discharged from office by the Mayor by filing of
reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or discharge shall not
become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the Mayor and City
Council.
   (d)   Compensation. The Chief of Police shall receive such salary and
expenses as authorized by the City Council.
§ 4.021 DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (a)   Position Established. The position of one Deputy Chief of Police is
hereby established. The Deputy Chief of Police position shall be an exempt rank
immediately below the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Appointment. The Deputy Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
Chief of Police from any rank of sworn, full-time officers who have at least
five years of full-time service as a police officer in the Hickory Hills Police
Department. Appointment of a Deputy Chief of Police shall not cause a vacancy
in the rank held by the officer so appointed.
   (c)   Term and Removal. The Deputy Chief of Police shall serve for an
indefinite term at the discretion of the Chief of Police and, if removed, shall
revert to the rank currently held without regard as to whether a vacancy exists
in that rank.
   (d)   Promotional Examination. The Deputy Chief of Police shall be
permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a
higher classified rank than currently held, without having to resign as Deputy
Chief of Police.
   (e)   Duties. The Deputy Chief of Police shall have supervision over all
members of the Police Department, except for the Chief of Police, and shall
exercise all the duties of the Chief of Police in the absence thereof.
(Ord. 21-2, passed 6-10-2021)
§ 4.03 FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, consisting of three members whose terms of office shall be 3
years and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
   (b)   Appointment. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council.
   (c)   Members. The members of the Board shall possess the qualifications
required of other officers of the city, shall take oath or affirmation of
office, and give bond in the same manner as other appointive officers of the
city.
   (d)   Rules. The Board shall make such rules and make such appointments and
removals except those herein reserved to the Mayor and Council.
   (e)   Secretary. The Board may employ a secretary or may designate one of
its members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the Board’s
proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the
Board, shall keep a record of all examinations held, and shall perform such
other duties as the Board shall prescribe.
   (f)   Powers and Duties. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be
invested with all of the powers and duties provided under Division 2.1 of
Article 10 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 4.04 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall appoint all officers and
members of the Police Department of the City of Hickory Hills except the Chief
of Police. All appointments made by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall be made from the rank next below that to which the appointment shall be
made, other than that of the lowest rank, and pursuant to qualifying
examinations as provided by law.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may waive its rules and appoint
any person as a full-time police officer who is certified by the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board, or another state law enforcement agency
certified by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board, who has
previously served as a full-time, sworn police officer in any municipal,
county, university, or state law enforcement agency for at least two (2) years
meeting the standards established by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training
Standards Board for out-of-state trained reciprocity. The applicant may be
given preference over candidates on the original eligibility list established
by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. The Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners is authorized to conduct a background investigation, medical
examination, psychological examination, oral interview, polygraph examination,
and any other examination to determine the applicant’s fitness for duty. The
City Council authorizes the Chief of Police to establish a level of
compensation for the applicant consistent with the provisions of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 12-8-2022; Ord. 24-08, passed 9-26-2024)
§ 4.05 POLICE PENSION FUND MEMBERS.
   All police officers appointed by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall join the Police Pension Fund.
§ 4.06 CHIEF OF POLICE, DUTIES.
   (a)   Command. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the
Police Department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the
Police Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
   (b)   Reports. He shall keep such records and make such reports concerning
the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the
Council.
   (c)   Keeper of Jail. The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the city
jail, and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
   (d)   Rules. The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules,
regulations, and orders as deemed necessary; in the conduct of the business of
the Police Department. All such rules, regulations, and orders shall conform to
the ordinances of the City, laws of the State of Illinois, and laws of the
United States. The City Council may change or invalidate any rule, regulation,
or order which it deems not in the best interest of the public health, safety
and welfare of the City.
   (e)   Lost Property. The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost,
abandoned or stolen property recovered in the city.
   (f)   Rewards. The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by any
member of the police force in the due discharge of his duty, may permit such
member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any
reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause of removal for
any member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice
thereof to the Chief of Police and without his permission.
§ 4.07 MEMBERS, DUTIES.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to
the enforcement of all the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable
therein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof.
   (b)   No member of the Police Department, except the Chief, shall serve any
process except on command of the Chief of Police.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times, and
to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey
the orders and directions of his superior.
   (d)   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever
this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any
state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service
as witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; any fees paid
for such services shall be turned over to the Chief, who shall deposit the same
with the City Treasurer.
   (e)   It shall be the duty of any member of the Police Department, when
ordered to do so by the proper authority, to deliver all calls of specially
called meetings of the City Council.
§ 4.08 POLICE MATRON.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Council, may appoint a police matron or
matrons, who shall perform such duties as may be assigned to her or them by the
Chief of Police or by the Mayor.
§ 4.09 POLICE PENSION BOARD.
   (a)   There shall be a Police Pension Board consisting of five members. Of
these members, two shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the
Council, to serve a term of two years each; two shall be elected from the
regular police force of the Council and one shall be elected from the
beneficiaries of the pension. Each member shall serve for two years and elected
members shall be selected in the manner provided by law.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Pension Board to
manage, invest, and control the Police Pension Fund and all monies pertaining
thereto in the manner provided by statute and to pay beneficiaries as provided
by law.
   (c)   There shall be deposited in the Police Pension Fund the amounts
provided for by statute.
§ 4.10 BUSINESS USE OF AUXILIARY POLICE SERVICES.
   (a)   All agencies, businesses, or individuals desiring or requiring
auxiliary police within the corporate limits of the City of Hickory Hills may
be furnished with such auxiliary police by assignment from the Chief of Police
after proper application therefor.
   (b)   All applications for auxiliary police shall be made in writing solely
to the Chief of Police and shall state the reasons or purposes therefor and the
area, date and time for which such are required.
   (c)   Applicants shall be billed for the services of such auxiliary police
by the Chief of Police.
§ 4.11 AUXILIARY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   There is hereby established an Auxiliary Police Department for the
City of Hickory Hills. Auxiliary police officers shall not be conservators of
the peace.
   (b)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint 20 auxiliary police
officers, with the advice and consent of the Council and in accordance with the
provisions of this section. The Auxiliary Police Department may be terminated
by the Council at the time there no longer exists a need for such a department.
   (c)   Auxiliary police officers shall be appointed for an indefinite term
and shall be considered as city employees. No person shall be appointed as an
auxiliary police officer if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime
involving moral turpitude.
   (d)   Any such appointed auxiliary police officers shall not be members of
the regular Police Department of the City of Hickory Hills. Identification
symbols and shoulder patches worn by such auxiliary police officers shall be
different and distinct from those used by the regular Police Department and
shall be selected and chosen from time to time by the Chief of Police.
Auxiliary police officers shall at all times during the performance of their
duties be subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police or others
that may be delegated this authority by the Council. Auxiliary police officers
may be discharged or suspended by the Mayor or Chief of Police and are not
entitled to any notice, hearing, or due process.
   (e)   Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties
when properly assigned and on duty:
      1.   To aid or direct traffic.
      2.   To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters.
      3.   To aid in case of civil disorder.
      4.   To aid in crowd control.
      5.   To assist in the observation and detention of prisoners.
      6.   To patrol and guard public facilities and grounds.
   (f)   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with the
permission of the Chief of Police on designated assignments while in uniform,
and then only if such officer has completed the required training promulgated
by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board.
   (g)   Prior to appointment or entering upon any of their duties, auxiliary
police officers shall be required to take a written and physical test and
attain a passing grade as established by the Chief of Police. A psychological
test may be required at the discretion of the Chief of Police, with the cost of
the test to be borne by the City of Hickory Hills. Auxiliary police officers
shall receive such training as required by State law.
   (h)   Auxiliary police officers shall be paid at the rate per hour for each
hour of service performed at the direction of the Chief of Police provided from
time to time. Auxiliary police officers may, at their discretion, and with the
approval of the Chief of Police, volunteer their services on a non-compensated
basis.
CHAPTER 5: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
5.01   Location
   
5.02   Dedication
   
5.03   Width of Streets
   
5.04   Parkways
   
5.05   Grade
   
5.06   Numbering Buildings
   
5.07   Supervision
   
5.08   Construction of Streets
   
5.09   Curb Construction
   
5.10   Injury to New Pavements
   
5.11   Repairs
   
5.12   Defects
   
5.13   Obstructions
   
5.14   Barricades
   
5.15   Disturbing Barricades
   
5.16   Signs on Pavement
   
5.17   Encroachments
   
5.18   Injury
   
5.19   Deposits on Streets
   
5.20   Merchandise on Streets
   
5.21   Drains
   
5.22   Poles and Wires
   
5.23   Excavations
   
5.24   Games/Skateboarding
   
5.25   Openings
   
5.26   Barbed Wire Fences
   
5.27   Driveways
   
5.28   Trees and Shrubbery
   
5.29   Sidewalk Construction
   
5.30   Culverts
   
5.31   Indemnification for Street Closures
   
5.32   Advertising Benches Prohibited
   
5.33   Bus Shelters
   
5.34   Conditions of Permit
   
5.35   Revocation of Permit
   
5.36   Advertising Benches on Private Property
   
5.37   Standards for the Construction of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way
   
5.38   Reserved
   
5.38   Obstruction of Public Areas
§ 5.01 LOCATION.
   All streets, public alleys and thoroughfares in the City of Hickory Hills
shall be the property of the city, under the control and management of the City
Council, and no additional streets or alleys shall be created, and no existing
streets or alleys shall be closed without the permission of the City Council.
§ 5.02 DEDICATION.
   When any plat is submitted to the City Council for approval or when any
portion of land is to be dedicated the city for a public thoroughfare, such
dedication or plat shall be accompanied by an instrument conveying full title
to the city instead of easement rights, in the portion to become a public
thoroughfare.
§ 5.03 WIDTH OF STREETS.
   (a)   All streets in the city shall be 66 feet wide with the following
exceptions:
      1.   95th Street, Roberts Road and 88th Avenue shall be 100 feet wide.
      2.   91st Street and 84th Avenue shall each be 80 feet wide.
      3.   Streets of different width may be permitted provided such width is
approved by the City Council.
   (b)   The curb line for streets 66 feet wide shall be a distance of 19 feet
from the middle of the street. The curb line for all other streets shall be set
by the City Engineer.
§ 5.04 PARKWAYS.
   (a)   The city hereby grants a revocable permission for each citizen to
beautify the portion of land owned by the city and located between his premises
and the adjoining curb line; providing, however, that no encumbrance other than
bushes, grass, flowers, trees, and decorative rocks may be established thereon.
Fences, fence posts, wires, and any other type of encumbrance is prohibited.
Such permission shall include all other rights of possession exercisable
against all but the representatives of the city acting in official capacity. An
action for trespass may be brought by the adjoining owner with regard to such
portion of land, exclusive of the area occupied by the public sidewalk.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of each person residing on property abutting on
the streets to maintain the area between his lot line and the curb line free
from weeds and other noxious herbage or matter. Any person notified by the
Director of Public Works to remove such offensive matter from the area fronting
upon his place of residence shall be fined not exceeding $20 for each day such
offense continues within 7 days after notification thereof.
§ 5.05 GRADE.
   Grade levels prevailing when this code is adopted shall be the official
grades for all thoroughfares flanked by one or more houses. In any block where
no houses are located, no grade level will be deemed to exist. Prior to
erection of any edifice in any block where no grade level is established, the
owner or contractor erecting such edifice shall make application to the City
Council for the establishment of a grade level. The term “grade level” with
regard to existing levels shall be understood to mean the crown of any
thoroughfare currently maintained by the city, country or state.
§ 5.06 NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   Each building in the city shall be designated by a number which number shall
be visible in the front thereof and be of such size and clarity as to be easily
read from the curb line of the street. A number shall be assigned to each
building by the Building Commissioner and shall be determined in accordance
with the numbering system currently prevailing in the City of Chicago, being an
extension thereof. The owner of any house or building in the city shall post
his number in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 5.07 SUPERVISION.
   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Public Works. He shall be charged with the
enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public places (except
traffic ordinances) and is authorized to enforce such ordinances.
§ 5.08 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
   (a)   Permit. It shall be unlawful to block, construct, or do any work on
any public streets, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same,
without a permit therefore. Application for such permit shall be made to the
Department of Public Works, and shall state the location of the intended
pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the
actual construction work.
   (b)   Bond. Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount of not less than
$10,000 with surety to be approved by the City Council, conditioned to
indemnify the city for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or
the manner of doing the same.
   (c)   Specifications. All streets and sidewalk pavements shall be made in
conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the
City Council.
§ 5.09 CURB CONSTRUCTION.
   All curbs shall be constructed with not less than a 6 bag cement mix and
shall contain two 5/8 inch continuous steel rods throughout their length.
§ 5.10 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by
a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly laid
pavement.
§ 5.11 REPAIRS.
   All public streets, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be kept in good
repair. Such repair work, whether done by the city or by abutting owner, shall
be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
§ 5.12 DEFECTS.
   It shall be the duty of every city officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the Director of Public Works as soon as possible.
§ 5.13 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Public Works.
§ 5.14 BARRICADES.
   (a)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricades shall be protected by lights at night time.
   (b)   Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any
such injury; and any person, properly maintaining any opening or excavation in
any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains
open by proper barricades and lights.
§ 5.15 DISTURBING BARRICADES.
   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in
any public street, alley or sidewalk.
§ 5.16 SIGNS ON PAVEMENT.
   No person shall write or mark any signs or advertisements on any pavement or
any other part of any street or a appurtenance thereon.
§ 5.17 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property.
§ 5.18 INJURY.
   No tractor, traction engine, motor truck or other similar vehicle shall be
operated across, over or along any street in the city if any such vehicle has
on the periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat,
ridge, lug, or any projection of metal or wood which projects radically beyond
the tread of traffic surface of the tire; except that this prohibition shall
not apply to tractors or traction engines equipped with what is known as
crawler type tractors, when the same does not contain any projections of any
kind likely to injure the surface of the road, nor to tractors, traction
engines and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels v-shaped,
diagonal or other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be continuously in
contract with the road surface. In no event shall the surface of any street be
used as an area or space for turning any tractor or other farm machinery in
carrying on or performing any farming operations upon the adjacent land. This
section does not prohibit the operation of tractors, traction engines or motor
trucks across any street in order to reach adjacent lands if the street is
protected by putting down solid planks or other suitable devices to prevent
such vehicle from injuring the surface of the street.
§ 5.19 DEPOSITS ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which
may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass, or
any articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.
§ 5.20 MERCHANDISE ON STREETS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or
other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise.
   (b)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width of the walk is not
thereby reduced to less than 4 feet; and provided that no such article shall
remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.
§ 5.21 DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley.
§ 5.22 POLES AND WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any
public street, alley or other public way without permission from the City
Council.
§ 5.23 EXCAVATIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to open cut, excavate, auger or tunnel in any
public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Director of Public Works,
and shall specify the intended location and purpose of the excavation.
   (b)   In each case the applicant shall agree to pay all of the cost of
restoring such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place and the surface
thereof to the condition that existed before the opening, excavation or tunnel
was made. No such permit shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with
the Director of Public Works the sum of $1,000 for each such opening,
excavation or tunnel, which such deposit shall be deposited by the applicant
and used by the city for the purpose of paying the cost of restoring such
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place and the surface thereof to the
condition that existed before the opening, excavation or tunnel was made,
provided that the applicant shall, in each case, do all necessary backfilling
or cause the same to be done.
   (c)   In restoring such street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, the
city may use its own employees and equipment and make reasonable charges
therefor, or it may engage the services of other persons and equipment and
charge the cost thereof to the applicant. Any balance of the deposit remaining
after the deduction of such charges or costs shall be returned to the
applicant, and any charges over the deposit, collected from said applicant. In
case the applicant shall restore said street to its original condition the
applicant shall be entitled to the return of his deposit after one year from
the date of application or restoration, whichever is later; otherwise the
deposit may be used as specified herein.
   (d)   No such permit shall be issued unless the applicant has on file with
the city and in full force and effect a bond in the amount of not less than
$10,000 with surety to be approved by the city, conditioned to indemnify the
city against any and all loss or liability resulting from the making of such
opening, excavations, or tunnel.
   (e)   All such openings, excavations, tunnels, refills and resurfacing shall
be made subject to the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
§ 5.24 GAMES/SKATEBOARDING.
   It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street or alley. It shall be
unlawful for any person to skateboard upon any street or alley.
§ 5.25 OPENINGS.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the City Council. All
such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover
or a railing, to the approval of the Director of Public Works.
§ 5.26 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
in part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury
to persons, or any wire charged with electric current, anywhere within 3 feet
of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way or place.
§ 5.27 DRIVEWAYS.
   (a)   Permit Required. No person shall construct a driveway on any private
or public property without having obtained a permit therefor. Application shall
be made to the Building Commissioner and a driveway permit fee shall be
required as per the schedule established by the Building Commissioner. No
driveway shall be constructed which impedes the natural drainage of storm
water. A driveway may only be constructed to access a garage. A driveway may
not be constructed for use solely as a parking area.
   (b)   Construction Materials. All driveways shall be constructed with a
paved surface such as asphalt, concrete, or paving bricks. Where a driveway
crosses a sidewalk, the driveway shall be constructed of concrete. Stone, dirt,
wood, and other materials are not permitted. Driveway materials and
construction methods must be approved by the Building Commissioner.
   (c)   Number of Driveways. No more than one driveway shall be allowed to
service any single-family residential property. Circular driveways are not
permitted except where the lot frontage is not less than 100 feet or where both
Aldermen and the Building Commissioner approve the construction of a circular
driveway. Except for an approved circular driveway, only one curb cut or
driveway is allowed to access a public street.
   (d)   Driveway Dimensions. The maximum width of a driveway on private
property shall be equal to the distance between the outer edges of the garage
doors being serviced by the driveway plus two feet on each side. Where there is
no garage being accessed, the maximum width of the driveway on private property
is 24 feet in width. The maximum width of a driveway on public property where
it accesses a street and crosses the sidewalk is 24 feet. All driveways must be
setback at least three foot from an adjoining property; provided that the
Building Commissioner can allow an administrative deviation, after consultation
with the Alderman of the Ward, to permit a driveway with a setback of not less
than one foot from the an adjoining property.
   (e)   Repair. All driveways shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions, holes, and openings.
   (f)   Parking Area. No person shall construct a parking area on any private
or public property without having obtained a permit therefor. All parking areas
shall be constructed with a paved surface such as asphalt, concrete, or paving
bricks. Parking areas are not permitted in the front yard setback except that
parking is permitted on a driveway.
   (g)   Maximum Automobile Parking. No more than 5 automobiles are allowed to
be parked outside on any single-family lot. No vehicle displaying dealer
license plates can park on residential property between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 9-26-2019; Ord. 21-11, passed 9-23-2021; Ord. 22-13, passed
9-22-2022)
§ 5.28 TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   (a)   Poplar and Cottonwood Trees Prohibited. No person shall plant or cause
to be planted in the city, any poplar or cottonwood trees as defined in this
section. A poplar tree is defined as any of a genus of slender, quick-growing,
salicaceous trees, also known as populus; a cottonwood tree is defined as a
tree of the poplar group with a cottony coma investing the seeds, also known as
populus balsamifera.
   (b)   Trimming. All trees kept, maintained, or cultivated in or near any of
the streets or public places of the city, the branches of which extend over a
sidewalk or street, shall be trimmed at least 7 feet above the ground so that
the branches thereof will not interfere with persons using the walks or
streets.
   (c)   Injury. It shall be unlawful to injure any trees or shrubs planted or
growing in any public place, except by permission of the Director of Public
Works.
   (d)   Advertisements or Notices. It shall be unlawful to attach any signs,
advertisements or notices to any tree or shrub in any such public place.
   (e)   Dangerous Trees. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to
fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the
abutting premises or of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The
Director of Public Works may trim any such tree or shrub or remove any such
tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage
shall be done away with.
   (f)   Wires. It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or
shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the City Council. Any person or company which maintains poles and
wires in the streets, alleys or other public places, shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from trees and shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible, and shall keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles
properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Director of Public Works,
so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs
and trees by their contact.
   (g)   Gas Pipes. Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe shall keep
such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to any trees
or shrubs.
   (h)   Repair. Sidewalks may be repaired at driveway crossings by the use of
asphalt pavement materials, provided that the Building Commissioner approves
the use and grade of said materials. In the event of sidewalk repairs, the
Building Commissioner may waive or reduce permit fees and bond requirements for
small repair jobs.
§ 5.29 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   Permit Required. No person shall build, rebuild, remove, repair or in
any manner disturb any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit from the
Building Commissioner specifying the work to be done. Any violation of the
terms of such permit shall render the same null and void. The permit fee shall
be 5 cents per square foot of surface of sidewalk to be constructed and all
permit fees shall be paid and bonds filed and approved before any permit shall
be issued.
   It shall be the duty of police officers and the Director of Public Works to
see to it that no such work shall be undertaken unless a permit therefor has
been obtained.
   (b)   Violations. Except where sidewalks are to be laid in accordance with
the provisions of special assessment or special taxation ordinances, it shall
be unlawful for any person to construct, lay or rebuild any sidewalk on any
portion of the public ways of the city otherwise than in compliance with the
specifications hereinafter prescribed. Each day that such sidewalk shall remain
so constructed, laid or rebuilt in violation of such specifications shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (c)   Grade Surface. The grade for the sidewalks shall be established by the
City Engineer. The grade and sub-grade for the sidewalks and the specifications
of materials used and mode of preparation shall be set by the City Engineer.
   (d)   Depth and Specification of Concrete. All sidewalks shall be
constructed of not less than a 6 bag cement mix and not less than 5 inches in
thickness, except that all commercial and multiple dwelling driveway sidewalks
shall be not less than 8 inches in thickness. All work on sidewalks shall be
laid out in stones of uniform size, each having a surface of not less than 24
square feet nor more than 36 square feet.
   (e)   Expansion Joints. Expansion joints shall be provided for by leaving a
space one-half inch wide between the walks and the curbs at street and alley
returns and spaces one-half inch wide at intervals of 40 feet in the sidewalk
proper.
   (f)   Markings on Sidewalk. Before the top or finishing of concrete walks
has set, the contractor or person building the walk shall place in such walk in
front of each lot or parcel of property a stamp or plate giving the name and
address of the contractor or person building the walk and the year in which the
work was done. The top of said plate or stamp which must not cover more than 54
square inches of surface, shall be flush and even with the top of the finished
walk, and must be of a permanent character plainly stamped or firmly bedded in
the concrete in such a manner that it cannot become loose or be easily removed
or defaced.
   Wherever one contractor or person has laid walks in front of three or more
adjoining lots or parcels of property in one continuous stretch, one of the
above name stamps placed in the walk at each end of said stretch of walk will
be sufficient.
   (g)   Bond. Each applicant, other than an owner or occupant, shall file a
bond with the City Clerk in the amount of $2,500, with surety to be approved by
the City Council conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage
resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. In addition
to the bond each person, other than an owner or occupant, shall deposit with
the city Clerk the cash sum of $250 to guarantee to the city and to reimburse
the city for water used, inspection fees, engineer’s fees, damage incurred to
streets or parkways, and permit fees; said sum may remain on deposit and be
used by said person to guarantee construction of sidewalks under permits issued
under this section. When the person certifies to the City Clerk that no other
construction of sidewalks in the city is intended by him, for a period of one
year from date of last permit, the sum may be returned, subject to any
deductions for the guarantee or reimbursement enumerated above. If the person
has deposited the sum of $250, under the driveway provisions of this chapter,
then said sum need not be deposited again if the person agrees said deposit
shall be applicable to sidewalks.
§ 5.30 CULVERTS.
   (a)   No person shall construct a driveway across any parkway on an improved
street in the city without installing a culvert under the driveway.
   (b)   The culvert shall be of 12 gauge galvanized material with beaded end
and of a minimum size of 15 inches in diameter and at least 24 feet in length.
   (c)   In the event that topography of any particular tract of land is such
that free flow of water through said culvert would be impaired by any of the
regulations of this section, variation may be granted on the recommendation of
the City Engineer provided the recommendation is approved by a resolution of
the City Council.
§ 5.31 INDEMNIFICATION FOR STREET CLOSURES.
   Whenever the City of Hickory Hills shall close a county road within the
city, the City of Hickory Hills shall indemnify, keep and save harmless the
county, its agents, officials and employees, against all injuries, deaths,
loss, damages, patent claims, which may in any way accrue against the county in
consequence of the granting by Cook County to the City of Hickory Hills
permission to close a county highway, or which may in anywise result therefrom,
whether or not it shall be alleged or determined that the act was caused
through negligence or omission of the City of Hickory Hills or its employees,
of the subcontractor or his employees, if any, or of the County of Cook or its
employees, and the City of Hickory Hills shall, at its own expense, appear,
defend and pay all charges of all attorneys and all costs and other expenses
arising therefrom or incurred in connection therewith, and, if any judgment
shall be rendered against the county in any such action, the City of Hickory
Hills shall, at its own expense, satisfy and discharge the same. The City of
Hickory Hills expressly understands and agrees that any insurance protection
required by Cook County shall in no way limit the responsibility to indemnify,
keep and save harmless and defend the county as herein provided.
§ 5.32 ADVERTISING BENCHES PROHIBITED.
   (a)   No person shall erect, place or maintain any advertising bench on any
public property, including public right-of-way within the City.
   (b)   No person shall erect, place or maintain any advertising bench on any
private property which does not advertise the activity or business located
thereon.
   (c)   No person shall erect, place or maintain any advertising bench on any
private property except as permitted by Chapter 28, Signs, of the Hickory Hills
Municipal Code.
   (d)   Advertising bench means any bench or seat upon which is placed any
advertising or message, but does not include a bus shelter.
§ 5.33 BUS SHELTERS.
   (a)   No person shall erect, place or maintain any bus shelter on any public
property, including public right-of-way within the City without having a valid
permit issued by the City.
   (b)   The City may award a permit and enter into an agreement for the
exclusive right to remove, construct, place and maintain bus shelters
throughout the City at such locations as designated by the Building
Commissioner for the convenience of patrons using public bus service.
§ 5.34 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   The rental permit shall be granted upon the following conditions:
   (a)   Within fourteen (14) days of the end of each permit year, the
permittee shall remove his advertising bench from the property of the City
unless the permittee has obtained another advertising bench rental permit for
the placement of the bench at its current location. In the event that the
permittee fails to remove said bench within the fourteen (14) day period, the
City may remove and store said bench and the permittee shall be responsible for
the City’s costs in removing and storing said bench.
   (b)   The permittee, upon the removal of an advertising bench, shall restore
the property of the City to the same condition as when the bench was initially
installed, ordinary wear and tear excepted.
   (c)   The permittee shall maintain the bench in good working order and in a
safe and clean condition and keep the immediate area surrounding such bench
free from litter and debris.
   (d)   The permittee shall save and hold the City harmless from any and all
liability for any reason whatsoever occasioned upon the bench and shall
furnish, at permittee’s expense, such public liability, insurance as will
protect permittee and the City from all claims for damage to property or bodily
injury, including death, which may arise from the operation under the permit or
in connection therewith and such policy shall name the City of Hickory Hills as
an additional insured, shall be in an amount not less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) combined single limit for any injury to persons and
damaged property, and shall provide that the insurance coverage shall not be
cancelled or reduced by the insurance carrier without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice to the City. A certificate of such insurance shall be provided
to the City and maintained before and during the installation of such benches.
   (e)   The permittee shall, with the payment of the permit fee and submittal
of the application, deposit with the City a removal and restoration cash bond
in an amount of $50 per bench or a surety bond in an amount of $200 per bench
which is the amount estimated to be sufficient to cover the total cost of
removing and storing each bench placed on public property hereunder plus the
cost to restore each site. Such bond is to provide that if the permittee fails
to remove and restore as required by subsections (a) and (c), the bond shall be
payable to the City for such removal, storing and restoration.
   (f)   Rental permits shall be for a term ending December 31 of a year, and
shall not be assignable.
   (g)   Each bench shall contain the name of the owner of said bench along
with an emergency phone number for said owner.
   (h)   If at any time an advertising bench is found located on any public
sidewalk, right-of-way or public way within the City, without a valid
advertising bench rental permit for said location, the City shall notify the
owner thereof, in writing, that said advertising bench must be removed. In the
event that said advertising bench is not removed within seven (7) days of the
date of the written notice to the owner thereof, the City may remove and store
said advertising bench and the owner thereof shall be responsible for the
City’s costs in removing and storing said advertising bench.
§ 5.35 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (a)   Rental permits may be revoked by the Building Commissioner after
notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement contained in the
application for such a permit.
      2.   Violation of any provision of ordinance regulating such rental
permit;
      3.   Violation of the terms of the rental permit granted.
   Notice of hearing for such a revocation shall be given in writing stating
the grounds of the complaint together with the time and place of hearing and
shall be mailed postage prepaid to the permittee at the address given in the
rental permit application at least five (5) days prior to the date set for
hearing.
   (b)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Commissioner in
revoking a rental permit shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal including a statement
of the grounds for the appeal with the Building Commissioner within ten (10)
days after notice of the decision by the Building Commissioner has been given.
The City Council shall set the time and place for hearing such appeal and
notice of such time and place shall be given in the same manner as specified
hereinabove. The City Council shall have the power to reverse, affirm, or
modify the decision of the Building Commissioner and any such decision made by
the Building Commissioner shall be final. In the event that no appeal is taken
from the City Administrator’s decision to revoke a rental permit, the owner of
the bench for which the permit has been revoked shall have ten (10) days from
the final date for filing an appeal in which to remove said bench from the
City. In the event that an appeal is filed and the City Council upholds the
decision of the Building Commissioner to revoke a rental permit, the owner of
the bench for which the permit has been revoked shall have ten (10) days from
the date of the City Council’s decision in which to remove said bench from the
City. In the event that the owner of the bench, in either of the above two (2)
situations, fails to remove the bench as required, in the ten (10) day period,
the City may remove and store said bench and the owner of said bench shall be
responsible for the City’s cost in removing and storing said bench.
§ 5.36 ADVERTISING BENCHES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Any advertising bench located on private property shall, for purposes of
this Code, be considered an advertising sign subject to the rules, regulations,
permit requirements and fees applicable to signs and advertising structures.
§ 5.37 STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities in rights-of-way located within the
City, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the
integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the rights-of-way and the City
as a whole.
   (b)   Intent. In enacting this Section, the City intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the City and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities and wireless providers, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by utility and small wireless
facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
City’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the City’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   (c)   Facilities Subject to This Section. This Section applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this Section may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (d)   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The City, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-of-
way. Utilities or wireless providers that are not required by law to enter into
such an agreement may request that the City enter into such an agreement. In
such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this Section.
   (e)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
      (1)   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this Section and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (f)   Conflicts with Other Sections. This Section supersedes all provisions
of the Code adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
   (g)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Section, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this Section to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
   (h)   Sound Engineering Judgment. The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this Section and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this Section when the City so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City
to regulate rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (i)   Definitions. As used in this Section and unless the context clearly
requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 I.A.C. § 530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   “AASHTO” means American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
   “ANSI” means American National Standards Institute.
   “Antenna” means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   “Applicable Codes” means the uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   “Applicant” means a person applying for a permit under this Section.
   “Application” means a request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to install a facility, or a request by a wireless provider to install a
new utility pole for collocation purposes.
   “ASTM” means American Society for Testing and Materials.
   “Backfill” means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.
   “Bore” or “Boring” means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for
the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   “Cable Operator” means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   “Cable Service” means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   “Cable System” means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   “Carrier Pipe” means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   “Casing” means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   “City” means the City of Hickory Hills.
   “Clear Zone” means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist
of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-
out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds,
and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.
   “Code” means the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.
   “Collocate” or “Collocation” means to install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
   “Communications Service” means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522
(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as
amended; mobile services, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
   “Communications Service Provider” means a cable operator, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   “Conductor” means wire carrying electrical current.
   “Conduit” means a casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   “Construction” or “Construct” means the installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in
place of facilities.
   “Cover” means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
   “Crossing Facility” means a facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.
   “Director of Public Works” means the Director of Public Works of the City,
or designee.
   “Disrupt the Right-of-Way” means, for the purposes of this Section, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   “Emergency” means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   “Encasement” means provision of a protective casing.
   “Engineer” means the City Engineer, or designee.
   “Equipment” means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.
   “Excavation” means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.
   “Extra Heavy Pipe” means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.
   “Facility” means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Section.
For purposes of this Section, the term “facility” shall not include any
facility owned or operated by the City.
   “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   “Fee” means a one-time charge.
   “Freestanding Facility” means a facility that is not a crossing facility or
a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   “Hazardous Materials” means any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined
by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to
the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance
of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   “Highway” means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. “Highway” includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   “Historic District” or “Historic Landmark” means a building, property or
site or group of buildings, properties or sites that are either: (i) listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.2.a.i. through Section VI.D.l.a.v. of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement, codified in 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   “Holder” means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401 et seq.
   “IDOT” means Illinois Department of Transportation.
   “ICC” means Illinois Commerce Commission.
   “Jacking” means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.
   “Jetting” means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure
to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   “Joint Use” means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities or wireless providers.
   “J.U.L.I.E.” means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.
   “Law” means a federal or state statute, common law, code rule, regulation,
order or local ordinance or resolution.
   “Major Intersection” means the intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.
   “Micro Wireless Facility” means a small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   “Municipal Utility Pole” means a utility pole owned or operated by the City
in public rights-of-way.
   “Occupancy” means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   “Parallel Facility” means a facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
   “Parkway” means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.
   “Pavement Cut” means the removal of an area of pavement for access to
facility or for the construction of a facility.
   “Permit” means a written authorization required by the City to perform an
action or initiate, continue or complete a project.
   “Permittee” means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
Subsections (l) through (x).
   “Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust or other entity or organization.
   “Petroleum Products Pipelines” means pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   “Practicable” means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.
   “Pressure” means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   “Public Safety Agency” means the functional division of the federal
government, the State, a unit of local government or a special purpose district
located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority
to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services
to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   “Rate” means a recurring charge.
   “Restoration” means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   “Right-of-Way” or “Rights-of-Way” means the area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement
dedicated for compatible use. “Right-of-Way” does not include City-owned aerial
lines.
   “Roadway” means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
   “Sale of Telecommunications at Retail” means the transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   “Security Fund” means that amount of security required pursuant to
Subsection (oo)-(uu).
   “Shoulder” means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   “Small Wireless Facility” means a wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-
off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
   “Sound Engineering Judgment” means a decision consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
   “Telecommunications” includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-war or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
“Telecommunications” shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications”
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. “Telecommunications” shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the City through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended.
   “Telecommunications Provider” means any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
   “Telecommunications Retailer” means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   “Trench” means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of
an underground facility.
   “Utility” means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this Section, except that, for purposes of this Section, utility
shall not include a wireless provider collocating, or applying for a permit to
collocate, a small wireless facility in the right-of-way.
   “Utility Pole” means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control or a similar function.
   “Vent” means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.
   “Video Service” means that term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   “Water Lines” means Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   “Wet Boring” means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
   “Wireless Facility” means equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under or
within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireless backhaul facilities,
coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or
utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
   “Wireless Infrastructure Provider” means any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   “Wireless Provider” means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider seeking to collocate or already collocating a small wireless
facility in the City’s right-of-way.
   “Wireless Services” means any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   “Wireless Services Provider” means a person who provides wireless services.
   “Wireless Support Structure” means a freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
   (j)   Annual Registration Required. Every utility or wireless provider that
occupies right-of-way within the City shall register on January 1 of each year
with the Director of Public Works, providing the utility’s or wireless
provider’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility or
wireless provider in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s or
wireless provider’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone
number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in
Subsections (ff) and (gg), in the form of a certificate of insurance.
   (k)   Annual Recurring Rate for Wireless Providers. A wireless provider that
collocates a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole located in the
right-of-way shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate that equals: (1)
$200 per year or (2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider’s use of space on the municipal utility pole. If the City has
not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the foe shall be $200
payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of
the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary
date thereafter.
   (l)   Permit Required. No person shall construct any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-of-way which (1) changes
the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-
of-way, or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and
obtaining a permit from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
Section. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (m)   Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
Section shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (n)   Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility, wireless provider or duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s or wireless provider’s name and address and telephone
and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility or
wireless provider, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility or wireless provider has placed on file
with the City:
         (i)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (ii)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
Section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in Subsections (ff) and (gg);
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Subsections
(oo)-(uu);
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one of the provisions of this
Section; and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
   (o)   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities
or Wireless Providers. In addition to the requirements of Subsection (n) of
this Section, the permit application shall include the following items, as
applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District have been satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (p)   Consolidated Applications for Small Wireless Facilities. An applicant
seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
City shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated
application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same
type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
   (q)   Applicant’s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility or wireless provider in writing to the City within 30
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (r)   Utility Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
Section shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $1,000. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 645.
   (s)   Wireless Provider Application Fees. The following fee schedule shall
apply to applications by wireless providers to install small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way:
      (1)   Applicants shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicants shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   The City will not impose fees on wireless providers for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with the requirements of this Section.
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   (t)   Application Fees Nonrefundable. Notwithstanding any contrary provision
of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this Section shall be
accompanied by the required application fee. Application fees shall be
nonrefundable.
   (u)   City Review of Utility Permit Applications. Completed permit
applications for utility facilities which contain all required documentation,
shall be examined by the Director of Public Works within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of
Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this Section and applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this Section.
   (v)   City Review of Wireless Provider Permit Applications. The City shall
process applications by wireless providers to collocate small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way as follows:
      (1)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different small wireless facility applicants for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (2)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the City shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the City’s permit application
form are submitted by the applicant to the City. Processing deadlines are
tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to the time
the applicant provides the missing information.
      (3)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
City in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner
than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall
be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the
complete application or the 10th day after receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not
preclude the City’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as
provided under this Subsection.
      (4)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete
application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
City’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under
this Subsection.
      (5)   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this Section. If the City determines that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the requirements of
this Section, require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be
replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider. The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
City denies an application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified
by the City and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional
application fee. The City shall approve or deny the revised application within
30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees and
result in recommencement of the City’s review period.
      The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application. Any review of a revised application shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial, except in cases in which the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
      (6)   Within 30 days after an approved permit to collocate a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the City and the applicant shall
enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement provided by the City for the
initial collocation on a municipal utility pole. For subsequent approved
permits to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
City and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole
Attachment Agreement.
      (7)   The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City;
or
         b.   A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
   (w)   Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications
Retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4,
a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence
work governed by this Section for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
(i) 10 days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
(ii) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the
case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this Section.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to Subsection (w)(1) the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of Subsection (n).
   (x)   Additional City Review of Applications of Holders of State
Authorization Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided the
holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations.
   (y)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A
permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this Section on any right-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (z)   Duration of Utility Permits. No permit issued under this Section shall
be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is
actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
   (aa)   Duration of Small Wireless Facility Permits. Wireless providers must
complete collocation of small wireless facilities within 180 days after the
issuance of a permit therefor, unless the City and the wireless provider agree
to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal
utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the
site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after
issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City
grants an extension in writing to the applicant. Permits for small wireless
facilities which are constructed within the foregoing timeframes shall be for a
period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless
facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with applicable
City codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this
Section.
   (bb)   Pre-construction Meeting Required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this Section prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the City with
such City representatives in attendance as the City deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the
area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities,
use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress
by adjacent property owners.
   (cc)   Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the
City does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the City and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   (dd)   Revised Permit Drawings. In the event that the actual locations of
any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in
the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application,
the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City
within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings
or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this Section, it shall
be treated as a request for variance. If the City denies the request for a
variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-
of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit
revised drawings or plans therefor.
   (ee)   Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities. The following requirements
and conditions shall only Apply to collocation of small wireless facilities, as
defined by this Section:
      (1)   Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities are permitted uses in the
City’s rights-of-way as long as such facilities meet the requirements of this
Section or have obtained a variance from the City for any non-compliance with
this Section.
      (2)   Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (3)   Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe condition
and in good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of
this Section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (4)   Make-Ready Requirements for Utility Poles with no Aerial
Facilities. The City may require make-ready work on an existing utility pole to
ensure structural integrity, compliance with an approved City plan, or to
comply with any ordinance, law or regulation. The City will not require more
make-ready work than required to meet applicable codes or industry standards,
Make-ready work may include work needed to accommodate additional public safety
communications needs that are identified in a documented and approved plan for
the deployment of public safety equipment as specified and included in an
existing or preliminary City or public service agency plan. Fees for make-ready
work, including any municipal utility pole attachment, shall not exceed actual
costs or the amount charged to communications service providers for similar
work and shall not include any consultants’ fees or expenses for municipal
utility poles that do not support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric service. Make-ready work, including any
pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of
the good-faith estimate by the City at the wireless provider’s sole cost and
expense.
      (5)   Make-Ready Requirements for Utility Poles which Support Aerial
Facilities. For municipal utility poles that support aerial facilities used to
provide communications services or electric services, a wireless provider shall
comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. § 224 and its
implementing regulations. Wireless providers shall follow a substantially
similar process for such make-ready work except to the extent that the timing
requirements are otherwise addressed by this Section. The good-faith estimate
of the person owning or controlling City’s utility pole for any make-ready work
necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation shall include
municipal utility pole replacement, if necessary. Make-ready work for utility
poles that support aerial facilities used to provide communications services or
electric services may include reasonable consultants’ fees and expenses.
      (6)   No Interference with Public Safety Communication Frequencies. The
wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 C.F.R. §§
22.970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672 through 90.675. The City may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal
Regulations. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.
      (7)   Electric Distribution or Transmission Systems. The wireless
provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on municipal utility
poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within
the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of
the pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the municipal utility
pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this section, the terms “communications space”, “communication
worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to
those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (8)   Compliance with Public Safety Codes. The wireless provider shall
comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
      (9)   Compliance with Written Design Standards. The wireless provider
shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for
decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic
requirements that are set forth in any City ordinance, written policy adopted
by the City, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to
other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.
      (10)   Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Section, a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities
on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation which
the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
      (11)   Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless
facility shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless
support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. New or
replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
City, provided the City may designate which intersecting right-of-way within
300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
      (12)   Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility has proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in Subsection (nnnn)-(rrrr) of this Section.
      (13)   Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (ff)   Required Insurance Coverages and Limits for Utilities. Unless
otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility
occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall
secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the
utility as named insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the
policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         (i)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         (ii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and
         (iii)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one minion dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
      (3)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
      (4)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
   (gg)   Required Insurance Coverages and Limits for Wireless Providers.
Wireless providers shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Worker’s compensation insurance, required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the right-of-way to afford minimum protection limits in the
amounts described in Subsection (ff)(1)(i)-(iii) above.
   The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on a
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the
collocation of any small wireless facility.
   (hh)   Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (ii)   Copies Required. The utility or wireless provider shall provide
copies of any of the policies required by this Section to the City within ten
(10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
   (jj)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages. The insurance policies
required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City,
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility or
wireless provider shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
   (kk)   Self-Insurance. A utility or wireless provider may self-insure all or
a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
Subsections (ff) and (gg) of this Section. A utility or wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under Subsections
(ff) and (gg), or the requirements of Subsections (hh), (ii) and (jj) of this
Section. A utility or wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
Subsections (ff) and (gg) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility or
wireless provider is a “private self insurer” under the Workers Compensation
Act, 820 ILCS 305/1.
   (ll)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s or Wireless
Provider’s Liability. The legal liability of the utility or wireless provider
to the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   (mm)   Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this Section
shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
   (nn)   Indemnification. By occupying or constructing facilities in the right
of-way, a utility or wireless provider shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the City and its elected and appointed officials and
officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any
and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-
way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such
acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Section or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s
or wireless provider’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Section by
the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
   (oo)   Security/Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this Section;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by
the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this Section; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages; claims,
costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this Section including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this Section to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to
this Section or any other applicable law.
   (pp)   Security Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
City in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant
to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
City and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Provide a location convenient to the City and within the State of
Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (qq)   Security Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-
of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates
are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be
performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior
to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the
permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each
phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for
phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this Subsection for any single phase.
   (rr)   Security Withdrawals. The City, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance
written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from the
Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such
amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if
the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this Section that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (ss)   Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
Subsection (qq) of this Section.
   (tt)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the City,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in Subsection (qq) of this Section.
   (uu)   Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
Section or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (vv)   Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by this Section or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
   (ww)   Permit Suspension and Revocation. The City may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this Section for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this Section;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (xx)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The City shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
   (yy)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal to the
City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
   The City may, in its discretion for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this Subsection.
   (zz)   Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within Subsection (ww)
of this Section.
   (aaa)   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee
fails to comply with the provisions of Subsection (yy) of this Section, the
City or its designee may, at the option of the City: (1) correct the
deficiencies; (2) upon not less than 20-days’ notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30-days’ notice
to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City
for all costs of removal.
   (bbb)   Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status. A utility
or wireless provider shall notify the City no less than 30 days prior to the
transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity
of the utility or wireless provider. The new owner of the utility, wireless
provider or facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by
the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this Section, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (ccc)   Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City’s right-of-
way.
   (ddd)   Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding
must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
   (eee)   General Construction Standards and Principles. All construction in
the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 I.A.C. §
545);
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (fff)   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required
by this Section, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard
or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
   (ggg)   Traffic Control Minimum Requirements. The City’s minimum
requirements for traffic protection are contained in the Illinois Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Code.
   (hhh)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility or
wireless provider is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal,
state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s
workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (iii)   Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (jjj)   Notice When Access is Blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
Subsections (kkkk), (llll) and (mmmm), the utility or wireless provider shall
provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   (kkk)   Compliance. The utility or wireless provider shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the utility’s attention by the City.
   (lll)   Location of Facilities and General Requirements. In addition to
location requirements applicable to specific types of facilities, all
facilities, regardless of type shall be subject to the general location
requirements of this subsection.
      (1)   No Interference with City Facilities. No facilities shall be placed
in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the proposed
location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the City’s
utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the City’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No Interference with Travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No Limitations on Visibility. No facility shall be placed in any
location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
(mmm)   Size of Utility Facilities. The proposed installation of utility
facilities shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures,
power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless
of location, for the particular application. Small wireless facilities shall
comply with the size limitations as described in Subsection (ee) of this
Section.
(nnn)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
      (1)   Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (i)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (ii)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (iii)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (iv)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (v)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (i)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (ii)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (iii)   In the case of an underground power or communications line,
the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and
not more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line or as near as practicable.
   (ooo)   Facilities Crossing Highways.
      (1)   No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or
as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (i)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
I.A.C. § 305);
         (ii)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (iii)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (i)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (ii)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs
is provided in the initial installation
      (6)   Markers. The City may require the utility or wireless provider to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other
than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the utility or wireless provider, and an
emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current
Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)).
   (ppp)   Utility Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way.
The City may require that utility facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (qqq)   Freestanding Utility Facilities.
      (1)   The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
utility facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The City may require any freestanding utility facility located
within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (rrr)   Utility Facilities Installed Above Ground. Above ground utility
facilities may be installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (sss)   Utility Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
      (1)   Utility facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means
of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include,
but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the
bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (i)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (ii)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (iii)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (iv)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (v)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (vi)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and
painting;
         (vii) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (viii) The public benefit expected from the utility service as
compared to the risk involved.
   (ttt)   Appearance Standards.
      (1)   The City may require that utilities or wireless providers install
screening or otherwise camouflage facilities in particular locations in order
to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   (uuu) Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction
Methods.
      (1)   Boring or Jacking.
         (i)   Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (ii)   Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (iii)   Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (iv)   Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (v)   Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the City to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
         (i)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         (ii)   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (iii)   Drip Line of Trees. The utility or wireless provider shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (i)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (ii)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility or wireless provider shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility or
wireless provider, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill
material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to
the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph is
permitted, the following requirements shall apply:
         (i)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         (ii)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
         (iii)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (iv)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (i)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
City.
         (ii)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (iii)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement
shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe
shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (iv)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (v)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
(1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
(2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (vi)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                      MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines                        30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service 18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by
Lines                                 City
Gas or Petroleum Products             30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                            Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                      Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or       Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
Drainage Line                         Protection
 
   (vvv)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
      (1)   Electric Power or Communication Lines.
         (i)   Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within a right-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 I.A.C. Part 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (ii)   Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities and wireless providers shall make every reasonable
effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires
are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (iii)   Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by
trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in
order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2)
If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (a) the
crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or
(b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior
to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         (iv)   Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities or
wireless providers shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within
ten (10) business days after placement.
      (2)   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication
Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (i)   the use of”moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (ii)   jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (iii)   open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch
lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (iv)   tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 C.F.R.
part 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,”
and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or
Drainage Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.”
      (6)   Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (www)   Materials.
      (1)   General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material Storage on Right-of-Way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the City.
      (3)   Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility or wireless
provider to the City shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
   (xxx)   Operational Restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
are those set forth for the construction of buildings as provided in the Code.
   (yyy)   Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility or wireless provider
proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and
ascertain the presence and location of existing above ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
The City will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of
identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the City or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility or wireless provider shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground
Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
   (zzz)   Vegetation Control - Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws
and Regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable
Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or
other agreement with the City as permitted by law.
   (aaaa)   Other Utilities or Wireless Providers - Tree Trimming Permit
Required. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility or wireless provider
with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to
applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not
be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this Section.
      (1)   Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (bbbb)    Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The City may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (cccc)    Chemical Use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility or
wireless provider shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs or vegetation in the City for any purpose, including the control
of growth, insects or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility or wireless provider demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control.
   (dddd)   Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Facilities - Notice.
Within 90 days following written notice from the City, a utility or wireless
provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon, the
rights-of-way.
   (eeee)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the City, any utility or wireless provider that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this Section; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (ffff)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility or wireless
provider, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
     (gggg)   Wireless Provider Options upon Removal of a Municipal Utility
Pole. The City may eliminate above-ground utility poles as long as such
decision is made on a non-discriminatory basis. In the event the City chooses
to eliminate a utility pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated,
the City will either: (1) install and maintain a reasonable alternative utility
pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of the small wireless
facility; or (2) offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost; or (3) allow the wireless provider to install its own utility
pole so it can maintain service from that location.
   (hhhh)   Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within
the rights-of-way of the City, the utility or wireless provider shall notify
the City within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the City may direct
the utility or wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the facility
if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
City does not direct the utility or wireless provider that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the City, the
abandoning utility or wireless provider shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility,
wireless provider or person.
   (iiii)   Deemed Abandonment of Small Wireless Facilities. A small wireless
facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless
facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying
the wireless provider of the abandonment.
   (jjjj)   Clean-Up and Restoration. The utility or wireless provider shall
remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property
within 10 days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or
destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility or wireless
provider, all to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup
and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this Section may be extended by the
Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
   (kkkk)   Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance. Facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or
for the utility or wireless provider in a manner satisfactory to the City and
at the utility’s or wireless provider’s expense.
   (llll)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility or wireless provider shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (mmmm)   Emergency Repairs. The utility or wireless provider must file in
writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-
way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
   (nnnn)   Request for Variance. A utility or wireless provider requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this Section must do so in
writing to the Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application.
The request shall identify each provision of this Section from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (oooo)    Authority to Grant Variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this Section
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (pppp)   Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Director of Public Works
may authorize a variance only if the utility or wireless provider requesting
the variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line)
create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (qqqq)   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition
for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the
utility or wireless provider requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
Section but which carry out the purposes of this Section.
   (rrrr)   Right to Appeal. Any utility or wireless provider aggrieved by any
order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance,
made by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this Section shall
have the right to appeal to the Mayor. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such
order, requirement, decision or determination. The Mayor shall commence his
consideration of the appeal by offering a hearing not less than 14 days after
receipt of the appeal and shall make a final decision within 7 days after such
hearing.
   (ssss)   Dispute Resolution for Small Wireless Facilities. The Circuit Court
of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes
arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, 50 ILCS 840/1.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on the City’s utility poles within the right-of-way, the
City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on the poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
   (tttt)   Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of Section
1.06 of the Code. There may be times when the City will incur delay or other
costs, including third party claims, because the utility or wireless provider
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Section. Unless
the utility or wireless provider shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility or wireless
provider shall bear the City’s costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be
imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
   (uuuu)   Enforcement. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting
any additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of
this Section.
   (vvvv)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase
or portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 18-13, passed 8-23-2018)
§ 5.38 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC AREAS.
   (a)   No person shall obstruct any portion of a street, public right-of-way,
sidewalk, parkway, public park, detention pond, or outdoor recreational
facility by sitting, lying, or sleeping; or by storing, using, maintaining, or
placing personal property in a manner that impedes passage thereof.
   (b)   No person shall obstruct any public area within 250 feet of a sign
that has been placed declaring the property an "Obstruction Free Zone Within
250 Feet" by sitting, lying, or sleeping; or by storing, using, maintaining, or
placing personal property in a manner that impedes passage thereof.
(Ord. 25-11, passed 7-10-2025)
CHAPTER 6: WATER SERVICE
Section
   
6.01   Department of Public Works
   
6.02   Jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works
   
6.03   Director of Public Works
   
6.04   Meter Readings
   
6.05   Connections to Water System
   
6.06   Unlawful Tampering with Waterworks System
   
6.07   Use of Hydrants
   
6.08   Meters
   
6.09   Access to Premises
   
6.10   Water Rates
   
6.11   Required Use of Water
   
6.12   Delinquent Charges
   
6.13   Responsibility for Water Registered by Meter
   
6.14   Notice of Lien
   
6.15   Tapping Water Mains, Cost
   
6.16   Fees for Water Connection Permits
   
6.17   Installation of Service Pipes
   
6.18   Inspection and Approval of Service Pipes
   
6.19   Water Meters Required
   
6.20   Use of Plumber’s Name
   
6.21   Water Meter Tampering Charge
   
6.22   Accounts
   
6.23   City Liability
   
6.24   Rules and Regulations
   
6.25   Fire Connection Privilege
   
6.26   Police Duties
   
6.27   Outdoor Water Use Restrictions
   
6.28   Water Repairs and Maintenance
   
6.29   Use of Well Water Prohibited
§ 6.01 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The waterworks system in the City of Hickory Hills shall be maintained and
operated by the Department of Public Works.
   A charge shall be made to the residents of the city which shall be
reasonable for the use and service of such waterworks and such charges or rates
for that purpose shall be established, and such rates shall be sufficient to
pay the costs, maintenance, operation, depreciation and payment of the
principal and interest on any revenue bonds that may be issued by the city for
the construction, installation, repairing and improving of the system.
§ 6.02 JURISDICTION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Department of Public Works, under the direction of the Director of
Public Works and such other officers and employees as may be from time to time
appointed, shall have the supervision, management and control, subject to the
City Council, of the maintenance, enlargement and operation of the waterworks
system owned and controlled by the city, the procuring and selling of water,
and all matters and things connected with the operation, maintenance and
extension of the waterworks system, including the establishment of restrictions
on sprinkling within the city, and preserving the property belonging thereto.
The Director and Assistant Director of the Department of Public Works shall
have the authority to issue and serve citations on all persons and entities, as
the case may be, for violating the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6.03 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works shall have the supervision over all buildings
and equipment used in the furnishing of water in the city and shall see that
the object and purposes of the Department of Public Works are carried out, and
that the waterworks system is conducted on an economical, businesslike basis.
For this purpose it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works and all
of the officers, employees and servants of said department to enforce all the
provisions of this chapter and to observe and obey and carry out the orders and
directions of the City Council. He shall prepare and keep in his office a
complete atlas of the waterworks system with all valves and hydrants, water
service connections and other appurtenances distinctly recorded therein.
§ 6.04 METER READINGS.
   The Director of Public Works shall designate employees of the Department of
Public Works or such other persons as may be designated by him to periodically
read the water meters and compile records of such readings. In the event such
person is unable to obtain a reading of the water meter at the designated time,
a card will be left at the address of the applicable water a account with
instructions printed on such card to place the actual meter reading of the
account at that time on a place designated on the card and return the card to
the City Clerk’s office within 5 days. In the event the card is not returned to
the office of the City Clerk with the applicable meter reading thereon, an
additional charge will be assessed to the water account for each card left by
the meter reader and not returned.
§ 6.05 CONNECTIONS TO WATER SYSTEM.
   Any person desiring to make any connection with the water system of plant,
or use water therefrom, shall first make application to the Building
Commissioner upon a blank form or forms to be furnished by the department. The
application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that all
the rules relating to the water system will be complied with; that all water
rates, assessments and rents and all fines and penalties assessed, charged or
imposed against said applicant or the property described in the application
will be paid.
§ 6.06 UNLAWFUL TAMPERING WITH WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to work on, adjust, repair,
obstruct or otherwise tamper with any water main, service pipe, water
connection, buffalo box, corporation cock or any other pipe or apparatus
connected with the waterworks’ system without having been authorized by the
Department of Public Works.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on the water supply to any
premises which has been turned off by the City due to delinquent water charges
or any other reason. In addition to any penalty provided by the Municipal Code,
the owner or tenant of the premises shall be responsible for any charges
resulting from such unauthorized use.
   (c)   No seal placed by the Department of Public Works on any meter, valve,
fitting, or other water connection shall be tampered with, defaced or broken
except on the written authority from the Director of Public Works.
§ 6.07 USE OF HYDRANTS.
   No person, other than members of the Department of Public Works shall use
water from any fire hydrant connected with the city water system, except for
extinguishing fires or unless especially authorized by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 6.08 METERS.
   (a)   All water consumers supplied by the city shall be supplied through
meters only. All meters used in connection with said water system shall be and
remain for all time the property of the city and shall be purchased by the
city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The City Council shall in
all cases determine the kind and pattern of water meters to be adopted and no
other kind shall be installed at any time. After the meter is placed, only
officers or employees of the department shall be allowed to repair, remove or
in any manner interfere with the same. A stopcock or valve shall be placed on
each side of the meter.
   (b)   The cost of keeping each meter in repair shall be paid by the person
upon whose application such meter was installed or repaired as soon as the bill
therefor is presented. The person upon whose application any meter is installed
shall be liable for any breakage or any loss or damage to such meter in any
way, except by ordinary use and wear, and the cost of making good such loss or
damage shall be paid by the person upon whose application such meter was
installed or repaired as soon as the bill for same is presented, and the amount
therefor shall be a lien against the premises for which such meter was
installed to the extent and with the same effect as water rates.
   (c)   Water meters shall be located at such place and in such manner the
city through its City Council shall direct, and boxes or vaults in which such
meters are to be placed shall be in accordance with specifications to be
prescribed by the city, and such boxes or vaults must be so constructed as to
prevent freezing of water flowing through such meters. Vaults must be kept in
such condition so that the meter may be read at any time. In any street where
water mains are installed, the single family residence fronting thereon shall
have the meter installed inside the building, preferably in the basement, if
any, and otherwise in a convenient location adjacent to an interior wall at a
height not less than 15 inches above the floor.
§ 6.09 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Director of Public Works and every person authorized by him and all
meter inspectors shall have ready access to the premises, place or buildings
where such meters are located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing
and repairing the same, and examining and testing the consumption, use and flow
of water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or
obstruct the Director of Public Works or such other person or inspector in his
work hereunder. Every consumer of water shall take the same upon the conditions
prescribed in this chapter.
§ 6.10 WATER RATES.
   (a)   Commercial Users. The term “commercial users” as used herein shall
mean any user other than a single family residential user.
   (b)   Billing Period. All commercial users as defined herein shall be billed
on a monthly basis. All other users shall be billed on a quarterly basis.
   (c)   Rates. There is hereby established a rate which shall consist of a
basic user charge, water rate, minimum billing amount and a minimum charge for
the use of water supplied by the City of Hickory Hills as follows:
      1.   The basic user charge shall be $6.00 per month, effective with
billings after September 1, 2025, regardless of whether any water is being
used.
      2.   The rate for water used shall be $9.16 per 1,000 gallons effective
with billings after September 1, 2025, and $9.91 per 1,000 gallons effective
with billings after September 1, 2026, subject to the following minimums:
 
                  Minimum Billing Amount Minimum Charge
                                         $45.80 per monthly billing (Effective
Commercial Users  5,000 gallons          September 1, 2025)
                                         $49.55 per monthly billing
                                         (Effective September 1, 2026)
                                         $100.92 per quarterly billing
Residential Users 12,000 gallons         (Effective September 1, 2025)
                                         $118.92 per quarterly billing
                                         (Effective September 1, 2026)
 
   Any single family residential user who shall qualify as a “senior citizen”
shall not be subject to the minimum billing amount and minimum charge. For the
purpose of this section, a “senior citizen” is defined as a taxpayer legally
liable for the payment of water charges who is (i) the actual user of the
water, and (ii) who is 65 years of age or older or whose spouse is 65 years of
age or older and residing in the same household.
   (d)   Liability for Payment. The owners of the premises, the occupant
thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for the service on such premises and the service is furnished to the
premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises,
occupant and users of this service are jointly and severally liable therefor to
the City.
   (e)   Bills. All bills for utility service at a residential property shall
be sent to the owner of the property and it shall be the primary responsibility
of the owner to pay said bill. Bills for utility service will not be sent to
tenants of residential property. The name on a utility account shall be the
owner and shall not be changed unless proof of ownership is presented to the
City. The City may change its records to reflect the ownership of property so
that bills are sent to the owner.
(Ord. 21-3, passed 6-10-2021; Ord. 25-12, passed 8-14-2025)
§ 6.11 REQUIRED USE OF WATER.
   (a)   All premises in the City are required to purchase all of their potable
water supply from the City. No person may use a well or other source of water
for potable water or for processing water in the City. All water which is
drained into the City’s sanitary sewer system must be purchased from the City.
   (b)   Nothing herein shall prevent the use of a well or cistern as a supply
of non-potable water for outdoor sprinkling purposes.
§ 6.12 DELINQUENT CHARGES.
   (a)   All water charges for single family residential use consumption shall
be due and payable on or before the 20th day after the date when the statements
of such charges are rendered and shall become delinquent if remaining unpaid
thereafter. A penalty in an amount equal to 10% of the unpaid delinquent amount
shall be added to the bill for each 3-month period (or part thereof) that the
bill remains delinquent.
   (b)   All water charges for commercial use consumption shall be due and
payable on or before the 30th day after the date when the statements of such
charges are rendered and shall become delinquent if remaining unpaid
thereafter. A penalty in an amount equal to 10% of the unpaid delinquent amount
shall be added to the bill for each month (or part thereof) that the bill
remains delinquent.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to cause the statement for
water charges to be delivered on the respective dates thereof to each consumer
of water.
   (d)   Whenever any such charges shall remain delinquent for a period of more
than 30 days, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of delinquency to be sent by
mail, to the party responsible for payment of the water bill at the address
shown for said party on the records of the City. Said notice shall state in
substance that if the delinquent water bill is not paid within 10 days from the
date of the notice, the water services to the supplied premises will be turned
off. Upon the expiration of the aforesaid 10-day period and in the event that
the delinquent water bill has not been paid, water service to the supplied
premises of the delinquent consumer shall be turned off and said water service
shall not be resumed until all water bills, including delinquencies, have been
paid. The City Clerk shall provide due process, including a notice and an
opportunity for a hearing, prior to the termination of water services.
   In the event that the City shuts off water service to any premises for any
reason, a turn-on fee of $50 shall be paid to restore service to the premises.
In the event that the City is required to restore water service more than one
time in a 24-month period, the turn-on fee shall be increased by $25 over the
turn-on fee for the prior restoration (i.e., the turn-on fee shall be $75 for
the second incident, $100 for the third incident, and increasing by $25
thereafter during any 24-month period).
   (e)   No person owing water charges and removing to other premises where
there are water connections or where connections shall afterwards be made,
shall be supplied with water until such charges in arrears are paid in full.
§ 6.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER REGISTERED BY METER.
   The owner or tenant of premises supplied with water will be held responsible
for all water registered by the meter. No reduction shall be made or rebate
allowed to any consumer on account of leakage or alleged leakage in any pipe,
tank, or other apparatus or device.
   Any person who shall vacate any premises, or any person who shall enter upon
and occupy any premises, shall immediately before vacating the premises or
moving to the premises, notify the Department of Public Works and secure
reading of the meter.
§ 6.14 NOTICE OF LIEN.
   In each case where a delinquent bill is not paid within 5 days from the date
of the notice of delinquency, and when no negotiation is completed allowing the
account to be in installments, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of lien to
be prepared and filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County.
§ 6.15 TAPPING WATER MAINS, COST.
   (a)   Whenever any permit for a connection with the water mains is issued
hereunder, the Director of Public Works or an employee of the city so
designated for the work by the Director of Public Works shall supervise the
tapping of the main of the system where such connection is to be made and shall
supervise the insertion of the corporation cock.
   (b)   The tapping of any water main shall be done solely by a plumber
licensed by the State of Illinois and appointed as the “City Plumber.”
   (c)   No connection with any water main shall be of less than 3/4 inch for
single family residences. Multiple family residence and business establishments
shall have larger size taps directed by the Director of Public Works of Water.
   (d)   All corporation cocks and goosenecks, curb cocks and buffalo or shut-
off boxes and meter boxes installed in connection with the water system shall
be subject to the approval of the city as to make and pattern.
   (e)   No person in any manner shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed the
free access of any duly authorized officer or employee of the city to any stop
cock, water meter, elevator dial, buffalo or shut-off box or connection with
any water main or service pipe by means of any coal, lumber, brick, building
material, or by any other means or device whatsoever, or to use or prevent free
access thereto by such officer or employee whenever such officer or employee
shall desire access thereto.
§ 6.16 FEES FOR WATER CONNECTION PERMITS.
   The Building Commissioner, or in his absence, the Director of the Department
of Public Works, is hereby authorized to establish and maintain a list of fees
to be paid by any person installing a new connection or repairing a connection
to the water system, which fees shall be paid before any permit is issued for a
water connection. The water connection fee shall include charges for all water
meters, remote readers, observation by City personnel, engineering fees, and
any other expenses incurred by the City caused by the requested connection.
§ 6.17 INSTALLATION OF SERVICE PIPES.
   (a)   The connections from the main to the service cock shall be placed at
least 5 feet below the level of the ground, and the lead or copper service pipe
shall be laid sufficiently wavy so that it shall be at least one foot longer
than if laid in a straight line and shall be placed in such manner as to
prevent rupture or breakage from settling to the ground.
   (b)   Lead pipe and all lead connections shall have wiped joints and lead
pipe shall consist of the following specifications:
 
Diameter of Pipe Western Standard XXXX Weight per lineal foot
3/4" pipe        3 pounds, 8 ounces
1" pipe          4 pounds, 12 ounces
1-1/4" pipe      6 pounds
1-1/2" pipe      7 pounds, 8 ounces
2" pipe          9 pounds
 
   Copper tubing, U.S. Government Type K, may be used in lieu of lead pipe.
   Lead or copper service pipe shall extend from a connection with the
corporation stop to the curb stop.
   (c)   No person, whether owner or occupant, in possession or control of any
building, structure or premises into which water is supplied through the
Hickory Hills water system shall be allowed, without permission from the City
Council, to supply water from such building or premises to any other building,
structure or premises. Any violation of this section shall result in the supply
of water to the building, structure or premises being shut off and stopped
forthwith, and the water shall not again be turned on to such building,
structure or premises from which it was cut off until there shall have been
paid to the city such sum of money as the City Council shall deem properly due
the city.
   (d)   If, after the water supply shall have been turned on to any building,
structure or premises, it shall be found by any officer or employee of the city
that fraudulent representations have been made by an applicant for such water
supply or that water is being used in or upon such building, structure or
premises for purpose not set forth in the application made for such water
supply, or that there is willful and unreasonable use or waste of water, the
proper officer or employee of the city shall cut off and stop the supply of
water to such building, structure or premises forthwith, and the water shall
not be turned on to such building, structure or premises until the person
responsible for such fraudulent representation or for such use of water or
willful or unreasonable waste thereof shall pay to the city such additional sum
of money for such water supply or on account of such unreasonable waste of
water as the City Council shall find properly to be due the city.
   (e)   Every person supplied with water from the city water system shall at
his own expense and cost, have installed and keep in repair all pipes leading
from the buffalo or shut-off box to his building, structure or premises which
are supplied with water through such service pipe. Service pipes laid from the
water main to the buffalo or shut-off box shall not be less than one inch
internal diameter.
   (f)   Each water service pipe shall be connected with the main water pipe
and shall extend horizontally at right angles with the main water supply pipe
to a point at least 8 feet from the nearest property line of the street and
shall be provided with a brass stop cock of not less than 3/4 inch in diameter
to be installed within a telescopic shut-off box of the best quality of cast
iron or first grade steel pipe.
   (g)   All corporation and curb cocks used in connection with the water
system shall be made of bronze which shall have the following composition:
copper 80 percent to 85 percent; tin 4 percent to 6 percent; zinc 4 percent to
6 percent; lead not more than 5 percent. All casts shall be high grade, true to
form and dimensions smooth and free from all sand or blowholes or other foundry
defects, and all material used herein shall be of the best quality and subject
to the approval of the City Council.
   (h)   Samples of corporation cocks and stop cocks must be submitted to the
City Council and to the department for inspection before installation. The main
must be tapped at an angle of 45 degrees with the vertical, and the corporation
cock must be turned so that the T handle will be on top.
§ 6.18 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF SERVICE PIPES.
   Service pipes and connections shall be inspected and approved by the
Director of Public Works or other persons under his direction and control, and
no such service pipes shall be covered until they have been so inspected.
§ 6.19 WATER METERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   No person shall use or take any water from the waterworks system
unless the amount of water is metered through a water meter approved by the
Department of Public Works.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to water used by the
Roberts Park Fire Protection District or the North Palos Fire Protection
District for emergency purposes in fighting a fire or responding to a hazardous
material incident.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to water used by the
City of Hickory Hills, the Roberts Park Fire Protection District or the North
Palos Fire Protection District when filling water tanks on vehicles provided
that the amount of water taken can be determined by the volume of the water
tank being filled and the amount of the water taken is reported to the
Department of Public Works on forms provided by them within 24 hours
thereafter.
§ 6.20 USE OF PLUMBER’S NAME.
   No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or party
directly or indirectly for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work
under his license.
§ 6.21 WATER METER TAMPERING CHARGE.
   No person other than an authorized representative of the City may attempt to
or remove, replace, adjust, or otherwise work on any water meter. In the event
that there is a broken water meter seal, then it is conclusively presumed that
the occupant or owner of the premises have attempted to or have removed,
replaced, adjusted, or otherwise worked on any water meter. In order to restore
or maintain water service to the premises an additional charge of $500 shall be
imposed in order to defray the cost of inspections and replacing the water
meter seal. The $500 charge shall be imposed on the next water bill for the
premises and shall be due and payable as provided in Section
6.12.
§ 6.22 ACCOUNTS.
   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the waterworks system
shall be held by the City Clerk to the extent received by him separate and
apart from all private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
city. Such revenues and monies without any deductions shall be delivered to the
City Treasurer no more than 10 days after the receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the City
Council. The Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the waterworks
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of said system
as the same may be delivered to him and deposit same in such funds as may be
set by ordinance. The Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks system,
and at regular annual intervals the City Council shall cause to be made under
the direction of the City Council, an audit by an independent auditing concern
of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the water system.
§ 6.23 CITY LIABILITY.
   All connections and water applied for hereunder and all the water used
hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the city shall not be
liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damage or injury caused by
reason of the breakage of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with said system or plant, or any part or portion of
said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery or by reason of stoppage, alteration, extension or renewals. All
repairs to service pipes and connections therefrom shall be at the expense of
the owner or tenant of the premises supplied, excepting repairs on the section
of the pipe included between the corporation cock at the main and the curb cock
in the parkway.
§ 6.24 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Water consumers, licensed plumbers and others shall be governed by the
following rules and regulations:
      1.   All work done in the streets and alleys or public places of the city
in connection with the water system shall be done in a thorough and workmanlike
manner and shall be under the supervision and direction of the Director of
Public Works and subject to his approval.
      2.   No connection shall be made with the water system without a proper
permit from the Department of Public Works.
      3.   No water service shall be laid nearer than 18 inches from a parallel
trench.
      4.   A gooseneck shall be provided for each service pipe and must be
supported by means of brick built up from the bottom of the trench.
      5.   Earth removed in excavating for water service pipes shall be removed
from the street and the trench filled with sand until 6 inches from ground
level and then filled with earth. When completed, the surface of the back
filling in the trenches shall not be higher than the general surface of the
ground on either side of same, and the roadways of all streets shall be left,
and shall be maintained for a period of one year in as good condition for
travel as they were before. Water service pipes shall be installed under
permanent pavement and sidewalks by jacking in such manner as to avoid damage
to surface. Where absolutely necessary to cut any such pavement, a deposit of
$200 shall be made as a bond to be held pending the satisfactory restoration of
pavement.
      6.   The installation of all service pipe must be done in a workmanlike
manner, under the supervision of the Director of Public Works and shall
withstand a test of 125 pounds pressure for a period of 10 minutes without
leaking.
      7.   There shall be a shut-off period provided for every connection or
tap, which shut-off must be in what is commonly called a buffalo box; same
shall be located as near the outer sidewalk edge as conditions will permit.
Each meter shall be set in a meter vault of not less than 18 inches in internal
diameter with a steel or cast iron lid or cover, except where there are heated
basements or utility rooms, in which event the meter may be installed in such
basement or utility room.
      8.   The pipe to be used on construction of the service pipe from the
shut-off box to the meter shall be of lead or copper pipe of the same
specifications as hereinbefore prescribed for the service pipe between the
water main and shut-off box.
      9.   All service pipes shall be so laid so as to prevent freezing,
breaking or rupture by settling.
      10.   All boilers connected with the water system shall be provided with
a tank of sufficient capacity to hold at least 6 hours supply and in case this
supply is shut off for the purpose of repair or any other purpose, the city
will not be responsible for any damage that may result. Consumers and other
persons are prohibited from connecting pipes direct with the city pressure to
supply steam boilers.
      11.   No alteration, change of location or addition of any kind shall be
made to any water meter, water cock or service pipe connected in any way with
the supply to any building or premises, without a written permit from the
Director of Public Works.
      12.   A complete statement in writing shall be made to the Director of
Public Works by the person doing the work of all connections made with the
water system.
      13.   All hydrants or plugs placed for fire purposes are declared to be
the public hydrants, and no person except such as have been authorized by the
City Council shall open or draw water therefrom, or in any manner interfere
with same except in case of fire.
      14.   The Director of Public Works and other authorized persons shall
have free access to any premises in which water is introduced for the purposes
of examining the fixtures and pipes at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of any day.
      15.   No booster pump or other apparatus intended to increase water
pressure shall be installed without approval of the city nor unless a tank or
reservoir be provided between the meter and such pump or apparatus. The tank or
reservoir shall be covered and shall be provided with a vent or overflow to
atmosphere, and shall be so designed as to prevent a direct hydraulic
connection between the meter and the pump or pressure increasing apparatus.
      16.   Application for water service shall be made in writing on a form
prepared by the city for the purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by
a contractor or plumber’s statement showing how the connection shall be made.
§ 6.25 FIRE CONNECTION PRIVILEGES.
   Any person being a regular consumer may be permitted by the City Council to
make special connections with the street mains, together with hydrants and
house cocks to be used in case of fire. For such permit, and for all water used
for fire purposes, there will be no charge, but all such work in connection
with the water system must be done by the city or under the direction of the
Director of Public Works of Water.
§ 6.26 POLICE DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works and police and all
persons in the employ of the city having police power to enforce the provisions
of all ordinances, rules and regulations respecting the water the water system
and to arrest or cause to be arrested all persons violating the same.
§ 6.27 OUTDOOR WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall, during the period of May 15 through September 15,
permit or sprinkle any lawn, garden, or landscape area during the hours of 12:
00 noon to 6:00 p.m. New lawns less than 3 months old are exempt from the
foregoing restrictions.
   (b)   During the period of May 15 through September 15, residents owning or
controlling property with an ODD numbered street address may use water for
lawns, gardens, landscaping, car washing and swimming pool purposes on ODD
numbered calendar dates only.
   (c)   During the period of May 15 through September 15, residents owning or
controlling property with an EVEN numbered street address may use water for
lawns, gardens, landscaping, car washing and swimming pool purposes on EVEN
numbered calendar dates only.
   (d)   No person shall sprinkle any lawn, garden, or landscape area during
prohibited hours after a temporary emergency water shortage is declared by the
City Council prohibiting the same.
   (e)   No personal shall use water for any outside purpose, including but not
limited to, watering of lawns; watering of gardens; watering of landscaping;
washing of cars; washing of outside areas such as windows, buildings, sidewalks
or driveways; or filling of swimming pools during prohibited hours after a
temporary emergency water shortage is declared by the City Council prohibiting
the same.
   (f)   “Sprinkle” means the use of any device for distributing water over an
area not under the active control and in the possession of a person such as by
a mechanical or automatic sprinkler or sprinkler system.
   (g)   “Watering” means the distribution of water over an area under the
active control and in the possession of a person such as by hose or sprinkling
can.
   (h)   Persons using private wells or cisterns, who wish to be exempt from
the provisions of this section, must register with the Public Works Department,
be inspected, and be certified as not using City provided water for such
purposes.
   (i)   All new and replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall otherwise be in compliance
with Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law.
§ 6.28 WATER REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   All fire hydrants on private property shall be kept in good working order by
the owner of the private property where located. All fire hydrants shall be
subject to inspection by the City. No person shall take or allow water to be
taken from any fire hydrant, whether on public or private property, unless the
water usage is metered, and unless the City is given prior written
notification. No person shall block access to or viewing of any fire hydrant.
No fire hydrant may be installed without a permit from the City.
   All fire hydrants and water lines located on private property or private
water lines located on public property may be repaired by the City in cases of
emergency. The bill for such repair shall be a lien against the property. If
said bill is not paid, the City may terminate water service pursuant to the
provisions of Section
6.12.
   The City is not responsible for any damage or liability caused by the reason
of or failure of the water system, including lack of pressure, inadequate
facilities, or inoperative facilities.
   The City is responsible only for repairs to the main water line before the
connection of a private line to the main is made. All repairs to any private
water line, wherever located, are the responsibility of the owner of the
property serviced by the private water line. The City may give notice to repair
any private water line which notice may be oral or in writing to the owner or
occupant of the property. If the repair is not made within the time limit
specified, or if the City deems it necessary to take immediate action to
protect the integrity of the City’s water, sewer, or street system, the City
may shut off water service to the private water line. The City shall not turn
service back on until proper repairs have been made and approved by the City,
and paid for.
§ 6.29 USE OF WELL WATER PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date
of this ordinance, the use of, or attempted use of, groundwater from within the
corporate limits of the City, as a potable water supply, by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method, is hereby prohibited. This
prohibition expressly includes the City.
   (b)   No person (including the City and any other unit of government) shall
drill a well in order to obtain a potable water supply for use in or outside of
the City.
   (c)   No person shall connect any pipe containing water supplied by the City
with water supplied from any well.
CHAPTER 7: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE
Section
   
7.01   Sanitary Sewer Connections and Work
   
7.02   Director of Public Works
   
7.03   Definitions
   
7.04   Use of Public Sewers Required
   
7.05   Building Sewers and Connections
   
7.06   Use of the Public Sewers
   
7.07   Protection of Sewage Works from Damage
   
7.08   Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
7.09   Basis for Wastewater Service Charges
   
7.10   General Provisions
   
7.11   Maintenance Obligations
   
7.12   Fees for Sanitary Sewer Connection Permit
   
7.13   Public Works Officials
§ 7.01 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS AND WORK.
   (a)   No sanitary sewer work of any type involving digging in the ground to
repair, construct or replace a public or private sewer or any pipe connected
thereto shall be performed, except in an emergency, without first securing a
written permit therefor from the Building Department. The permit fee of $75.00
shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit and any work (except
emergency work) being performed. Permits for emergency work on weekends and
holidays shall be applied for on the first normal working day after the repairs
were made. Before such permit is issued, a complete application shall be filed
with and approved by the City. This section does not prohibit rodding out a
sanitary sewer line from a connection unless the rodding involves digging in
the ground.
   (b)   The City may discontinue sanitary sewer and water service to any
property which contains an illegal source of storm water into the sanitary
sewer system or which violates Section
7.05(i) or Section
7.06(a).
(Ord. 22-04, passed 1-28-2022)
§ 7.02 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Director of Public Works of the Department of Public Works shall have
supervision over all material and equipment used in the operation and
maintenance of the sewerage system. For this purpose it shall be the duty of
the Director of Public Works and all of the officers, employees and servants of
the department to enforce all the provisions this chapter and observe, obey and
carry out the orders and directions of the City Council. He shall prepare and
keep in his office a complete atlas of the sewerage system.
§ 7.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
   (a)   Administrator. The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (b)   Approving Authority. The City of Hickory Hills.
   (c)   Basic User Charge. The basic assessment levied on all users of the
Wastewater Collection System for the cost of operation and maintenance plus
replacement.
   (d)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standards laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   (e)   Building Drain. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   (f)   Building Sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
   (g)   City. The City of Hickory Hills or its authorized agents and
employees.
   (h)   Combined Sewer. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface, and groundwater drainage.
   (i)   Commercial User. A user of the wastewater collection system including
transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in
selling merchandise, or rendering services.
   (j)   Control Manhole. A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access in order to measure and/
or sample discharge.
   (k)   Debt Service Charge. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and indebtedness of loans, bonds and installment
contracts which are applicable to the sanitary sewer system. This charge shall
be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users
connected to the wastewater collection system.
   (l)   Director. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (m)   Easement. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.
   (n)   Effluent Criteria. Defined in applicable NPDES Permit
   (o)   Federal Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972 (Pub. L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
   (p)   Federal Grant. The U.S. Government participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II - Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and Implementing Regulations.
   (q)   Floatable Oil. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
   (r)   Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   (s)   Industrial User. A user of the wastewater collection system including
establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials of substance into products.
   (t)   Industrial Waste. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewerage.
   (u)   Institutional/Governmental User. A user of the wastewater collection
system including schools, churches, penal institutions and users associated
with Federal, State and local governments.
   (v)   May. Permissible.
   (w)   MWRD. Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   (x)   Milligrams per Liter. A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   (y)   Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
   (z)   NPDES Permit. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued
by the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act.
   (aa)   Person. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   (bb)   pH. The logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in “Standard
Methods”.
   (cc)   Population Equivalent. A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream.
   (dd)   ppm. Parts per million by weight.
   (ee)   Pretreatment. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
   (ff)   Public Sewer. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries
that service one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds.
   (gg)   Replacement. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
wastewater collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for which
the system was designed and constructed.
   (hh)   Residential User. A user of the wastewater collection system
including all dwellings such as houses, mobile homes, apartment units,
condominiums and multi-family dwelling units.
   (ii)   Sanitary Sewer. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   (jj)   Sewage. Used interchangeably with “wastewater”.
   (kk)   Sewer. A pipe or conduct for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   (ll)   Sewerage. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   (mm)   Sewerage Fund. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the wastewater collection system.
   (nn)   Shall. Mandatory.
   (oo)   Slug. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration for flows during normal
operation.
   (pp)   Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth
in the most recent addition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater” published jointly by the American Public Health Association,
the American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
   (qq)   State Act. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, Title 35,
Part 360 of the Illinois Administrative Code.
   (rr)   State Grant. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-
Pollution Bond Act, Title 35, Part 360 of the Illinois Administrative Code and
for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Illinois.
   (ss)   Storm Sewer. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   (tt)   Stormwater Runoff. That portion of the precipitation that is drained
into the sewers.
   (uu)   Surcharge. An assessment in addition to the basic user charge and
debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater
in strength than normal concentration values.
   (vv)   Suspended Solids. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by
a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods”.
   (ww)   Unpolluted Water. Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities.
   (xx)   User Class. The type of user of the wastewater collection system;
“Residential”, “Commercial”, “Industrial” or “Institutional/Governmental”.
   (yy)   Useful Life.   The period during which the wastewater collection
system will be operated.
   (zz)   Wastewater. The spent water of a community. It may be a combination
of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
   (aaa)   Wastewater Collection System. The structures, equipment and
processes required to collect and transport wastes to the interceptor sewers of
the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   (bbb)   Wastewater Service Charge. The charge per billing period levied on
all users of the wastewater collection system and also known as the sewer bill
or charge.
   (ccc)   Wastewater Treatment Works. An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
   (ddd)   Water Quality Standards. Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations
of Illinois.
   (eee)   Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 7.04 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited on public or private property any human or animal excrement, garbage
or other waste or refuse.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
   (d)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer within 90
days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 300 feet of the property line.
§ 7.05 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (a)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with, or into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (b)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (c)   There shall be 2 classes of building sewer permits: (1) for
residential and commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the city. The fees to be charged for a permit to
tap or otherwise make a connection to any sanitary sewer shall be $350 plus $50
for each dwelling unit or for each store or office unit occupied by a separate
owner or lessee. Where a subdivider installs a main or lateral connecting to a
city line, the connection fee shall be as set forth above for each separate
building. No allowance shall be given any subdivider for extension of any city
sanitary sewer except as provided by the City Council. For subdividers
installing their own sanitary sewer system within a subdivision which connects
with the sanitary sewer system of the City of Hickory Hills, the fee shall be
$100 per home. Each industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must
provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity.
   (d)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities
have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the
additional anticipated waste load.
   (e)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the buildings sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall pay for any
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
   (f)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (g)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found to meet all requirements of this chapter. This
determination will be made upon examination and test by the city at the expense
of the applicant.
   (h)   The size, slope, alignment, connection, materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification
thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications
of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall apply.
   (i)   The building sewer shall be brought to the building in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and other city ordinances.
   (j)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (k)   All connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
   (l)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city.
   (m)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner to at least their prior condition to
the satisfaction of the city.
§ 7.06 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (a)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (b)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city to
a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   (c)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (d)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the city or MWRD that such waters can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city and MWRD representatives will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150 degrees F), (65 degrees C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150 degrees
F), (0 degrees and 65 degrees C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been property shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.05 mg/1 as Hg at
any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/1 at any time except as permitted
by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         A.   unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         B.   excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         C.   unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         D.   unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      12.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdictions over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (e)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in paragraph (d) or which are in violation of
the Standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and
Regulations, Subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards,
Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the city or MWRD may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city or MWRD may:
      1.   reject the wastes;
      2.   require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
      4.   require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of paragraph (k).
   If the City and MWRD permit the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (f)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city or MWRD they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the city and MWRD and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (g)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
   (h)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city or MWRD, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city and MWRD. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (i)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this ordinance and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or MWRD.
   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the city or MWRD but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city and MWRD at such times and in
such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city or MWRD. At such
times as deemed necessary, the city or MWRD reserve the right to take
measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (j)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater”, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH’s are determined
from periodic grab samples.)
   (k)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city, MWRD and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for transmission, and MWRD for treatment, subject
to payment, therefore, in accordance with Section 7.09 hereof, by the
industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal and
state guidelines for User Charge System.
§ 7.07 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
§ 7.08 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (a)   The City, or authorized employees of other governmental bodies may
enter upon private property for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing provided that permission to enter has been
given by the property owner or occupant. The City, or authorized employees of
other governmental bodies may enter upon private property upon which there is
an easement for the purposes of constructing, maintaining, inspecting, and
repairing the public sewer.
   (b)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect upon private
property, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a
warrant from the Circuit Court of Cook County. That Court may consider any of
the following factors, along with such other matters as it deems pertinent, in
its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violations.
      2.   Citizen complaints.
      3.   Tenant complaints.
      4.   Plain view violations.
      5.   Violations apparent from City records.
      6.   Age and nature of property.
      7.   Similar properties in the area.
      8.   Documented violations of similar properties.
      9.   Previous violations.
      10.   Tests.
      11.   Passage of time.
   (c)   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of non-conformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 7.09 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (a)   The wastewater service charge shall consist of a basic user charge for
operation and maintenance of the system (including replacement, capital
improvement, and equipment replacement) plus a debt service charge. The debt
service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the
number of billable customers and dividing by 12 for a monthly charge. The basic
user charge shall be computed so that there shall be sufficient annual revenue
for the operation and maintenance of the system (including replacement, capital
improvement, and equipment replacement). The wastewater service charge shall be
revised periodically by the City Council to reflect cost changes.
   (b)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be the
water consumptions taken from metered readings.
      1.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the City water system, all
or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall
install and maintain, at his expense, water change, volume or reading device of
a type approved by the City for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
      2.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the City if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
      3.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the City.
       4.   If the user can prove through metering devices, installed at his
expense and approved by the City, that a portion of the water he uses is not
entering the sanitary sewer system, the City may make adjustments for future
billing.
   (c)   A debt service charge of $0 per month is hereby established.
   (d)   Residential, Commercial and Industrial Users. A basic user charge of
$4.70 per month plus $1.85 per thousand gallons is hereby effective for all
billings after September 1, 2025. A basic user charge of $2.20 per thousand
gallons is hereby effective for all billings after September 1, 2026, is hereby
established.
(Ord. 18-8, passed 6-14-2018; Ord. 25-13, passed 8-14-2025)
§ 7.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Bills. The wastewater service charge shall be payable by the owner of
the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service who shall be
jointly and severally liable. Service is furnished to the premises by the city
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of
the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city which
condition may be required in writing prior to connection or initiation of
service.
   All sewer bills are due and payable 20 days after being sent out. Bills
shall be sent out in conjunction with water bills for the same billing periods
as water bills.
   (b)   Delinquent bills. Whenever any such charges shall remain delinquent
for a period of more than 30 days, the City Clerk shall cause a notice of
delinquency to be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the party
responsible for payment of the sewer bill at the address shown for said party
on the records of the city, with a copy of said notice being sent to or posted
upon the premises being served with water. Said notice shall state in substance
that if the delinquent sewer bill is not paid within 10 days from the date of
the notice, the water and sewer services to the supplied premises will be
turned off. Upon the expirations of the aforesaid 10 day period and in the
event that the delinquent sewer bill has not been paid, water and sewer service
to the supplied premises of the delinquent consumer shall be turned off and
said water and sewer services shall not be resumed until all sewer bills
including delinquencies have been paid. In addition thereto, a charge of $25
shall be made by the city for turning on and restoring the water services to
the premises. However, whenever the water service temporarily turned off at the
request of any consumer and the meter is not removed and there is no
delinquency in payment of water and sewer charges, the consumer shall pay the
regular minimum rate per billing period, but shall not be required to pay the
aforesaid charge of $25 for turning on the water when requested.
   No person owing water and sewer charges and removing to other premises where
there are water and sewer connections or where connections shall afterwards be
made, shall be supplied with water until such charges in arrears are paid in
full.
   (c)   Lien. Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid, the city may
file with the County Recorder of Deeds a lien.
   (d)   Revenues. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the
wastewater collection system shall be credited to the sewerage account of the
sewerage fund.
   (e)   Accounts. The city shall establish a system of accounts and shall keep
books and records in which complete entries shall be made of all transactions
relative to the sewerage system, which shall be audited as all city records.
   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
or other report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater collection system, including a replacement cost, to indicate that
sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet
these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
report shall also include the following:
      1.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      2.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      3.   Number of users connected to the system.
      4.   Number of non-metered users.
   (f)   Notice of rates. Each user shall be notified, at least annually of the
rate and the wastewater service charge.
   (g)   Access to records. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or
authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges for
the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof
to insure compliance with the terms of the Special and General conditions to
any State Grant.
§ 7.11 MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS.
   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house
connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of the public right of way shall
be the responsibility of the owner of the premises served by the same except
where the problem is caused by the owner (or occupant) of the premises. The
owner shall be responsible for all costs of maintenance and repair of that
portion because his premises have the exclusive use thereof. Before the city
shall examine or repair any building service sewer, house connection or
sanitary sewer line under public right of way, the owner of the premises shall
rod the same out to the connection to the main sewer line and present evidence
thereof to the city. If the blockage and repair the same out to the connection
to the main sewer line and present evidence thereof to the city. If the
blockage and repair needed is under the public right of way, and has not been
caused by the property owner (or occupant) the city shall repair the same. The
city shall assume all costs of maintenance and repair of the main sewer lines
and manholes. The owner of any premises whose discharge causes a blockage or
necessitates a repair to the main sewer line shall be responsible for all such
costs.
   Maintenance means keeping the sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or
other sewer facilities or structures in satisfactory working condition and good
state of repair (including but not limited to preventing any obstruction or
extraneous materials of flows from entering the facilities, protecting the
facilities from any damage and keeping same free from defects or malfunctions),
and making necessary provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that
the sewer facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the
services and adequately discharging the functions and producing the final
results and purposes said facilities are intended to perform, discharge or
produce.
§ 7.12 FEES FOR SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT.
   The Building Commissioner, or in his absence, the Director of the Department
of Public Works, is hereby authorized to establish and maintain a list of fees
to be paid by any person installing a new connection or repairing a connection
to the sanitary sewer system, which fees shall be paid before any permit is
issued for a sanitary sewer system connection. The sanitary sewer connection
fee shall include charges for observation by City personnel, engineering fees,
and any other expenses incurred by the City caused by the requested connection.
§ 7.13 PUBLIC WORKS OFFICIALS.
   The Director and Assistant Director of the Public Works Department shall
have the authority to issue and serve citations on all persons and entities, as
the case may be, for violating the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 11: HEALTH
Section
   
11.01   Health Officer, Duties
   
11.02   Health Officer, Compensation and Assistance
   
11.03   Burials
   
11.04   Violation of State or County Law
   
11.05   Inspection of Schools
   
11.06   Unwholesome Foods
   
11.07   Poultry or Animals
   
11.08   Heating Facilities
   
11.09   Rodent Extermination, Demolition of Building
   
11.10   Water Ponding, Excavations, etc.
   
11.11   Weeds
   
11.12   Violation; Notice to Comply with Regulations
   
11.13   Discharge of Hazardous Materials
§ 11.01 HEALTH OFFICER, DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer:
   (a)   To enforce and observe all rules, regulations and orders of the
Illinois Department of Public Health and all state laws pertaining to the
preservation of the health of the people within the city.
   (b)   To execute and enforce all ordinances of the city relating to
nuisances, public health and sanitation.
   (c)   To enforce and observe all rules, regulations and orders of the Cook
County Department of Public Health and all state laws pertaining to the
preservation of the health of the people within the city.
   (d)   To make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and
inspections within the city.
§ 11.02 HEALTH OFFICER, COMPENSATION AND ASSISTANCE.
   The Police Department shall assist the Health Officer in the performance of
his duties when called upon by the Health Officer, the Mayor, or City Council.
§ 11.03 BURIALS.
   It shall be unlawful to bury, inter or cremate any human body or any part of
a human body in the city.
§ 11.04 VIOLATION OF STATE OR COUNTY LAW.
   It shall be unlawful to violate any law, rule, or regulation of the Illinois
Department of Public Health or the Cook County Department of Public Health.
§ 11.05 INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS.
   The Health Officer shall make regular inspection of all school buildings at
least once a year as to their hygienic condition and shall report the result of
such inspection to the City Council and to the board having charge and control
of such schools, with instructions as to remedy of condition (if any such be
found) whereby the health of those in attendance may be impaired or life
endangered, that in the event the Health Officer deems It advisable to close
any public or private school or schools, he shall report his recommendations to
the City Council.
§ 11.06 UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or
polluted food or drink of any kind in the city.
   (b)   All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for
human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be
unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious disease to
handle any food or drink intended for sale, or for any such person to handle
food or drink. All such premises shall be kept free from flies and from vermin
of all kinds.
§ 11.07 POULTRY OR ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or raise any cattle, hogs, sheep
or poultry, or any animal which can be used for food purposes.
§ 11.08 HEATING FACILITIES.
   (a)   Residential Buildings. Every dwelling shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 65 degrees F. at a
level of 3 feet above the floor and a distance of 3 feet from the exterior
walls in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every owner and
operator of any building or guest room on terms, either express or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the
period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a room temperature of not less than
65 degrees F. in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the
hours between 6:30 am. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees
F. during other hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet
above the floor and 3 feet from the exterior walls. When the outdoor
temperature is below 0 degrees F., the owner or operator shall not be required
to maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided the heating system is
operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in full open
position.
   (b)   Nonresidential Structures. Every enclosed occupied work space shall be
supplied with sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F. during all working hours.
The temperature shall be measured at a point 3 feet above the floor and 3 feet
from the exterior walls.
§ 11.09 RODENT EXTERMINATION, DEMOLITION OF BUILDING.
   Prior to the demolition or razing of any building or structure located
within the city, the owner thereof shall cause the premises to undergo a rodent
extermination in a manner and form satisfactory to the Health Officer.
§ 11.10 WATER PONDING, EXCAVATIONS, ETC.
   (a)   Drainage; Safety Regulations. All open excavations, including the
removal of topsoil, except those excavations or topsoil removals that are
referred to in subsections (b), (C) and (d) hereinafter, shall comply with the
following conditions:
      1.   Excavations must provide for complete self-drainage, or
      2.   In the event self-drainage is not provided, then the following
conditions must be met:
         A.   A minimum water depth of 4 feet shall be maintained at all times,
and
         B.   All shorelines, within the zone of water level fluctuation, shall
be constructed and maintained on a slope of 4 feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, or steeper, and where such sloping may result in the creation of a
hazardous or dangerous condition, the provision of fencing, exit ramps or
stairs, ladders or other safety devices may be required, and
         C.   The topmost berm around such excavation shall be constructed and
maintained to permit ready access of, and, shall be continuously available to,
light vehicles for purposes of mosquito control, and
         D.   Provision shall be made for prompt and adequate control of all
aquatic and semi-aquatic vegetation, and the removal of debris and floatage
below the topmost berm.
   (b)   Building Excavations. Those open excavations or removal of topsoil
necessary or incident to the construction or installation of buildings,
structures or other fixed works shall be excluded from the provisions of
subsection (a) provided that in the event such necessary or incidental
excavations or areas of topsoil removal are not completely covered within a
period of one year after commencing the excavation or removal of topsoil, then
such excavations shall be made self-draining or shall be back-filled within 30
days after notification as provided for in Section
11.12.
   (c)   Ditches and Culverts. All ditches and culverts shall be constructed so
that they are completely self-draining, and all ditches, culverts and natural
watercourses shall be maintained free of debris and other obstructions.
   (d)   Septic Tanks. All septic tanks and seepage systems shall be installed
in accordance with the specifications of the Cook County Department of Public
Health.
   (e)   Ponds and Lakes. All ponds, lakes or other artificial impoundments
shall be constructed and maintained in a manner to conform with the provisions
in subsection (a) above.
   (f)   Screening Containers. All artificial containers and water holding
devices so placed that they may hold water for a period of 5 days or longer,
unless such containers or devices be tightly covered or screened to prevent the
entry of mosquitoes, constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to maintain on his premises unscreened or uncovered containers or other
water holding devices under conditions that permit mosquito larvae or pupae to
develop. All such uncovered or unscreened containers or other water holding
devices shall be completely drained or the water therein changed at intervals
of not more than 5 days between April 1 and October 25, or effective
insecticides must be applied to all exposed water surfaces at intervals of not
more than 5 days during the above period. The failure to maintain such
containers or devices free of mosquito larvae or pupae during the above period
constitutes a violation of this section.
   (g)   Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Building Department for
each excavation, construction or installation referred to in his section.
Drawings and other information pertaining to compliance with requirements
hereinbefore stipulated may be required in application for the permit, and the
fee for issuance of the permit shall be determined by the Building
Commissioner. In no event shall the fee be less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
§ 11.11 WEEDS.
   (a)   All weeds and underbrush, including those which due to the
dissemination of pollen are a menace to health, as well as weeds otherwise
injurious to public health or welfare, are hereby declared to be public
nuisance.
   (b)   All such plants shall be cut, pulled, destroyed or chemically sprayed
with an effective chemical weed killer by the owner or person in control of
said plot of ground at least twice a year, once between May 15 and June 15, and
once between July 1 and August 1 of each year. The failure to destroy such
plants within the designated periods shall constitute a violation of this
section.
§ 11.12 VIOLATION; NOTICE TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.
   When the owner or person in control of any property fails to comply with the
provisions of Sections
11.10 or
11.11 the Health Officer shall cause service of a written notice upon such
owner or person to obtain compliance therewith. The notice shall stipulate the
time allowed for full and complete compliance and each day of failure to comply
with the notice within the time stipulated therein shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 11.13 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Section, shall have the meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
   Emergency response charges means any expense for personnel, supplies and
equipment involved in responding to an occurrence. Emergency responses include,
but are not limited to, firefighting services, emergency rescue services,
emergency medical services, hazardous materials response teams, civil defense
services, technical rescue teams, public works services, police services, and
the services performed by a private contractor responding to an occurrence at
the request of the City of Hickory Hills, the Roberts Park Fire Protection
District, or the North Palos Fire Protection District.
   Hazardous material means a substance or material in a quantity and form
determined by the United States Department of Transportation to be capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property. Hazardous materials
include, but are not limited to, hazardous waste, marine pollutants, elevated
temperature materials, materials designated as hazardous in the Hazardous
Materials Table (49 C.F.R. § 172.101), petroleum, including crude oil or any
fraction thereof, natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas or
synthetic gas usable for fuel.
   Occurrence means any discharge or threatened discharge of a hazardous
material.
   Responsible party means any person or entity owning, controlling, leasing,
having custody over, or conducting any activity upon any land, facility,
equipment or vehicles, who causes or contributes to an occurrence.
   (b)   Responsible Party Liability. It shall be the duty of any responsible
party to reimburse the City of Hickory Hills and any other unit of local
government for all emergency response charges relating to an occurrence. The
liability of a responsible party shall be joint and severable.
   (c)   Responsible Party Charges. The City of Hickory Hills, and any other
unit of local government, shall be reimbursed for its emergency response
charges at the following hourly rates: $125 per hour, or any portion thereof,
for fire apparatus, equipment, ambulances or emergency response vehicles; $75
per hour, or any portion thereof, for other motor vehicles, including police
squad cars, responding to the occurrence; and $35 per hour, or any portion
thereof, for personnel. All other charges shall be billed at their reasonable
and customary rate. The above hourly charges shall be applicable for calendar
year 2006 and shall be increased by 5% per year thereafter.
CHAPTER 12: NUISANCE
Section
   
12.01   Public Nuisances Prohibited
   
12.02   Public Nuisances Defined
   
12.03   Abatement of Public Nuisances
   
12.04   Cost of Abatement
   
12.05   Weeds
§ 12.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the city, or within its police jurisdiction.
§ 12.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (a)   Generally. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
      1.   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      2.   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property;
      3.   Greatly offend the public morals or decency;
      4.   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way.
   (b)   Public Nuisances Effecting Health. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances
coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section:
      1.   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold
or offered for sale to the public;
      2.   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed
of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
      3.   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, junk, vehicles,
trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any
material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats or other
vermin may breed, or which constitute a fire hazard;
      4.   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
      5.   The allowing of water to accumulate and remain in a pond or ponds
either wholly or partly within the limits of any private property for a period
of more than 10 consecutive days;
      The term “pond” shall be considered to mean any exposed surface of water
not less than 100 square feet in area which has accumulated either by natural
or artificial means, in any depression or connected series of depressions of
excavation, whether existing naturally or created artificially.
      6.   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
      7.   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly
ash or industrial dust within the city limits in such quantities as to endanger
the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause
substantial injury to property;
      8.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances;
      9.   Any use of property, substances or things within the city emitting
or causing any foul, offensive, noisesome, nauseous, noxious, or disagreeable
odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of
ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of
any appreciable number of persons within the city;
      10.   Any barn, stable, yard, shed, pen or other place where animals or
fowl are kept which is not maintained in a clean condition; or any animals or
fowl which because of disease, unsanitary conditions, odor or noise, discomfort
or injure the health or well being of residents of the city;
      11.   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use;
      12.   All noxious weeds as defined by 525 ILCS 10/2;
      13.   Any violation of the Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, Fire
Prevention Code, or Zoning Ordinance or the condition of any premises declared
by the City Council to be a nuisance.
   (c)   Public Nuisances Offending Morals and Decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and
decency coming within the definition of subsection (a) of this section:
      1.   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling;
      2.   All gambling devices and slot machines;
      3.   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages are
sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without a
permit or license as provided for by this code;
      4.   Any place or premises within the city where city ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously repeatedly and intentionally violated;
      5.   Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the laws of the
State of Illinois or the ordinances of the city.
   (d)   Public Nuisances Effecting Peace and Safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming
within the provisions of subsection (a) of this section:
      1.   All buildings erected, repaired or altered within the fire limits of
the city in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating
to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures within said
district.
      2.   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing.
      3.   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
      4.   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than 8
feet above the surface thereof or less than 10 feet above the surface of a
public street.
      5.   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the State of Illinois and ordinances of the city.
      6.   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use.
      7.   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground.
      8.   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations or any kind.
      9.   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all
excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the
city or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose has been
accomplished.
      10.   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk.
      11.   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing with the strength of a small child.
      12.   Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire
hazard or will impair extinguishing a fire.
      13.   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks.
      14.   Any packing house, renderies, tallow candleries, glue and bone
factories, soap factories, and tanneries within the city or within the distance
of one mile outside the city limits.
      15.   Any building, or other place, for the exercise of any trade,
employment or manufacture which, by occasion of noxious exhalations, offensive
smells, or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or
of the public.
      16.   Any abandoned vehicle.
      17.   Any violation of the Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, Fire
Prevention Code or Zoning Ordinance or the condition of any premises declared
by the City Council to be a nuisance.
      18.   Any nuisance described in the Illinois Revised Statutes.
§ 12.03 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (a)   Inspection of Premises. Whenever complaint is made that a public
nuisance exists, or has existed, within the city, the Health Officer, Chief of
Police, or Building Commissioner, or some other city official whom the Mayor
shall designate, shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected the premises
and shall make a written report of his findings. Whenever practicable, the
inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall
file the same in the office of the City Clerk.
   (b)   Summary Abatement.
      1.   Notice to Owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private property and that there is a great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
Mayor may direct the Chief of Police, or a deputy sheriff, to serve a notice on
the owner, or if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on the
premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within
24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so abated, the city will
cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may
be.
      2.   Abatement by City. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided or if the owner, occupant or persons causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the Health Officer, Chief of Police or the Building Commissioner, or
some other city official whom the Mayor shall designate, shall cause the
abatement or removal of such public nuisance.
   (c)   Abatement by Court Action. If the inspecting officer shall determine
that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature of such
nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public
health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report of his
findings with the City Council which shall cause an action to abate such
nuisance to be commenced in the name of the city.
§ 12.04 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to any other penalty imposed for the erection, contrivance,
creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the cost of abating
a public nuisance by the city shall be collected as a debt from the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and if
notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be
assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.
§ 12.05 WEEDS.
   (a)   Nuisance. Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle,
cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract of
land in the city are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful
to permit any such weeds to grow or remain in any such place.
   (b)   Height. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any weeds or
plant growth in excess of 8 inches, such are declared to be a nuisance. Weeds
shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants or vegetation, other than trees
or shrubs; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   (c)   Barberry Bushes. It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or
permit the growth of the bush of the species of tall, common or European
barberry, further known as barberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties
within the city.
   (d)   Removal; Notice. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to serve
or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on
which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of
this section and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within 10 days.
   (e)   Abatement. If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within
10 days the Superintendent of Streets may proceed to abate such nuisance,
keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be
charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
   (f)   Lien. Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon the premises.
Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been
rendered, the City Clerk may file a lien with the Recorder of Deeds. This lien
shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs
incurred and the date the weeds were cut, and a notice that the city claims a
lien for this amount. Notice of such lien claims shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises if his address is known. Failure of the Clerk to record such
lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such
notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as
provided in the following section.
CHAPTER 13: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
13.01   Definitions
   
13.02   Uncovered Garbage
   
13.03   Wind-Blown Refuse
   
13.04   Deposits on Streets
   
13.05   Containers
   
13.06   Burning of Garbage, Landscape Waste
   
13.07   Dumping Refuse
   
13.08   Rat Control
   
13.09   Dumping and Landfill
   
13.10   Topsoil Removal
   
13.11   Landscape Waste/Recycling
   
13.12   Garbage and Refuse Removal
   
13.13   Scavenger Service
   
13.14   Scavenger Service-Multi Family Residence
§ 13.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used in this code, the words “garbage,” “refuse” and “ashes” have
the following meanings:
      1.   Garbage: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
      2.   Refuse: Combustible trash, including but not limited to paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture, bedding; non-combustible trash including but not limited to metals
tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of
concrete, glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish, including but
not limited to street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt, contents of
litter receptacle; provided, refuse shall not include earth and wastes from
building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from
industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing
wastes, boiler-house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
      3.   Ashes: Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating
buildings.
§ 13.02 UNCOVERED GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any
garbage or other material subject to decay other than leaves or grass excepting
in a tightly covered metal container.
§ 13.03 WIND-BLOWN REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes, or
trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind anywhere in the
city except in a covered container.
§ 13.04 DEPOSITS ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any
garbage, refuse or ashes on any public streets and/or city parkways and/or
alleys in the city provided, that this section shall not be construed to
prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes in a container complying with the
provisions of this chapter preparatory to having such material collected or
disposed of in the manner provided herein. All garbage containers shall be
removed from the streets and/or city parkways within 12 hours after garbage
pickup is made, and during such time as said containers are on the street all
containers shall be tightly closes.
§ 13.05 CONTAINERS.
   All garbage, refuse and ashes for collection shall be placed in metal
containers or plastic containers equipped with a tight fitting cover and
equipped with handles so that they may be lifted and carried by one man. No
such container shall have a capacity of less than 10 gallons nor more than 30
gallons.
§ 13.06 BURNING OF GARBAGE, LANDSCAPE WASTE.
   The burning of garbage, landscape waste or of other combustible materials is
prohibited.
§ 13.07 DUMPING REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit and for any property
owner to permit the dumping on his property of any refuse of any kind in the
city. This section does not prohibit the filling or topping of ground with
sand, stone, clay or loam.
§ 13.08 RAT CONTROL.
   (a)   Rat Stoppage. Every building or structure within the city shall be
rat-stopped, freed of rats and maintained in a rat-stopped and rat-free
condition.
   The term “rat-stoppage” as used herein applies to a form of ratproofing to
prevent the ingress of rats into or under buildings or other structures from
the exterior or from one building or structure to another. It consists
essentially of the closing of all openings in the exterior walls, ground or
first floors, basements and foundations that may be reached by rats from the
ground by climbing or by burrowing, with concrete, sheet iron, hardware cloth
or other types of ratproofing material impervious to rat gnawing, approved by
the Health Officer. Hardware cloth shall mean wire screen of such thickness and
spacings as to afford reasonable protection against the entrance of rats.
   The term “rat harborage” shall mean any condition which provides shelter or
protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence
in, under or outside a structure of any kind.
   (b)   Inspection Notice. It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to cause
inspections of the interior and exterior of buildings or other structures to
determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks
in the rat stoppage, and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of
rats or openings through which rats may enter such building or structures, the
Health Officer shall serve the owner, agent or occupant of such building or
structure with written notice to abate the conditions found.
   (c)   Maintenance. The owner, agent or occupant in charge of all rat-
stoppage buildings or structures shall maintain them in a rat-stopped condition
and repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the rat-stoppage.
   (d)   Unlawful to Remove Rat-Stoppage. It shall be unlawful for the owner,
occupant, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any other person to
remove the rat-stoppage from any building or structure for any purpose and fail
to restore the same in satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that
are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
   (e)   Rat-Stoppage by Owner; Lien. Upon receipt of notice in writing from
the Health Officer the owner, agent, or occupant in charge of any building,
structure or premises specified in such notice shall take immediate measures
for the rat-stoppage of such building or structure and for freeing the premises
of all rats, and unless the work is completed in the time specified in the
notice, in no event to be less than 15 days, or any written extension thereof
that may be granted by the Health Officer, then the owner, agent or occupant in
charge of the building, structure or premises shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this section.
   Whenever the owner, agent or occupant in charge of the building, structure
or premises, after being served with notice as provided in this section, has
failed within the time fixed in the notice to perform all work necessary to
prevent the ingress of rats to said building or structure or to exterminate
rats from the premises described in the notice, the Health Officer or person
duly authorized by him may go on the premises and do such work as is necessary
to free said premises from rats and to maintain said premises in a rat-stopped
condition. The cost and expense incurred for all works and materials shall be
charged to and collected from the owners and persons interested in the premises
and the city or persons performing such work or furnishing such materials
therefor shall have a lien on the premises and may enforce the same as provided
by statute.
§ 13.09 DUMPING AND LANDFILL.
   (a)   Dumping Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to dump any landfill or other
waste material for the purpose of preparing any land for construction unless a
permit is granted by the Building Commissioner. All dumping and development
must comply with the provisions of Ordinance No. 89-20 pertaining to flood
plains.
§ 13.10 TOPSOIL REMOVAL.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person, except as incidental
to building, to cause the removal of topsoil or other soil structure from any
land within the limits of the city without first having secured a permit
therefor from the Building Commissioner. Any person desiring a permit shall
file a written application therefor with the Building Commissioner.
Accompanying the application shall be a survey of the land involved, a profile
before soil removal and a profile projected after soil removal, showing
necessary grades, elevations, and provisions for adequate drainage. The
applicant for a permit shall furnish such bonds with corporate sureties as
shall be required by the City Council. Permit fees shall be set by the City
Council on each application. All permits before issuance shall bear the
approval of the City Engineer, and all work done thereunder shall be under the
supervision and inspection of the City Engineer and the City Council.
§ 13.11 LANDSCAPE WASTE/RECYCLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (a)   Mix landscape waste with any other waste;
   (b)   Dump landscape waste on any property except that landscape waste may
be spread or composted on the property from which it was collected;
   (c)   Place landscape waste in any container for collection unless that type
of container has been approved by the City;
   (d)   Compost landscape waste within 50 feet of any residential structure
located on another property;
   (e)   Burn any landscape waste;
   (f)   Place landscape waste into a collection container of another person;
   (g)   Take any material which has been placed in a recycling bin or
container; or
   (h)   Take any newspaper or paper set out for recycling collection.
   For the purpose of this section “landscape waste” means accumulations of
grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated
as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. Landscape waste
also includes Christmas trees.
§ 13.12 GARBAGE AND REFUSE REMOVAL.
   Every occupant and owner of a structure shall provide for weekly collection
of garbage, refuse and landscape waste by a licensed scavenger.
§ 13.13 SCAVENGER SERVICE.
   (a)   Every occupant and owner of a single family residential structure and
every townhouse (provided that there is separate utility billing therefor)
shall pay for weekly collection of garbage, landscape waste, and recyclables
provided through the City.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect garbage, landscape
waste or recyclables from single family residential structures and townhouses
(provided that there is separate utility billing therefor) except under
contract with the city.
   (c)   A scavenger service fee of $24.30 per month (provided that senior
households which are eligible for the reduced water rate shall pay a scavenger
fee of $23.30 per month) is hereby established for the collection of garbage,
landscape waste, and recyclables. The occupant and owner of each dwelling unit
which is serviced under any scavenger services agreement shall be responsible
for payment of such scavenger service fee.
   (d)   The owners of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and users of this service
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city. In any case where a bill
remains delinquent for a period of more than 30 days, the City Clerk may file a
notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County.
   (e)   Failure to pay for scavenger service such that charges remain
delinquent for a period of more than 30 days shall be cause to terminate water
service to the premises after notice has been provided.
§ 13.14 SCAVENGER SERVICE-MULTI FAMILY RESIDENCE.
   (a)   Every owner of a multi family residential structure shall provide for
collection of garbage, landscape waste, and recyclables. At a minimum, the
recyclables to be collected shall include glass containers (clear, amber and
green), food and beverage cans (aluminum, steel and tin), plastic containers
(Society of Plastics Industry Code 1-4), and old newspaper.
   (b)   Collection of garbage, landscape waste, and recyclables shall be
provided not less than once a week. Collection of landscape waste is required
only from April 1 through December 1 and only if the owner does not have a
landscape service maintain the property and haul away the landscape waste.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to supply garbage collection
services to any multi family residential structure unless the owner thereof has
made provision for the collection of landscape waste and recyclables as
required herein. Nothing herein shall be construed to require an owner of a
multi family residential structure to contract with any specific company for
the provision of any services nor to require that one company provide all of
the required services.
CHAPTER 14: DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Section
   
14.01   Cook County Animal and Rabies Control Ordinance
   
14.02   Limitation of Number of Dogs and Cats
   
14.03   Dog and Cat License
   
14.04   License Tags
   
14.05   Dogs or Cats at Large, Impoundment
   
14.06   Rabies Vaccination
   
14.07   Animal Bites
   
14.08   Animal Care and Miscellaneous Offenses
   
14.09   Responsibility for Removal of Excreta
   
14.10   Prohibited Animals
   
14.11   Animals as Door Prizes or as Attractions for Trade
   
14.12   Fierce Dogs
   
14.13   Dangerous Animals
   
14.14   Hunting Prohibited
   
14.15   Animal Control and Welfare Officer
   
14.16   Poundkeeper
§ 14.01 COOK COUNTY ANIMAL AND RABIES CONTROL ORDINANCE.
   There is hereby adopted by the City of Hickory Hills for the purpose of
promoting the public safety, health and welfare, the Cook County Animal and
Rabies Control Ordinance with the following exceptions and changes:
   (a)   “County” or “Cook County” shall mean the City of Hickory Hills.
   (b)   “Administrator” shall mean the Animal Control and Welfare Officer of
the city.
   (c)   Sections 20-11A, 20-12A, 20-13, 20-16, 20-17, and 20-18 are deleted
and not adopted.
§ 14.02 LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than two dogs or two cats of
two months of age or older in any single-family residence, building or lot or
to keep or maintain more than one dog or one cat of two months of age or older
in any family unit of a multi-family residence or in a business establishment
within the city. This section shall not apply to licensed pet shops, animal
hospitals, animal grooming establishments, or kennels.
§ 14.03 DOG AND CAT LICENSE.
   Every owner of, and every person who harbors or keeps a dog or cat within
the limits of the City of Hickory Hills, shall report to the City Clerk
annually within 30 days after the first day of May his or her name and address,
and the name, breed, color, sex and age of each dog or cat owned or kept by
such person. Such person shall also present to the City Clerk at that time a
current identification that such dog has been inoculated for rabies in
compliance with the Illinois Rabies Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/8. An annual
license fee of $2 per dog or cat shall then be paid to the City Clerk. All such
licenses shall expire on the 30th day of April next following issuance.
§ 14.04 LICENSE TAGS.
   No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in the City of Hickory
Hills without being licensed as provided for herein. Upon issuing a license to
keep any dog or cat, the City Clerk shall issue to the owner a durable tag or
identification collar, stamped with an identifying number and with the year of
issuance. Tags should be so designed that they may be conveniently fastened to
the dog’s collar or harness. Dogs or cats must wear identification tags or
collars at all times when the animal is off the premises of the owner. The City
Clerk shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers and shall make this
record available to the public.
§ 14.05 DOGS OR CATS AT LARGE, IMPOUNDMENT.
   (a)   No person maintaining a dog or cat within the City of Hickory Hills
shall permit such dog or cat to run at large within the city. All dogs or cats
while remaining on the owner's property, while outside of the dwelling unit,
shall be kept within the confines of a fenced in yard or enclosure. All dogs or
cats taken off the owner's property shall at all times remain on a leash.
   (b)   Unrestrained dogs or cats may be taken by the police and impounded in
an animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. Impounded dogs shall
be kept for not less than 5 days unless reclaimed by their owners. Impounded
cats shall be kept for not less than 3 days unless reclaimed by their owners.
If by a license tag or other means the owner can be identified, the Police
Department shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone or
mail of the impoundment of the animal. Dogs not claimed by their owners within
5 days and cats not claimed within 3 days, or placed in suitable new homes,
shall be humanely euthanized at the direction of the Police Department or by an
agency delegated by the department to exercise that authority.
   (c)   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee of $10, plus
the actual cost incurred by the City of Hickory Hills for the impoundment of
the animal.
   (d)   In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding the animal found at large,
the Police Department may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice of
violation in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Hickory Hills.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any female dog to run at large while in heat,
every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure.
Any female dog in heat running at large in the city may be impounded by any
police officer of the city or by the Animal Control and Welfare Officer.
(Ord. 25-08, passed 6-12-2025)
§ 14.06 RABIES VACCINATION.
   It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog over 4 months of age
to have such dog vaccinated against rabies. The rabies vaccination shall be
given in an amount sufficient to provide immunities from rabies for one year
and shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate from a
licensee veterinarian shall be furnished the City Clerk. If the rabies
inoculation is effective for a period in excess of one year, the certificate
shall so state.
§ 14.07 ANIMAL BITES.
   The Police Department shall cause to be investigated reports of animal
bites. If an animal has bitten a person, the Police Department shall notify the
owner of the animal and the animal shall be delivered promptly to a licensed
veterinarian who shall confine or cause to be confined such animal as provided
in the Animal Control Act of Illinois. If the owner is not known, the police
officer shall take such animal promptly to a licensed veterinarian to be
confined as provided in the Animal Control Act of Illinois, 510 ILCS 70/3.04.
§ 14.08 ANIMAL CARE AND MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.
   (a)   Each person who has (A) a right of property in an animal, (B) keeps an
animal or (C) has an animal in his care or custody, or (D) who knowingly
permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by him, shall
provide for each of his animals:
      1.   Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
      2.   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
      3.   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
      4.   Humane care and treatment.
   (b)   No person as described in this section shall permit or suffer his
animal to:
      1.   Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting;
      2.   Attack other animals;
      3.   Damage property other than that of the owner;
      4.   Bark, whine or howl excessively;
      5.   Create noxious or offensive odors.
§ 14.09 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL OF EXCRETA.
   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for removal and sanitary
disposition of any excreta deposited by his animal anywhere in the city. When
accompanying the animal outside his premises, he shall have on his person
suitable means for the removal of such excreta.
§ 14.10 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep any pigs, swine, sheep, cattle, horses, goats
or similar animals, or any naturally wild animals, except birds or fish, within
the city except in horse stables, educational institutions, veterinary
hospitals or animal shelters.
§ 14.11 ANIMALS AS DOOR PRIZES OR AS ATTRACTIONS FOR TRADE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give away any live vertebrate animals
as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such
vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the
offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
§ 14.12 FIERCE DOGS.
   If any owner, or keeper or possessor of a fierce or dangerous dog shall
permit the same to be at large in any of the streets, alleys or other public
places, or upon property belonging to any other person other than the owner,
keeper or possessor of such dog, to the danger or annoyance of any of the
inhabitants of the city, such owner, keeper or possessor shall forfeit and pay
for the first offense a sum not to exceed $100. Upon a second conviction for
the same offense, the Police Department shall immediately cause the dog, upon
account of which conviction takes place, to be killed and buried.
§ 14.13 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep any lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar,
cheetah, margay, mountain lion, Canada lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, hyena, wolf,
coyote, skunk, poisonous reptile, alligator, crocodile, bear, or boa
constrictor.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any of the above mentioned
animals.
   It is no defense to a violation of this section that any animal or poisonous
reptile which is prohibited by this section has been domesticated.
§ 14.14 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hunt within the territorial limits of the City of Hickory
Hills.
§ 14.15 ANIMAL CONTROL AND WELFARE OFFICER.
   The Mayor may appoint an Animal Control and Welfare Officer, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, for a term of one year commencing on May 1.
Such officer shall be a special police officer for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, under the supervision of the Chief of Police, with
authority to make all necessary arrests in the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 14.16 POUNDKEEPER.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to designate such individual or
corporation, whether residing within or without the boundaries of this city, to
act as poundkeeper.
CHAPTER 15: RETAIL FOOD STORES, FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD DEALERS
Section
   
15.01   Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code
   
15.02   Food Establishment Permit Required
   
15.03   Food Establishment Permit Fees
   
15.04   Submission of Plans
   
15.05   Mobile Food Vendors
   
15.06   Violation of Food Code; Notice to Correct
   
15.07   Immediate Hazard and Hold Orders
   
15.08   Administrative Adjudication
   
15.09   Suspension or Revocation of City License
§ 15.01 ILLINOIS FOOD SERVICE SANITATION CODE.
   The provisions of 77 I.A.C. Chapter I, Subchapter m, part 750 (amended as of
July 1, 2018) are hereby adopted as the Food Code of the City. The provisions
of this Chapter and the Food Code shall be enforced by the Health Officer,
provided that the City may enter into a contract with the Cook County
Department of Public Health for inspection and enforcement. In that event, the
Cook County Department of Public Health and its employees are hereby authorized
and designated to act as the Health Officer. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate the Food Code or any provision of this Chapter.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.02 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall own, operate or maintain a food establishment (defined as
any food service establishment, food processing establishment, retail food
store, or commissary operation) without having obtained a food establishment
permit. Food establishment permits shall be issued only upon compliance with
the terms of this Chapter and are not transferable between locations or
permittees. All food establishment permits shall be posted in a conspicuous
place for viewing by the public.
   An application for a food establishment permit shall be made upon such forms
as provided by the City Clerk. A food establishment permit shall be valid for a
period of 12 months unless otherwise stated thereon.
   Prior to the issuance of a food establishment permit by the City, the food
establishment shall be inspected by the Health Officer for compliance with the
terms of this Chapter.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.03 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT FEES.
   The annual fee for obtaining a food establishment permit shall be $25.00
plus the actual costs of inspection paid by the City to any private or public
entity performing inspections.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.04 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Prior to construction, remodeling, or conversion of a structure to a food
establishment; plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Building
Department and to the Health Officer for approval. The plans and specifications
shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, construction
materials, equipment and such other items required by the Building Code. No
food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Building Commissioner
and the Health Officer.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.05 MOBILE FOOD VENDORS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own, or operate as a
mobile food vendor (except for ice cream, ice milk, and ice cream bar vendors)
on any public right-of-way or on any private property.
   (b)   Any permitted vendor must obtain a City license and must pay the
license fee required in Section 31.02(a) for each vehicle. Each vehicle must be
inspected and approved by the Health Officer.
   (c)   No vending shall be permitted before the hour of 9:00 a.m. nor after
the hour of 9:00 p.m. for the period of Memorial Day through Labor Day. During
the remainder of the year, no vending shall be permitted before 9:00 a.m. or
after sunset.
   (d)   All vending must comply with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, City ordinances, and state law. No noise device shall be used in such a
manner as to disturb persons within a residence.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.06 VIOLATION OF FOOD CODE; NOTICE TO CORRECT.
   If a violation of the Food Code is determined to exist, a written notice to
correct may be delivered to the permittee with a copy of the inspection report
which shall order a date by which such violation shall be corrected. If the
violation is not so corrected, then the violation shall be processed through
the administrative hearing procedures of the City and shall be subject to fine.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.07 IMMEDIATE HAZARD AND HOLD ORDERS.
   Whenever an inspection indicates that conditions create an immediate hazard
to the public health, the Health Officer may order the closure of the premises
and the suspension of any license therefor, without any prior hearing or
notice. The Health Officer may issue a “hold order” for any food items that are
suspected of being improperly labeled or adulterated, without any prior hearing
or notice. The Health Officer may order the immediate destruction of foods
which present an imminent hazard to the health of employees or patrons, without
any prior hearing or notice. The Health Officer may allow operations to
continue only after another inspection has determined that there are no longer
any immediate hazards to the public health. A hold order is appealable only by
filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within 72 hours of the issuance of
the hold order. The Health Officer shall provide notice to the permittee within
24 hours of an appeal providing for the hearing time and place, which hearing
shall be held no later than 36 hours after notice thereof. At the hearing, this
permittee shall have the right to present such witnesses and evidence as deemed
relevant to the improperly labeled or adulterated food. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Health Officer shall determine whether the food is improperly
labeled or adulterated. If so determined, then the food shall be destroyed
under the supervision of the Health Officer. The permittee shall have the right
to appeal the decision of the Health Officer by filing an action with the
Circuit Court of Cook County within 72 hours of the decision. Upon the filing
of an appeal in the Circuit Court of Cook County, the food shall be isolated
until such time as ordered by the Circuit Court of Cook County. If no such
appeal is filed, then the adulterated food or improperly labeled food shall be
destroyed under supervision of the Health Officer.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.08 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   If a violation of the Food Code is determined to exist, a violation notice
for an administrative hearing may be delivered to the permittee which shall be
processed through the code hearing department.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 15.09 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CITY LICENSE.
   The Health Officer shall have the right to request the administrative
hearing officer to suspend or revoke a City license if the permittee does not
comply with the requirements of the Food Code or this Chapter. While a license
is suspended or revoked, all food service operations shall immediately cease. A
hearing to suspend or revoke a license shall be conducted by the administrative
hearing officer after notice to the permittee.
(Ord. 20-6, passed 3-12-2020)
CHAPTER 16: HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
Section
   
16.01   Definitions
   
16.02   Public Accommodations
   
16.03   Housing
   
16.20   Definitions
   
16.21   Solicitation Prohibited
   
16.22   Broker Responsibility
   
16.23   Non-Solicitation List
   
16.40   Human Rights Commission Established
   
16.41   Powers
 
   
16.50   Penalty
§ 16.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this Chapter, unless otherwise defined herein:
   (a)   Age means chronological age of not less than 40 years.
   (b)   Disability means (1) a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual;
(2) a record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an
impairment. Excluded from this definition is an impairment relating to the
illegal use, possession or distribution of “controlled substances” as defined
in schedules I through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 812).
   (c)   Gender identity means the actual or perceived appearance, expression,
identity, or behavior of a person as being male or female, whether or not that
appearance, expression, identity or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the person’s designated sex at birth.
   (d)   Housing status means the type of housing in which an individual
resides, whether publicly or privately owned; an individual’s ownership status
with respect to the individual’s residence; or the status of having or not
having a fixed residence.
   (e)   Marital status means the status of being single, married, divorced,
separated, or widowed.
   (f)   Military discharge status means the fact of having been discharged
from the Armed Forces of the United States, their Reserve components or any
National Guard or Naval Militia other than by a “dishonorable discharge.”
   (g)   National origin means the place in which an individual or one of his
or her ancestors was born.
   (h)   Parental status means the status of living with one or more dependent
minors or disabled children.
   (i)   Person means one or more individuals; partnerships, associations, or
organizations; labor organizations, labor unions, joint apprenticeship
committees, or union labor associations; corporations; recipients of City
funds; legal representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers;
state governments other than that of Illinois; or commercial operations or
entities controlled by governments other than those of Illinois, or of the
United States.
   (j)   Public accommodation means a person, place, business establishment, or
agency that sells, leases, provides, or offers any product, facility, or
service to the general public in the City, regardless of ownership or operation
(1) by a public body or agency; (2) for or without regard to profit; or (3) for
a fee or not for a fee. “Public accommodation” also means an institution, club,
association, or other place of accommodation in the City, whether or not open
to the general public, that has more than 400 members and provides regular meal
service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, accommodations,
facilities, or services from or on behalf of nonmembers for the furtherance of
trade or business. “Public accommodation” also means any products, facilities,
or services of a nonpublic accommodation that are made available in the City to
the general public or to the customers or patrons of another establishment that
is a public accommodation.
   (k)   Religion means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as
well as belief, or the actual identification with or perceived identification
with a religion.
   (l)   Sexual orientation means the status or expression, whether actual or
perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.
   (m)   Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual
supports himself or herself and his or her dependents.
   (n)   Unlawful discrimination means discrimination against a person because
of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person’s
race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source
of income, gender identity or housing status; or the actual or perceived
association with such a person.
§ 16.02 PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (a)   Prohibition: No person that owns, leases, rents, operates, manages, or
in any manner controls a public accommodation in the City shall withhold, deny,
curtail, limit, or discriminate concerning the full use of such public
accommodation by any individual on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
   (b)   Exceptions:
      1.   The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to sex
discrimination in any of the following:
         A.   Distinctly Private Facility. Any facility that is distinctly
private in nature, such as rest rooms, shower rooms, bath houses, dressing
rooms, or health clubs.
         B.   Sleeping Rooms. Any facility that restricts rental of residential
or sleeping rooms to individuals of one sex.
         C.   Educational Institutions. Any educational institution that
restricts enrollment of students to individuals of one sex.
         D.   For the purposes of the above exceptions, the determination of an
individual’s sex or gender shall be based upon the sex or gender of that
individual as reflected on any official identification of that individual
recognized by the State of Illinois, including a driver’s license or state
identification card.
      2.   The Human Rights Commission as defined in this Chapter may adopt
rules specifying any additional exceptions to the prohibition contained in this
section based on bona fide considerations of public policy.
      3.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter,
nothing contained in this section shall require any person who does not
participate in the federal Section 8 housing assistance program (42 U.S.C. §
1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution
under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or
prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance,
contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such place of
accommodation.
   (c)   Sexual Harassment: No person who is, owns, leases, rents, operates,
manages, or in any manner controls a public accommodation shall engage in
sexual harassment affecting access to, participation in, or the full use of
such public accommodation. “Sexual harassment” means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when (1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual’s access to, participation in, or full use of a public
accommodation; or (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the individual’s
access to, participation in, or full use of a public accommodation; or (3) such
conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual’s access to, participation in, or full use of any public
accommodation or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
with respect thereto.
§ 16.03 HOUSING.
   (a)   Definitions: Whenever used in this section:
      1.   Person shall mean any person that is also an owner, lessor,
sublessor, assignor, managing agent, or other individual, firm, or corporation
having the right to sell, rent, lease, or sublease any housing unit within the
City, or any agent, broker, or other individual working on behalf of any such
individual, firm, or corporation.
      2.   Real estate transaction means the sale, exchange, rental, occupancy,
lease, sublease, or lease renewal of real property for residential purposes in
the City or the provision of services or utilities in connection with such
sale, exchange, rental, occupancy, lease, sublease, or lease renewal. “Real
estate transaction” also means with respect to activity conducted or property
located in the City, the brokering or appraising of residential real property
in the City and the making, purchasing, or guaranteeing of loans or mortgages
or providing any other financial assistance either (a) for purchasing,
constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or (b) secured by
residential real property.
   (b)   Prohibitions:
      1.   Terms and Conditions. No person shall make any distinction,
discrimination, or restriction in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges
of any real estate transaction, including the decision to engage in or renew
any real estate transaction, on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
      2.   Discriminatory Communications. No person shall publish, circulate,
issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed,
any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind
relating to a real estate transaction which will indicate or express any
unlawful limitation or discrimination on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
      3.   Listings. No person shall deliberately and knowingly refuse
examination of any listing of residential real property within the City to any
individual because of unlawful discrimination.
      4.   Representations. No person shall deliberately and knowingly
represent to an individual that residential real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease in the City when in fact it is available, or
fail to bring a residential real estate listing in the City to an individual’s
attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect residential real property in
the City because of unlawful discrimination.
      5.   Blockbusting. No person shall solicit, for sale, lease, or listing
for sale or lease, residential real property within the City on the grounds of
loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of
any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status.
      6.   Encouragement of Blockbusting. No person shall distribute or cause
to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner
of residential real property in the City to sell or lease his, her, or its
property because of any prospective change in the race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status of individuals in the neighborhood.
      7.   Creating Alarm. No person shall intentionally create alarm among
residents of any community within the City by transmitting communication in any
manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues,
with a design to induce any person within the City to sell or lease his or her
residential real property within the City because of the present or prospective
entry into the vicinity of the property of any individual or individuals of any
particular race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military
discharge status, source of income, gender identity, or housing status.
   (c)   Exceptions: The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any of
the following:
      1.   Age. Restricting rental or sale of a housing accommodation to an
individual of a certain age group (a) when such housing accommodation is
authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part for the
benefit of that age group by a unit of state, local, or federal government; or
(b) when the duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or community
association limits such housing accommodations to individuals 50 years of age
or older, provided that an individual or members of the household of an
individual owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the
recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of
the age restriction as long as the individual or household member continues to
own or reside in the housing accommodation.
      2.   Religion. Limitation by a religious organization, association, or
society, or any not-for-profit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, of the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such individuals.
      3.   Single Sex. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing
accommodation to individuals of one sex. The determination of an individual’s
sex or gender shall be based upon the sex or gender of that individual as
reflected on any official identification of that individual recognized by the
State of Illinois, including a driver’s license or state identification card.
      4.   Private Rooms. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an
owner if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein or, while
absent for a period of not more than twelve months, if he or she or a member of
his or her family intends to return to reside therein.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter,
nothing contained in this section shall require any person who does not
participate in the federal Section 8 housing assistance program (42 U.S.C. §
1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution
under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or
prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance,
contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such housing
accommodation.
   (d)   Sexual Harassment: No person shall engage in sexual harassment in any
real estate transaction. “Sexual harassment” means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when (1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual’s real estate transaction; or (2) submission to or rejection of such
conduct by an individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the
individual’s real estate transaction; or (3) such conduct has the purpose or
effect of substantially interfering with an individual’s real estate
transaction or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with
respect thereto.
§ 16.20 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them for the
purposes of Sections
16.20 to
16.23:
   (a)   Absolute liability means that a person may be guilty of an offense in
this Chapter without acting with intent, knowledge, recklessness, or
negligence.
   (b)   Agent means any person acting or attempting to act on behalf of
another person.
   (c)   Broker has the meaning ascribed to it in the Real Estate License Act
of 1983, as amended (735 ILCS 5/15-1213).
   (d)   Occupant means any person who lives, dwells, or resides at any real
estate.
   (e)   Owner means any person having any legal or equitable title to all or a
portion of any real estate. It shall be sufficient for purposes of this Chapter
that one owner of any real estate take an action, and nothing herein shall
require or imply that all owners of any real estate must take an action.
   (f)   Person has the meaning ascribed to it in the Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended (720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.).
   (g)   Real Estate has the meaning ascribed to it in the Real Estate License
Act of 1983, as amended (225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.).
   (h)   Salesperson has the meaning ascribed to it in the Real Estate License
Act of 1983, as amended (225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.).
   (i)   Solicit means any communication by or on behalf of an agent with an
owner or occupant of real estate:
      1.   which is intended to induce the sale, rental, or listing for sale or
rental of real estate, or which is intended to offer or promote services in
connection with the sale, rental, or listing for sale or rental of real estate
(including market analysis) and;
      2.   which is carried out by means of:
         A.   in-person contacts; or
         B.   written material mailed or delivered, such as direct mail,
leaflets or pamphlets; or
         C.   telephonic contacts.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the term solicit shall not refer to
communication carried out by means of print or electronic media or general
circulation, such as newspaper, radio, television or yellow pages which is not
intended for or targeted at any specific real estate or area of real estate.
§ 16.21 SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any agent to solicit the owner or occupant of real
estate at any time after an owner of that real estate has filed with the Clerk
a notification that he does not desire to be solicited. An agent shall be
absolutely liable for any violation of this section.
§ 16.22 BROKER RESPONSIBILITY.
   A broker shall be absolutely liable for and responsible for the actions of
any employee or salesperson who is affiliated with, employed by, or has a
contract (written or unwritten) as an independent contractor with the broker.
In the event that such an employee or sales person is guilty of any violation
of this Chapter, then the broker shall also be guilty of the same and may be
prosecuted therefor.
§ 16.23 NON-SOLICITATION LIST.
   The Clerk shall prepare a list of all owners filing a notification not to be
solicited and shall make such list available without charge to any person. At
least annually the Clerk shall make available and send the current list, or
updates of old lists, to all persons who have filed their name and address with
the Clerk requesting a copy of the same. It shall not be any defense to a
violation of Sec.
16.21 that the person has not obtained a list from the Clerk. It shall be the
responsibility of all persons to make themselves aware of the current list
maintained by the Clerk.
§ 16.40 HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Human Rights Commission which shall
consist of three members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. One or more members of the City Council may serve on the
Commission.
   (b)   The term of office shall be three years, except that the first
appointments shall be appointed for a term of one, two and three years.
   (c)   Members shall receive such compensation as is provided by the City
Council; however, no elected official shall receive additional compensation for
serving as a member.
§ 16.41 POWERS.
   The Commission shall have the following powers:
   (a)   To employ such personnel as authorized by the City Council.
   (b)   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
   (c)   To hear and decide by majority vote complaints filed before it.
   (d)   To approve settlements of violations.
   (e)   To cooperate with public and private organizations, including the
Illinois Human Rights Commission and the Department of Human Rights.
   (f)   To hold public hearings to obtain information from the general public
on the effectiveness of protection against unlawful discrimination afforded by
this Chapter and to accept public recommendations concerning the implementation
of this Chapter.
   (g)   To revoke the City license of any violator.
   (h)   To terminate any public contract of the City with a violator and to
bar a violator from any future public contract with the City.
§ 16.50 PENALTY.
   Any person guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 per offense.
CHAPTER 17: LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES
Section
   
17.01   Definitions
   
17.02   License Required
   
17.03   License Application and Procedures
   
17.04   Security Requirements
   
17.05   Persons Prohibited From Residing in Long-Term Care Facilities
   
17.06   State Law
   
17.07   Enforcement and Penalties
§ 17.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions contained in the Nursing
Home Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq., shall apply unless the context
otherwise requires.
§ 17.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or maintain a long-term
care facility without obtaining a valid City license therefor, which license
remains unrevoked and unexpired. Licenses shall be renewed annually and shall
be for a period of 12 months commencing on January 1 of each year.
   (b)   No facility shall operate without a state license.
§ 17.03 LICENSE APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.
   Each applicant shall submit a completed application form and such
information as required by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the
following information:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than
an individual, then the name and addresses of all partners, stockholders or
other persons having an interest in the ownership of the facility must be
disclosed.
   (b)   The name and location of the facility for which a license is sought
and the name of the beneficial owners of the facility.
   (c)   The name and address of the administrator of the facility.
   (d)   The number and type of residents for whom maintenance, personal care
or nursing is to be provided.
   All applications shall be accompanied by a license issued by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, any management agreements for the operation of the
facility, and copies of any Medicare/Medicaid certifications. A license fee
shall be submitted in the amount of $500.00 plus $30.00 per licensed bed.
   Before a license is issued by the City Clerk, the facility shall be
inspected to determine that it is in compliance with the ordinances of the
City, the provisions of the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/1, and any rules
promulgated thereunder.
§ 17.04 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All exterior doors shall be equipped with a signal that will alert the
staff if a resident leaves the building. Any exterior door that is supervised
may have a disconnect device for the signal during such time as the door is
actually supervised. If there is 24-hour supervision of a door, then a signal
is not required.
   (b)   All exterior doors shall be equipped with a camera which shall be
monitored by the staff so that a resident shall not be allowed to leave the
facility without registering in the log book.
   (c)   The facility shall maintain a log book which shall be used for all
residents leaving the facility. The information required to be placed in the
log book before a resident leaves the facility shall be the name of the
resident, the time of leaving, the destination, and the planned time of return.
Upon return to the facility the log book shall be marked with the time of
return.
   (d)   The provisions of subparagraph (c) shall not apply to any resident
leaving the facility who remains solely on the property on which the facility
is located.
§ 17.05 PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM RESIDING IN LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES.
   (a)   Any person required to register as a sex offender under the provisions
of the Sex Offender Registration Act, 730 ILCS 150/1 et seq., is hereby
prohibited from residing in a long-term care facility within the City.
   (b)   No licensee or owner of a long-term care facility may admit or allow
any person registered as a sex offender (regardless of the address where
registered) on the Sex Offender Registry maintained by the Illinois State
Police to reside in or to remain overnight in such long-term care facility.
Each long-term care facility must conduct a record search of each person to be
admitted as a resident thereof, before the person is admitted, in order to
determine whether the person is a registered sexual predator or sexual
offender. The long-term care facility must search the Sex Offender Registry
maintained by the Illinois State Police. Each long-term care facility must have
in its possession evidence demonstrating that a search of the Sex Offender
Registry has been made before allowing a person to be admitted as a resident
thereof. The long-term care facility must notify the City within 72 hours each
time that it refuses to admit a prospective resident who was identified as a
sexual predator or sexual offender on the Sex Offender Registry.
   (c)   When a long-term care facility determines upon information or belief
that a person residing therein is a sexual predator or sexual offender who is
required to be registered, but who has failed to register, under the Sex
Offender Registration Act, the long-term care facility shall notify the Hickory
Hills Police Department of its suspicion so that the Police Department can
perform a search of its data base in order to determine if that person is in
fact required to be registered under the Sex Offender Registration Act.
§ 17.06 STATE LAW.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in violation
of any provision of the Nursing Home Care Act.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in violation
of the “Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for Classification and
Licensure of Long Term Care Facilities”, as promulgated by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS
45/1.
   (c)   In the event that a license issued by the State of Illinois for a
facility is revoked, suspended, or not in effect, then such fact shall be
grounds for the Mayor to take similar action with respect to any City license.
§ 17.07 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter, any
rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS
45/1 et seq., or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per
violation. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (b)   The Mayor may also suspend, for a period not to exceed 30 days, or
seek revocation of a license issued under this Chapter, in accordance with the
procedures described in this section, upon the determination that one or more
violations of this Chapter, any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the
Nursing Home Care Act, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, has
occurred.
   (c)   Before any suspension or revocation order shall be issued, the Mayor
shall notify the licensee of the specific charges against him and of his right
to a hearing. Notice shall be served upon licensee of the long-term care
facility at least seven days prior to the hearing date by: (i) first class or
express mail or by overnight carrier; or (ii) personal service. The person
before whom the hearing is held shall not have been involved in the initial
decision to seek suspension. At the hearing, a long-term care facility licensee
and its representatives may be represented by counsel, present documentary
evidence and witnesses, and may cross-examine witnesses called by the charging
party. The charging party shall present sufficient evidence from witnesses
having personal knowledge of the offense to prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that one or more violations of the aforementioned provisions
occurred. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall
not apply to hearings under this section. The record of each hearing shall
include: (i) a record of the testimony presented at the hearing, which may be
by tape recording or other appropriate means; (ii) any document presented at
the hearing; and (iii) a copy of the written notice of hearing that was served
in accordance with this section. Following the hearing, the Mayor shall issue
in writing a decision stating whether the long-term care facility license shall
be suspended or revoked, or for such lesser relief as may be appropriate. The
licensee may file a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking to
review of a decision issued by the Mayor.
   (d)   Any official of the City may file charges seeking the suspension or
revocation of a license under this Chapter.
CHAPTER 21: PLANNING
Section
   
21.01   Plan Commission
   
21.02   Powers of the Plan Commission
§ 21.01 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (a)   Created. A Plan Commission is hereby created for the City of Hickory
Hills, which commission shall be known as “The Plan Commission of the City of
Hickory Hills.”
   (b)   Members. The Plan commission shall consist of seven members, one of
whom shall be appointed as chairman, together with the Mayor, who shall be a
member of the commission ex-officio.
   (c)   Appointment; Qualifications. The members of the Plan Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council. No person
shall be eligible to be a member of the commission unless he or she shall be a
qualified elector of the City of Hickory Hills. Should a member of the
commission cease to be such a qualified elector, his office shall become
vacant.
   (d)   Terms of Office. The members of the commission shall be appointed to
serve for a term of 7 years and until their respective successors are appointed
and qualified.
   (e)   Resignation; Vacancy. Any member of the commission may resign from his
office. If a vacancy in office occurs by reason of death, resignation or
removal from office, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council, for the remainder of the term of the
office which has become vacant.
   (f)   Meetings. Meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at such time
or times as the commission shall prescribe. Such meetings shall be held in the
city hall and shall be open to the public.
   (g)   Rules of Procedure; Records. The Plan Commission shall adopt its own
rules of procedure, a copy of which and all amendments thereto shall be filed
in the office of the City Clerk. The commission shall keep minutes of its
meetings and the minutes of the commission shall be open to public examination
in the City Clerk’s office during regular office hours.
   (h)   Expenses and Fees. Expenses incurred by the Plan Commission are to be
borne by the city which shall charge the petitioners of any matter referred to
the Plan Commission by the City Council an initial fee according to a schedule
of fees determined by the City Council. Any additional expense over and above
the initial fee shall be assessed against the petitioners of such referred
matters.
   (i)   Compensation. Plan Commission members shall receive such compensation
as determined by the City Council.
§ 21.02 POWERS OF THE PLAN COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Plan Commission authorized by this chapter shall have the power:
      1.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan of
public improvements and private development looking to the present and future
development of the City of Hickory Hills. After such plan is prepared and
adopted by the City Council, this plan shall be known as the ‘Official Plan of
the City of Hickory Hills.’ Thereafter from time to time the commission may
recommend changes in the Official Plan based upon the needs of the city and its
development within the goals of the Official Plan. This plan may include
reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys, buildings, and
public grounds in unsubdivided land situated within the corporate limits of the
City of Hickory Hills or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half
miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. These
requirements shall be effective whenever this unsubdivided land is subdivided
after the adoption of the Official Plan.
      2.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council from time to time plans
for specific improvements in pursuance of the Official Plan.
      3.   To give aid to the city officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, to further the
making of those projects and generally to promote the realization of the
Official Plan.
      4.   To exercise such powers, germane to the powers granted herein and by
statute as may be conferred from time to time hereafter by the City Council,
and to matters referred to it by the City Council.
CHAPTER 22: ZONING
Section
   
22.01   Zoning Regulations
§ 22.01 ZONING REGULATIONS.
   The zoning regulations of the City of Hickory Hills as set forth in
Ordinance No. 70-2 as subsequently amended and supplemented are hereby
continued in full force and effect and made part of this code by reference.
CITY OF HICKORY HILLS ZONING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
TITLE
   
1.01   Title
ARTICLE II
INTENT AND PURPOSE
   
2.01   Intent and Purpose
ARTICLE III
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
   
3.01   General Terms
   
3.02   Definitions
ARTICLE IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
4.01   Interpretation
   
4.02   Severability
   
4.03   Scope of Regulations
   
4.04   Regulations for Specific Uses
      (a)   Home Occupations
      (b)   Truck Terminals
   
4.05   Bulk Regulations
      (a)   Continued Conformity with Bulk Regulations
      (b)   Division of Lots
      (c)   Location of Required Open Space
      (d)   Yard Regulations
   
4.06   Visibility at Intersection
   
4.07   Limited Number of Buildings
   
4.08   Landscaping
   
4.09   Open Storage
      (a)   Landscaping
      (b)   Deposit of Wastes
   
4.10   Access to Service Stations, Garages and Parking Areas
   
4.11   Off-Street Parking Regulations
      (a)   General Requirements
      (b)   Size, access and Design Requirements
      (c)   Number of Parking Spaces Required
      (d)   Location
      (e)   Off-Site Facilities
   
4.11.5   Drive-Thru Facilities and Windows
   
4.12   Off-Street Loading
      (a)   1. Size and Location Z-13
         2. Required Number of Off-street Loading Spaces
   
4.13   Additional Regulations for Off-street Parking and Loading Areas
      (a)   Joint Facilities for Parking or Loading
      (b)   Development and Maintenance of Parking and Loading Areas
   
4.14   Signs
   
4.15   Floodplains Districts
   
4.16   Noise Buffer Zone
   
4.17   Special Uses
      (a)   Purpose
      (b)   Initiation of Special Use
      (c)   Application for Special Use
      (d)   Hearing on Application
      (e)   Standards
      (f)   Conditions and Guarantees
      (g)   Revocation
      (h)   Effect of Denial of Special Use
      (i)   Existing Special Uses
      (j)   Planned Unit Development
   
4.18   Adult Uses
      (a)   Definitions
      (b)   Adult Uses Prohibited
ARTICLE V
NON-CONFORMING LAND, BUILDINGS, AND USES
   
5.01   Statement of Purpose
   
5.02   Continuance of Use
   
5.03   Discontinuance of Use
   
5.04   Change of Non-conforming Use
   
5.05   Termination and Removal of Non-conforming Use, Buildings and Structures
   
5.06   Repairs and Alterations
   
5.07   Damage and Destruction
   
5.08   Additions and Enlargements
   
5.09   Use District Changes
ARTICLE VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND SCHEDULES
   
6.01   Establishment of Districts
   
6.02   Zoning Map, Incorporation of
   
6.03   Rules for Interpretation
   
6.04   Zoning Schedules
   
6.041.1   R-1 Single-Family Residential District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.2   R-2 Single-Family Residential District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.3   R-3 Single-Family Residential District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.4   R-4 Single-Family Residential District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.5   R-5 Multi-Family Residential District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.6   C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.7   C-2 General Commercial District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.8   C-3 Highway Commercial District - Use Regulations
   
6.041.9   I-1 Industrial District - Use Regulations
   
6.042   Lot, Bulk and Coverage Regulations
   
6.043   Performance Standards
ARTICLE VII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   
7.01   Enforcement Officer, Zoning Certificate, and Occupancy Certificate
   
7.02   Zoning Board of Appeals
      (a)   Creation and Membership
      (b)   Meetings and Rules
      (c)   Jurisdiction
   
7.03   Variations
   
7.04   Special Uses
   
7.05   Amendments of Regulations and Districts
   
7.06   Procedure
   
7.07   Notice
   
7.08   Hearing and Recommendation
   
7.09   City Council Action
   
7.10   Penalties
ARTICLE VIII
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES
   
8.01   Responsibility
   
8.02   Application for Community Residence Permits
   
8.03   Community Residence Permits
ARTICLE IX
CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS
   
9.01   Purpose and Applicability
   
9.02   Process
   
9.03   Cannabis Organization Components
   
9.04   Cannabis Industrial Organizations
   
9.05   Cannabis Dispensing Organizations
   
9.06   Locational Restrictions
   
9.07   Additional Requirements
ARTICLE I
TITLE
§ 1.01 TITLE.
   (a)   This ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as:
      1.   The City of Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE II
INTENT AND PURPOSE
§ 2.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (a)   This ordinance is deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
      1.   PROMOTE ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT - To protect the character and maintain
the stability of residential, business, and industrial areas within the City,
and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
      2.   REGULATE INTENSITY OF USE - To regulate the intensity of use of lot
areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings necessary
to provide adequate light and air, privacy and convenience of access to
property and to protect the public health.
      3.   REGULATE LOCATION OF BUILDINGS - To establish building lines and the
locations of buildings designed for residential, commercial, manufacturing, or
other uses within such lines.
      4.   ESTABLISH STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT - To fix reasonable standards to
which buildings or structures shall conform.
      5.   ESTABLISH DISTRICTS - To divide the municipality into districts of
such number, shape, area, and of such different classes (according to use of
land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of the use of lot
area, area of open spaces) as may be deemed best suited to carry out the
purposes of this ordinance.
      6.   PROHIBIT INCOMPATIBLE USES - To prohibit uses, buildings or
structures which are incompatible with the character of development or the
permitted uses within specified Zoning Districts.
      7.   REGULATE ALTERATIONS OF EXISTING BUILDINGS - To prevent such
additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or
structures as would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder.
      8.   LIMIT CONGESTION IN STREETS - To limit congestion in the public
streets and so protect the public health, safety, convenience, and the general
welfare by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the
loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
      9.   PROTECT AGAINST HAZARDS - To provide protection against fire,
explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards in the interest of the public
health, safety, comfort, and the general welfare.
      10.   CONSERVE TAXABLE VALUE OF LAND - To conserve the taxable value of
land and buildings throughout the city.
      11.   PRESERVATION OF CHARACTER OF GENERAL AND HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS. To limit commercial districts to commercial retail stores,
commercial establishments, service establishments, and professional offices
that generate sales tax revenues, maintain the City’s tax base, and allow for
convenient locations for the public to shop, obtain services and conduct
business.
ARTICLE III
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
§ 3.01 GENERAL TERMS.
   Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of the Ordinance. Words used in the
present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”; the word “used” shall include arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used; the word “shall” is
mandatory and not discretionary.
§ 3.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   ALLEY - A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
   (b)   ALTERATION - As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts, or in the entrance and exit facilities,
or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
   (c)   AREA, BUILDING - The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
   (d)   ACCESSORY USE - A use of structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure. Provided, however, no use that would otherwise be considered an
accessory use shall be so deemed if that use is identified separately under the
Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance as a principal use or special use.
   (e)   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - A building or place of business where
gasoline, oil and greases, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories, are
supplied and dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade, at retail, and
where minor repair service is rendered.
   (f)   BUILDING - Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
When a structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extended
from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building.
   (g)   BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the ground surrounding the building to the highest point on the
coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of mansard roofs and the mean height
between eaves and ridge for the highest of gable, hip and gambrel roofs, but
not including chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar
projections.
   (h)   CHANNEL - That area, adjacent to a watercourse, which is at an
elevation of two feet lower than the elevation of the surrounding flood plain
area.
   (i)   CLUB OR LOUNGE, PRIVATE - A non-profit association of persons who are
bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building,
or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and
their guests. The affairs and management of such “private club” or “lodge” are
conducted by a Board of Directors, Executive Committee, or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting. It shall be permissible to serve food
and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen
facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their
guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary and incidental to the
promotion of some other common objective of the organization, and further
provided that such a sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the
applicable Federal and State laws and ordinances of the City.
   (j)   COMMON AREA (COMMON OPEN SPACE) - A tract of land, an area of water,
or a combination of land and water located within the Residential Planned Unit
Development site designed and intended primarily but not necessarily
exclusively for the use and enjoyment of the Residential Planned Unit
Development residents. Common area (Open Space) shall contain no structures or
improvements except for those necessary and appropriate for the benefit and
enjoyment of the residents.
   (k)   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE - A group home or specialized residential care
home serving unrelated persons with disabilities living in a family-like
setting and constituting a single housekeeping unit. Community residence does
not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration
for a criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is
substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
   (l)   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE-SMALL - A community residence serving 8 or fewer
persons with disabilities in a family-like atmosphere.
   (m)   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE-LARGE - A community residence serving 9 to 15
persons with disabilities.
   (n)   COVERAGE - That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by a
building.
   (o)   DISTRICT - A section or sections of the City of Hickory Hills for
which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height
of buildings, the size of yards and intensity of use are uniform.
   (p)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY - A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by one family.
   (q)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY - A building designed for or occupied exclusively
by two families.
   (r)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE - A building designed for or occupied exclusively
by more than two families.
   (s)   FAMILY - Either (1) one or more persons occupying a premises and
living as a single housekeeping unit, and related to each other by birth,
adoption or marriage, and including domestic servants as distinguished from a
group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house or hotel as defined in this
section or (2) persons living together in a community residence or (3) not more
than two unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
   (t)   FLOODPLAIN - That continuous area, adjacent to a watercourse, whose
elevation is equal to or below the elevation of the highest flood level; and
any land of higher elevation, having an area of less than two acres, which is
completely surrounded by land having elevation equal to or lower than the
elevation of the highest flood level.
   (u)   FLOOD CHANNEL - That area, adjacent to a watercourse, which is at an
elevation of two feet lower than the elevation of the surrounding flood plain
area.
   (v)   FLOOR AREA RATIO - The floor area ratio of the building or buildings
on any zoning lot is the floor area of the building or buildings on that zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or, in case of planned
developments, by the net site area.
   (w)   HOME OCCUPATION - Any occupation or profession, practiced by a member
of the family residing on the premises, and which occupation is clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling; and in
connection with which there is no indication from the exterior, other than one
(1) unanimated, non-illuminated sign of not more than one (1) square foot in
size, that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose
than that of a dwelling. No commodity is sold upon the premises and no
commodity intended for sale or use elsewhere is stored on the premises; no more
than one (1) person is employed other than members of the family residing on
the premises; and no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except for
telephones, calculators, typewriters and computers. A professional person may
use his residence for consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of
religious rites. No accessory building shall be used for such home occupation.
Home occupations, further, shall not utilize more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the total floor area of any one (1) story. No vehicle used in
conjunction with the home occupation may be parked on the premises, based at
the premises, or parked on the public street in the area of the premises,
except for one passenger car designed for carrying not more than six persons.
   (x)   HOTEL - An establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a lodging house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the
community in which it is located and which provides customary hotel services
such as maid service, furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and
secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bell boy
service.
   (y)   LANDOWNER - The legal or beneficial owner of all the land to be
included in the Residential Planned Unit Development. This includes the holder
of an option or contract to purchase, provided, however, that a final
development plan shall not be approved until the applicant has taken title or
executed a binding sales contract for all the property. A land owner shall also
mean a lessee having a remaining term of not less than forty (40) years and any
other person or public agency having an enforceable proprietary interest in all
the land to be included in such development.
   (z)   LOT - Any portion, piece, division or parcel of land.
   (aa)   LOT MEASUREMENT -
      1.   Area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot,
excluding the horizontal area of such lot covered by water, or marsh, or beyond
the rim of a river bank, watercourse or lake, or between the top and toe of an
embankment of thirty (30) degrees or more from horizontal.
      2.   Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   (bb)   LOT OF RECORD - A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, or Registrar of
Titles of Cook County, or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, or Registrar of Titles of Cook County,
prior to the date of the adoption of this Ordinance.
   (cc)   LOT TYPE -
      1.   Corner Lot. A lot situated at the intersection of and abutting upon
two or more streets, provided that the enclosed angle of intersection of such
streets is not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
      2.   Through Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one (1) street other than an alley.
   (dd)   MANUFACTURING OR INDUSTRY - Any use in which the major activity is
the treatment, processing, rebuilding, repairing or wholesale storage of
material, products or items, and where the finished product is not acquired by
the ultimate use on the premises, as distinguished from a retail use where the
treatment, processing, repairing or storage is secondary to the sale, exchange,
or repairing of materials or products on the premises.
   (ee)   MOTEL - An establishment consisting of a group of attached or
detached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space,
located on a single lot and designed for use by transient automobile tourists.
   (ff)   NONCONFORMING LOT - Any lot which does not conform with the minimum
area and/or dimensions required in the district.
   (gg)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - A structure or sign, the design or size of
which does not conform to the regulations of this Ordinance for the district in
which it is located.
   (hh)   NONCONFORMING USE - A building, structure or premises legally
existing and/or used at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or any
amendment thereto which does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (ii)   NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME - A proprietary facility for the
accommodation of convalescents or other persons who are not acutely ill and not
in need of hospital care, but who require skilled nursing care and related
medical services which are prescribed by or performed under the direction of
person or persons licensed to provide such care or services in accordance with
the laws of the State of Illinois.
   (jj)   PARKING SPACE - A durably surfaced area, enclosed in the main
building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
one standard automobile, and if the space is unenclosed comprising an area of
not less than 200 square feet, exclusive of driveway connecting the parking
space with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of an
automobile.
   (kk)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - A structure or group of structures
designed to be maintained and operated as a unit in single ownership or control
by an individual, partnership, cooperative or corporation and which has certain
facilities in common such as yards, open space, recreation areas, garages, and
parking areas.
   (ll)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN - The proposal for development of a
residential planned unit development, including a plat of subdivision, all
covenants, grants of easement and other conditions relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space and public
facilities. The Planned Unit Development Plan shall include the information
required by this amendment.
   (mm)   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE - The office of an accountant, architect,
chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist, lawyer, minister, optometrist, osteopath,
physician, registered professional engineer, or member of another similar
profession.
   (nn)    SIGN - A “sign” is a name, identification, description, display, or
illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or
indirectly, upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business, but does not include an official traffic control
device, nor does it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, state,
county, municipality, school or religious group. Each display surface of a sign
shall be considered to be a “sign”.
   (oo)   SIGN, SURFACE AREA - The entire space within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign except that such perimeter
shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits
of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
   (pp)   SINGLE OWNERSHIP - The Proprietary interest of a Landowner as defined
herein.
   (qq)   SITE PLAN - A plan placing the buildings on the land, showing paved
roadways, sidewalks, set back lines, parking areas, buffer zones, screening,
fences and general landscaping.
   (rr)   STORY - That portion of building other than a cellar, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or,
if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
   (ss)   STORY, HALF - A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall space not more than three feet above the
top floor level, and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area is
finished off for use.
   (tt)   STRUCTURES - Anything constructed or erected, that use of which
requires permanent location on the ground, including but without limiting, the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards and back stops for
tennis courts.
   (uu)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS - Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls of partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
   (vv)   USE - The “use” of property is the purpose or activity for which the
land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it
is occupied or maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such
activity with respect to the performance standards of this comprehensive
ordinance.
   (ww)   USE, PRINCIPAL - A “principal use” is the main use of land or
buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A “principal
use” may be either “permitted” or “special”.
   (xx)   USE, PERMITTED - A permitted use is a use which may be lawfully
established in a particular District or Districts, provided it conforms with
all requirements, regulations, and performance standards (if any) of such
District.
   (yy)   USE, SPECIAL - A use--either public or private--which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in any
particular District or Districts. After due consideration, in each case, of the
impact of such use upon the neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular location, such “special use” may or may not be
granted. A use may be a permitted use in one or more districts and a special
use in one or more districts.
   (zz)   USE, NON-CONFORMING - Any lawfully established use of a building or
premises which on the effective date of this ordinance does not comply with all
of the applicable use regulations of the District in which such building or
premises shall be located.
   (aaa)   VARIANCE - The City Council’s authorized departure from the terms of
the Ordinance in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance in
direct regard to a hardship peculiar to an individual lot or situation.
   (bbb)   YARD - An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of the front yard,
or the depth of a rear yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line
and the principal building shall be used.
   (ccc)   YARD, FRONT - A Front Yard is a yard extending across a front of a
lot between the side yard lines, which is along an existing or dedicated public
street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way. On a corner
lot the lot line having the shortest length abutting a street line shall be the
front yard, except in Commercial Districts the front yard shall always be on
the main street (such as 95th Street, 87th Street, Roberts Road, 88th Avenue).
   (ddd)   YARD, REAR - A Rear Yard is a yard extending along the full length
of a lot between the side lot lines which is most distant from, and is, or is
most nearly, parallel to, the front yard.
   (eee)   YARD, SIDE - A yard on the same lot with the principal building,
situated between the side of a building and the adjacent side lot line and
extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear
yard.
   (fff)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other
necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at an adult-use
dispensing organization or use at an adult-use processing organization, per the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705, as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   (ggg)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed adult-use
cannabis business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410
ILCS 705, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (hhh)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION - A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to adult-use purchasers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410
ILCS 705, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (iii)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS ORGANIZATION - An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization or adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
   (jjj)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION - An adult-use cannabis
cultivation center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis
processing organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization, or adult-use
cannabis transporting organization.
   (kkk)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705, as amended, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   (lll)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR - A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds
to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate
into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705, as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (mmm)   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTATION ORGANIZATION - An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of an adult-use cannabis business establishment or
a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705,
as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (nnn)   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION - Any adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization or medical cannabis dispensing organization.
   (ooo)   CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION - Any facility operated by an
adult-use cannabis cultivation center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-
use cannabis processing organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization,
adult-use cannabis transporting organization, medical cannabis cultivation
center, medical cannabis craft grower, medical cannabis processing
organization, medical cannabis infuser organization, or medical cannabis
transporting organization.
   (ppp)   CANNABIS ORGANIZATION - Any adult-use cannabis organization or
medical cannabis organization.
   (qqq)   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed medical cannabis
dispensing organizations, per the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   (rrr)   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to registered qualifying patients, per the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, as it may be amended from time-
to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (sss)   MEDICAL CANNABIS ORGANIZATION - A medical cannabis cultivation
center, medical cannabis processing organization, medical cannabis infuser
organization, medical cannabis dispensing organization, or medical cannabis
transporting organization.
   (ttt)   MEDICAL CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION -A medical cannabis
cultivation center, medical cannabis processing organization, medical cannabis
infuser organization, or medical cannabis transporting organization.
   (uuu)   MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product-formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, as amended,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (vvv)   MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION - A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   (www)   MEDICAL CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION - An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a medical cannabis business establishment, per
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1, as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
ARTICLE IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4.01 INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (b)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance upon
the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this ordinance or by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule,
or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which
impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   (c)   This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or
any other private agreement provided that where the regulations of this
ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements)
than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements
of this ordinance shall govern.
   (d)   No building, structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the
time of the adoption of this ordinance shall become or be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this ordinance; and to the extent that, and in any
manner that, said unlawful building structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this ordinance, said building, structure, or use remains
unlawful hereunder.
   (e)   Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed to be a consent,
license, or permit to use any property or to locate, construct, or maintain any
building, structure, or facility or to carry on any trade, industry,
occupation, or activity.
   (f)   The provisions in this ordinance are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances, heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in the City of Hickory Hills
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 4.02 SEVERABILITY.
   (a)   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and City
Council of the City of Hickory Hills that the provisions of this ordinance are
severable, in accordance with the following:
      1.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision
of this ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
      2.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property,
building, or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, building, or structure not specifically
included in said judgment.
§ 4.03 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   (a)   All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing
uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this ordinance
which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses, or
land shall be located.
   (b)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this comprehensive
amendment, and provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of
such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis
of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may upon completion
be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally
designated--subject thereafter to the provisions of Article V, Non-Conforming
Land, Buildings, and Uses.
   (c)   Where the Building Commissioner has issued a permissive use permit, a
special use permit, or a permit for a variance pursuant to the provisions of
this comprehensive amendment, such permit shall become null and void unless
work thereon is substantially underway within six (6) months of the date of the
issuance of such permit by the Building Commissioner.
   (d)   A Special Use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular
special use and shall expire if the special use shall cease for more than six
(6) months for any reason. Where a lot is to be occupied for a permitted use
without buildings, the side yards and front yard required for such lot shall be
provided and maintained unless otherwise stipulated in this comprehensive
amendment, except that side yards shall not be required on lots used for garden
purposes without buildings or structures nor on lots used for public recreation
areas.
   (e)   No land which is located in a Residence District shall be used for
driveway, walkway, or access purposes to any land which is located in a
commercial or Industrial District, or used for any purpose not permitted in a
Residence District.
§ 4.04 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES.
   (a)   HOME OCCUPATIONS [See Section
3.02(w)]
   (b)   TRUCK TERMINALS - The following supplementary regulations shall apply
to truck terminals, in addition to those regulations which apply to the I-
1 Industrial District.
      1.   Minimum Transitional Yards - Where a truck terminal adjoins either a
Residential District or a Commercial District, transitional yards (within which
no off-street loading or unloading operation is permitted) shall be provided in
accordance with the regulations hereinafter indicated. Transitional yards shall
be unobstructed from the ground level to the sky. All accessory buildings which
are attached to principal buildings shall comply with the yard requirements of
the principal building.
   In each truck terminal, the minimum transitional yard requirements for all
structures, other than agricultural buildings and structures, shall not be less
than those specified below:
 
Transitional Yard Abutting Residential District Abutting Commercial District
Side              150 feet                      50 feet
Rear              150 feet                      50 feet
 
§ 4.05 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (a)   CONTINUED CONFORMITY WITH BULK REGULATIONS - The maintenance of yards
and other open space and minimum lot area legally required for a building shall
be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on
which it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no
legally required yards, other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any
building shall by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy yard, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements for
other building.
   (b)   DIVISION OF LOTS - No improved lot shall hereafter be divided into two
(2) or more lots unless all improved lots resulting from each such division
shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district
in which the property is located.
   (c)   LOCATION OF REQUIRED OPEN SPACE - All yards and other open spaces
allocated to a building shall be located on the same lot as such building.
   (d)   YARD REGULATIONS
      1.   Required Yards-Existing Buildings - No yards now or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum yard requirements of this ordinance for equivalent new construction.
      2.   Projections into Required Yards - Certain architectural features may
project into required yards as follows:
         A.   Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features
may project into required yards no more than two (2) feet.
         B.   Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, fire escapes, and chimneys,
may project three (3) feet, six (6) inches provided that such features do not
occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third (1/3) of the length of the
building wall on which they are located.
      3.   Walls and Fences - Walls and fences are permitted in yards subject
to visibility requirements of Section 4.06 and as regulated by ordinance.
      4.   Front Yards for Corner Lots - A front yard of the required depth
shall be provided on one of the two frontages and a second front yard shall be
provided on the other frontage, provided that in any R-zone, the second front
yard need to be only fifty (50) percent of the required depth for front yards
in that zone.
      5.   Required yard applies to One Building Only - No part of a yard, or
other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required for or in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance,
shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or
loading, similarly required for any other building.
§ 4.06 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION.
   On a corner lot in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, or C-3 Zoning District,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
so as to materially impede vision between a height of two and a half (2-1/2)
and ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in
the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lot and a line joining
points along said street lines thirty (30) feet from the point of the
intersection.
§ 4.07 LIMITED NUMBER OF BUILDINGS.
   There shall be no more than one (1) principal dwelling and two (2) accessory
structures, including a private garage, on each lot in any R-zone except as
provided in Planned Unit Development.
§ 4.08 LANDSCAPING.
   Any use required by this ordinance to be landscaped in accordance with this
section shall be contained within a fence or wall six (6) feet high, or a
visual screen consisting of evergreen, or evergreen type hedges or shrubs,
placed at intervals of not more than six (6) feet, located and maintained in
good condition within five (5) feet of the property line.
§ 4.09 OPEN STORAGE.
   (a)   LANDSCAPING - All open storage shall be landscaped in accordance with
Section
4.08.
   (b)   DEPOSIT OF WASTES - No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises
by natural causes or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or
dust or which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible by or otherwise
be attractive to rodents, insects or animals shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
§ 4.10 ACCESS TO SERVICE STATIONS, GARAGES AND PARKING AREAS.
   No automobile service station, public garage, or commercial parking area or
garage for twenty-five (25) or more motor vehicles, shall have an entrance or
exit for vehicles within two hundred (200) feet along the same side of a street
on which is located a school, playground, place of worship, hospital, library,
or institution for dependents or for children, except where such property is in
another block or on another street on which the lots does not abut.
§ 4.11 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (a)   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
      1.   In all Zoning Districts, in connection with every manufacturing,
business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there
shall be provided, at the time any new building or structure is erected, off-
street parking spaces in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
      2.   If the use of the building or structure erected on or after the
effective date of this ordinance is changed to another use which required more
off-street parking spaces than required for the original use, additional off-
street parking spaces shall be provided in the amount necessary to conform to
this section.
      3.   When the intensity or use of a building or structure existing before
the effective date of this ordinance is increased by an additional or additions
of employees, dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, beds or other units
of measurement specified below, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
such addition or additions as follows:
         A.   When such addition or additions increase, the intensity of use of
such building or structure by more than 25 percent of the aggregate.
         B.   Off-street parking spaces for such additional or additions need
not exceed the amount of off-street parking spaces which would be required for
the entire building or structure as proposed if newly constructed.
         C.   The determination of the increase of intensity of use shall be
based on the total increase in intensity of use of such building or structure
which it undergoes on or after the effective date of this ordinance whether
such total increase occurs at one time or in successive stages.
   (b)   SIZE, ACCESS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
      1.   Size. Each off-street parking space and aisle accessing parking
spaces shall conform to the following size requirements:
 
Angle of Parking  Stall Width Parallel Stall Depth
(degrees)         to Aisle             Perpendicular to Aisle Width (One Way)
                                       Aisle
0                 24.0'                9.0'             13.0'
45                12.75'               17.33'           13.0'
60                10.4'                19.0'            17.0'
90 (parallel)     9.0'                 18.0'            24.0'
 
   Parking spaces may be shortened by 2 feet with the approval of the Building
Commissioner to allow for car overhang extending over a landscape area provided
that such parking spaces must be bounded by a continuous concrete curb. All
two-way parking aisles must be at least 24 feet in width. Dead end parking
aisles of less than 26 feet in width and parking spaces where vehicles must
back onto a public street are prohibited.
      2.   Access. An off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway. Any access to a parking lot or parking space must receive
the approval of the Building Commissioner. No curb cut or driveway in excess of
30 feet is permitted. No access shall be provided through a residential zoning
district or through a zoning lot other than owned by the parking lot owner
(except by a permanent recorded easement). Access to off-street parking areas
shall be limited to well-defined locations and shall not be unrestricted across
the length of a street or alley which the parking lot abuts.
      3.   Surfacing. All new and existing parking areas shall be improved with
a paved asphalt or concrete surface over a proper base. All construction shall
meet the minimum standards for structural materials derived from the Illinois
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction or shall be approved by the Building Commissioner. Parking spaces
shall be clearly identified by painted markings at least 4" in width.
      4.   Drainage. All parking areas shall provide adequate drainage of water
to a storm sewer system. Storm water retention or detention is prohibited in a
parking lot if the water level for a 100-year rainfall intensity will exceed 6"
in any part thereof.
      5.   Wheel Stops. Concrete or plastic bumpers shall be installed not less
than 24" from any public sidewalk, private building, or landscaping where
determined necessary by the Building Commissioner.
      6.   Lighting. Fixed lighting shall be required for all parking lots
accommodating more than 10 vehicles. Illumination shall be arranged so as not
to reflect directly into adjacent residential areas.
      7.   Use. No off-street parking lot shall be used for any purpose other
than the temporary parking of motor vehicles related to the premises on the
zoning lot. The storage of merchandise, vehicles and the sale and repair of
vehicles is prohibited. Required off-street parking spaces shall be solely for
the parking of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants and employees.
      8.   Handicapped Parking. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided to
meet the requirements of Illinois and Federal law or any code of the City.
      9.   Change in Use. Whenever the use on any zoning lot is changed to
another use which requires a greater number of off-street parking spaces, such
change is prohibited unless additional off-street parking is provided to
conform to the minimum requirements.
      10.   Location. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same
zoning lot as the use which they serve or within 300 feet of such use provided
such off-lot parking spaces are located in the same or a less restrictive
zoning district and are located on property which is under the same ownership
as the use served or under a lease with a term of not less than 20 years. In
the event that such spaces cease to be under such control or cease to be used,
then the use on the zoning lot shall be terminated or reduced in conformity
with the number of required parking spaces available.
      11.   Screening and landscaping. Any parking area containing 5 or more
vehicles shall be screened on any side which abuts a residential use by a fence
or hedge which conforms to Section
4.08.
      12.   Minimum Setback. No parking space shall be located within 2 feet of
any lot line.
      13.   Front Yard. No parking space in an R-5 Multi-Family Residential
District shall be located forward of the front building line and on corner
lots, forward of the side building line abutting the street.
   (c)   NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED - The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth below. Except in the case of dwellings,
no parking area provided hereunder shall be established for less than three (3)
spaces.
USES REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
USES                                    REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
1. Bowling Alleys                       3 for each alley
2. Community Buildings and Social Halls 1 for each 200 sq. feet of floor area
3. Funeral Homes, mortuaries            1 for each 50 sq. feet of parlor space
4. Hospitals, Nursing and Convalescent  1 for each 3 beds plus 1 for each
Homes                                   employee
5. Hotels, Boarding and Rooming Houses  1 for each room
6. Manufacturing Plants, Research or    1 for each 4 employees in the maximum
Testing Laboratories, Bottling Plants   working shift
7. Medical or Dental Clinics or Offices 4 spaces for each doctor or dentist
8. Motels                               1 for each rental unit
9. Multiple Dwellings                   2 for each dwelling unit
10. Offices (General)                   1 for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area
11. Places of Worship                   1 for each 5 seats or 100 inches of
                                        bench
12. Restaurants, Bars and Night Clubs   1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
13. Retail Stores, Store Groups, Shops, 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area
etc.
14. Schools, Senior High School;
professional business or technical      1 for each 10 classroom seats
school, studio for art, music, dancing
or photography
Junior High School                      1 for each 15 classroom seats
Elementary School                       1 for each 20 classroom seats
15. Sports Arenas, Auditoriums          1 for each 3 seats
Theaters, Assembly Halls
16. Truck Terminals                     1 for each 2 employees in maximum shift
                                        1 for each 2 employees in maximum
17. Wholesale establishments or         shift; the total parking area shall not
warehouses                              be less than 25 percent of the building
                                        floor area
 
   In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned
and to which said use is similar, in the opinion of the Plan Commission shall
apply.
   (d)   LOCATION - Off-street parking for uses in R-5 zone shall not be
located between the front building line and street line. On corner lots, this
restriction shall also apply to the space between the side street line and the
side building line.
   (e)   OFF-SITE FACILITIES - All permitted and required accessory off-street
parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be located on the same lot as the use
to which such spaces are accessory, except that such spaces may be provided
elsewhere but shall be provided within a radius of no greater distance than 250
feet from that lot, and provided further, that required spaces are provided off
the site in accordance with the provisions set forth herein and that such
spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use which they are accessory and
shall be subject to deed restrictions filed in an office of record, binding the
owner and his heirs and/or assigns to maintain the required number of spaces
available throughout the life of such use, and such spaces shall conform to all
regulations of the district in which they are located.
§ 4.11.5 DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES AND WINDOWS.
   (a)   PURPOSE - The purpose of this Section is to regulate facilities
containing drive-thru windows with development standards to ensure that the
design and operation of such uses effectively mitigates associated problems
with traffic, congestion, excessive pavement, litter, and noise. Such use shall
not substantially increase traffic on streets in a residentially zoned
district; shall not create increased traffic hazards to pedestrians when
located near a school, church, auditorium, theater, or other place of assembly;
shall be located on a site having a minimum frontage of 100 feet on a major
street; and shall not substantially lessen the usability and suitability of
adjacent or nearby residentially zoned property for residential use.
   (b)   APPLICABILITY - The provisions of this Section apply to all facilities
where the drive-thru windows are constructed, added, or modified after the
passage hereof.
   (c)   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - The development standards in this Section are
intended to supplement the standards in the underlying zoning district for
drive-thru uses. In the event of conflict between these standards and the
underlying zoning district standards, the provisions of this Section shall
apply.
   (d)   DRIVE-THRU AISLES - The minimum standards for drive-thru aisles are:
      1.   Drive-thru aisles shall not be located in any required rear yard
setback or side yard setback where the adjoining property use is for a single-
family dwelling. Drive-thru aisles or stacking lanes shall be independent of
any on-site parking spaces, parking aisles, public streets, and public alleys.
      2.   Drive-thru aisles shall have a minimum 10-foot interior radius at
curves and a minimum 12-foot width.
      3.   Drive-thru windows and remote tellers shall provide at least 120
feet of stacking space for each facility, as measured from the service window
or unit to the entry point into the drive-thru lane. Non-food and non-beverage
businesses may reduce the stacking space to a minimum of 60 feet.
      4.   Each drive-thru entrance/exit shall be at least 50 feet from an
intersection of public streets/alleys at the closest intersecting curbs, and at
least 25 feet from the curb cut on an adjacent property.
      5.   Each entrance to a drive-thru or parking aisle and the direction of
traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs and pavement markings.
      6.   Each drive-thru aisle shall be separated from the circulation routes
and parking aisles necessary for ingress or egress from the property, or access
to a parking space.
   (e)   HOURS OF OPERATION - When located on a site within 100 feet of any
residentially zoned property, hours of operation for a drive-thru window shall
be limited to 7:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. daily. For drive-thru windows
otherwise located, there are no restriction on the hours of operation.
   (f)   NOISE - Any drive-thru speaker system shall emit no more than 50
decibels and at no time shall any such speaker system be audible above daytime
ambient noise levels beyond the property lines of the site. The system shall be
designed to compensate for ambient noise levels in the immediate area.
   (g)   LIGHTING - Any lighting shall be located at a maximum height of 14
feet and shall be so arranged and shielded that there will be no glare or
reflection onto adjacent residential properties.
(Ord. 18-9, passed 6-14-2018)
§ 4.12 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (a)   In all Zoning Districts, where the use requires off-street loading,
there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building off-
street loading berths in accordance with the requirements of the table
following.
      1.   Size and Location - Each loading space shall be not less than twelve
(12) feet in width, thirty-five (35) feet in length, and have a minimum
vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet, and may occupy all or any part of any
required yard.
      2.   Required Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces:
 Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Off-Street Loading Spaces
                         Square Feet of Gross Floor Required Off-Street Loading
                         Area                       Spaces
School                   - - -                      1
                         Under 30,000               1
Hospital                 For each additional 30,000 1 additional
                         or major fraction thereof
Funeral Home             ---                        1
Office, Hotel, Retail    Under 25,000               1
Service Wholesale,       From 25,001 - 100,000      2-4
Warehouse Manufacturing, For each additional 50,000
Processing or Repairing  or major fraction thereof  1 additional
Uses
 
§ 4.13 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS.
   (a)   JOINT FACILITIES FOR PARKING OR LOADING - Off-street parking and
loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if the total
number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate
requirements for each use, and provided that all regulations governing the
location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to and
that no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for
more than one (1) use.
   (b)   DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS - Every
parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area for five (5)
or more cars or loading area, including a commercial parking lot, shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   Screening and Landscaping - Off-street parking area for five (5) or
more vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively screened by a
fence or hedge as provided in Section 4.08 on the side or sides which adjoin or
faces an R zone.
      2.   Minimum Distances and Setbacks - No off-street loading area or
parking area or part thereof for five (5) or more vehicles shall be closer than
ten (10) feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human
care located on an adjoining lot, or two (2) feet from any lot line.
      3.   Surfacing - Any off-street parking of five (5) or more vehicles or
off-street loading area shall be surfaced with a durable and dustless surface.
All areas shall be marked so as to provide for the orderly and safe loading,
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
      4.   Lighting - Lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or
loading area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises. Off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be
adequately lighted.
      5.   Drainage - Any off-street parking area and off-street loading area
shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without
detriment to surrounding uses.
§ 4.14 SIGNS.
   Signs may be permitted in all zoning districts as regulated by ordinance of
the City of Hickory Hills.
§ 4.15 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.
   See Ordinance No. 89-20, as amended.
§ 4.16 NOISE BUFFER ZONE.
   In order to protect the residents of the City of Hickory Hills from the
nuisance and hazards resulting from excessive noise generated by high speed
traffic, residential and institutional structures shall be discouraged within
500 feet of the center line of the Tri-State Tollway.
§ 4.17 SPECIAL USES.
   (a)   PURPOSE - The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based
upon the division of the City into districts, within which districts the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that
there are special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot
be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such
special uses fall into two categories.
      1.   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (b)   INITIATION OF SPECIAL USE - Any person owning or having an interest in
the subject property may file an application to use such land for one or more
of the special uses provided for in this ordinance in the zoning district in
which the land is situated.
   (c)   APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE - An application for a special use or
expansion of a special use shall be filed with the City Clerk. The application
shall be accompanied by such plans and/or date and a statement in writing by
the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will
conform to the standards set forth in Sections
4.17(e).
   (d)   HEARING ON APPLICATION - Upon receipt in proper form of the
application and statement referred to in Sec.
4.17(c) the City Council shall refer the application to the Zoning Board of
Appeals who shall hold a public hearing under provision of Article VII of this
ordinance.
   (e)   STANDARDS - No special use shall be recommended by the Zoning Board of
Appeals unless said Board shall find:
      1.   That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use
will not be detrimental or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
or general welfare.
      2.   That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
      3.   That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      4.   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
      5.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      6.   That the special use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the City Council pursuant to
the recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (f)   CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES - Prior to the granting of any special use,
the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the City Council stipulate such
conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, and operation of the special use as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards
and requirements specified in Sec.
4.17(e). In all cases in which special uses are granted, the City Council shall
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied
with.
   (g)   REVOCATION - In any case when a special use has not been established
within a year after date of granting thereof, then without further action by
the Board, the special use authorization shall be null and void.
   (h)   EFFECT OF DENIAL OF SPECIAL USE - No application for a special use
which has been wholly or in part denied shall be resubmitted for a period of
one year from the date of said order of denial, except on grounds of new
evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the Board.
   (i)   EXISTING SPECIAL USES
      1.   Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a special
use or permitted use prior to the adoption of this comprehensive revised
ordinance, then it shall be a legal special use under this ordinance.
      2.   Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use and exists
as a special use prior to this ordinance, then it shall become a non-conforming
use and subject to the applicable non-conforming use provisions of this
ordinance.
   (j)   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT - Planned Unit Developments are of such
substantially different character from other special uses that specific
additional standards and exceptions are hereby established to govern the
recommendations of Zoning Board of Appeals and the action of the Board of
Commissioners.
      1.   Statement of Objectives - The intent is to permit greater
flexibility for the purpose of securing better site planning than would be
possible through a strict application of the zoning ordinance and the
subdivision regulations ordinance, while safeguarding the present or future use
and development of surrounding areas, and specifically to provide for:
         A.   An opportunity for new and creative approaches to the living
environment and for ingenuity, imagination and design efforts on the part of
builders, architects, site planners and developers;
         B.   An economic and efficient use of land;
         C.   Permanent provision of common open space and recreation area and
facilities;
         D.   The preservation of natural features, thus enhancing the
appearance of the neighborhood and serving a conservational purpose;
         E.   An improved level of amenities;
         F.   Maximum choice in the types of environment and housing available.
      2.   Review Procedure - The Plan Commission of the City of Hickory Hills
is hereby designated by the corporate authorities to review Planned Unit
Developments as a special use in accordance with 24 ILCS 11-13-1.1.
      3.   Application of Residential Planned Unit Development - The site of
the Residential Planned Unit Development shall consist of not less than two (2)
contiguous acres with no major internal barriers. This requirement may be
waived if none or more of the following conditions exist:
         A.   If, because of unusual physical features of the site itself or of
the neighborhood in which it is located, a waiver is necessary or appropriate
in order to conserve a physical or topographical feature of importance to the
municipality;
         B.   The site or its neighborhood has a historical character of
importance to the community which will be protected by a Planned Unit
Development.
      4.   Permitted Uses - A Planned Unit Development may be built in the R-3,
R-4, R-5 or C-2 Districts and may include but shall not be limited to the
following uses:
         A.   Dwelling units in detached, semi-detached, attached, multi-
storied structures or any combination thereof.
         B.   Non-residential uses of a religious, cultural, recreational and
commercial character which are primarily for the service and convenience of the
residents of the development provided that commercial development does not
exceed thirty (30) square feet of gross floor area under roof per dwelling unit
in the development. Commercial uses shall be limited to those permitted in the
C-1 and C-2 zoning districts as listed in Article VI of the Zoning Ordinance.
If land zoned commercial is included in the Planned Unit Development, the
restrictions of the commercial zone shall apply. However, the location of the
commercial development may be shifted within the project site if approved in
the development plan and provided that the size remains unchanged.
      5.   Standards - A plan for a Residential Planned Unit Development shall
be reviewed by the Plan Commission for conformity with the intent and the
spirit of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Hickory Hills; with Statement
of Objectives for Residential Planned Unit Development of this section and for
conformity with the provisions of other sections of this ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance not superseded by the standards set out in this section.
A plan meeting those initial requirements shall qualify for tentative approval.
The Plan Commission shall not revise or add to the rules and regulations
applicable to a specific Proposed Residential Planned Unit Development after an
application has been filed by the Landowner. A plan shall be consistent with
the following general standards:
         A.   Ownership - The site of a Residential Planned Unit Development
shall be under single ownership or control at the time of approval of the final
development plan. A binding purchase agreement for the entire site at the time
of submittal of the final development plan shall satisfy the requirements of
this section.
         B.   Housing Types - The plan may include a variety of housing types.
         C.   Maximum ground coverage - The total ground area occupied by
buildings and structures shall be regulated by the rules and practice of the
Plan Commission who will evaluate the overall plan of each application
submitted under the provision of this ordinance.
         D.   Architectural Style - The architectural style of a proposed
building shall not alone be sufficient cause for denial of approval.
         E.   Density - Any plan which does not propose to increase the number
of dwelling units per acre allowed under existing provisions of this ordinance
shall qualify for approval with respect to density of use. For the purpose of
this paragraph, density shall be computed by dividing the gross project area by
the required lot area per dwelling unit after the amount required for streets
is first deducted. If the land is not entirely within a single zone, the number
of units permitted must be calculated separately for each zone and totaled to
determine the total number of dwelling units allowable in the Planned Unit
Development. If development is to take place in stages, the Plan Commission may
require that the lower density stages be developed first.
         F.   Lot and Yard Requirements - The Plan Commission may modify
requirements for yard, setback, lot size, frontage and space between buildings
for development within the Planned Unit Development, provided that the spirit
and intent of the Planned Unit Development Statement of Objectives are complied
with and that reasonable visual and acoustical privacy is provided for. The
Plan Commission may determine that certain setbacks, frontage requirements, and
types of dwellings be required within all or a portion of the perimeter of the
site in order to provide reasonable conformance with adjacent development. The
Plan Commission may require that structures located on the perimeter of the
Planned Unit Development be well screened in a manner that is approved by the
Commission in order to provide reasonable privacy for adjacent uses.
         G.   Common Open Space - The Plan Commission shall consider the
amount, shape and location of open space and proposed improvements in terms of
usability, access, and the topography of the site. Open space with natural
features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. Common open space shall
be provided in an amount equal to the amount saved by decreased lot size
immediately adjacent to the lot so decreased.
         H.   Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space -
         (1)   All land shown on the final development plan as common space
must be conveyed under one of the following options.
            a.   It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to
maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures, or improvements
which have been place on it.
            b.   It may be conveyed in accordance with provisions of the final
development plan. The means of ownership and maintenance of the common open
space must be approved by the Plan Commission and must restrict the common open
space to the uses specified on the final development plan and provide for
maintenance in a manner which assures its continuing use for its intended
purpose.
         (2)   If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, one
of the following methods of enforcement must be provided.
            a.   The legal right to develop the common open space for the uses
not specified in the final development plan must be conveyed to a public
agency.
            b.   In the event of a substantial default in the stated conditions
of the restrictions governing the use, improvement, and maintenance of the
common open space, the fee title to the common open space shall be vested in a
public agency.
         (3)   No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the
final development plan unless the final development plan has been amended to
permit the use in accordance with Sub-section (j)6, Procedure. However, no
change of use authorized under Sub-section (j)6 may be considered as a waiver
of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open space areas, and all
rights to enforce these covenants against any use permitted under Sub-section
(j)6, are expressly reserved.
         I.   Minimum Area of Open Space - A minimum of twenty-five (25)
percent of planned development group site area shall be developed as public
open space, including walkways, plazas, landscaped areas, pools and fountains.
Parking areas and vehicle access facilities shall not be considered in
calculating public open space.
         J.   Parking and Loading Design Standards -
         (1)   Off-street parking may be located anywhere within the Planned
Unit Development, provided that in each case the Plan Commission shall find
that such off-street parking spaces will be conveniently located. No less than
two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per single family dwelling unit, and
per multi-family unit.
         (2)   Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and monotony of parked
cars.
         (3)   Pedestrian connections between parking areas and buildings shall
be via special pedestrian walkways and/or elevators.
         (4)   Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, ease of access, and shall be
developed as an integral part of an overall site design.
         (5)   Any above-grade loading facility should be screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
         K.   Access Requirements and Circulation System Design Standards -
         (1)   The proposed site shall be accessible from public roads that are
adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed
development.
         (2)   There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking and
loading space.
         (3)   Roads, pedestrian walks and open space shall be designed as
integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be properly related to
existing and proposed buildings and appropriately landscaped.
         (4)   There shall be an adequate amount, in a suitable location, of
pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped spaces to prevent pedestrian use of
vehicular ways and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls and
public transportation loading places from general vehicular circulation
facilities.
         (5)   Buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces shall be
arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily
exposed to vehicular traffic.
         (6)   Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks shall
be provided along the lines of the most intense use, particularly from building
entrances to streets, parking areas and adjacent buildings.
         (7)   The location and design of pedestrian walks should emphasize
desirable views of new and existing development in the area.
         (8)   The maximum separation of private automobiles and service
vehicles shall be provided through the use of separate service lanes.
         (9)   Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs benches, etc., shall be of good appearance, easily
maintained and indicative of their function.
         L.   Design Standards -
         (1)   All buildings in the layout and design shall be an integral part
of the development and have convenient access to and from adjacent uses and
blocks.
         (2)   Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design,
masses, materials, placement and connections to provide a visually and
physically integrated development.
         (3)   Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the
Planned Development group shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to the
treatment given to street frontages of these same buildings.
         (4)   The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the project site where appropriate, to provide
separate levels of access.
         (5)   All building walls shall be so oriented as to insure adequate
light and air exposures to the rooms within.
         (6)   All buildings shall be arranged so as to avoid undue exposure to
concentrated loading or parking facilities wherever possible and shall be so
oriented as to preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings.
         (7)   All buildings shall be arranged so as to be accessible to
emergency vehicles.
         M.   Landscape Design Standards -
         (1)   Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and
parking areas shall be designed as an integral part of a coordinated landscape
design for the entire project area.
         (2)   Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground
cover and street trees, and shall combine with appropriate walks and street
surfaces to provide an attractive development pattern. Landscape materials
selected should be appropriate to the growing conditions of the City’s
environment.
         (3)   Whenever appropriate, existing trees shall be conserved and
integrated into the landscape design plan.
         (4)   All streets bordering the project area shall be planted at
appropriate intervals with street trees.
         N.   Subdivision Requirements -
         (1)   Because each Residential Planned Unit Development proposal is
unique, specifications for (1) the width and surfacing of streets and highways,
(2) alleys, (3) ways for public utilities, curbs and gutters, (4) sidewalks,
(5) street lights, (6) public parks and playgrounds, (7) school grounds, (8)
storm water drainage, (9) water supply and distribution, (10) sanitary sewers
and sewage collection and treatment, shall be subject to modifications from the
provisions of the subdivision regulations. The Plan Commission shall waive or
modify within the limits specified in this section those other provisions for
public facilities which are not considered necessary in the interest of the
residents of the Planned Development, the rest of the community and the public.
         (2)   There shall be adequate design of grades, paving, gutters,
drainage and treatment of turf, to handle storm waters, prevent erosion and
formation of dust.
         (3)   Signs and lighting devices shall be properly arranged with
respect to traffic control devices and adjacent residential districts.
         O.   Coordination with Subdivision Regulations -
         (1)   In order to facilitate the procedure for the approval of a
proposed plan, review required under this section of the zoning ordinance may
be carried out simultaneously with the review under the subdivision ordinance.
         (2)   The plan required in Sub-section (j)6, Procedure may be
submitted in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the subdivision
ordinance for the preliminary and final plans required under the two
ordinances.
      6.   Procedure
         A.   Preapplication Conference - The applicant may request a
preapplication conference or conferences with the Plan Commission to obtain
information and guidance before entering into binding agreements or preparing
detailed plans. The Plan Commission may also request a preapplication
conference if it is deemed necessary.
         B.   Preliminary Development Plan - The applicant shall file a
preliminary development plan with the Plan Commission for review and
recommendation or, at his option, may file the final development plan. In the
event that a zoning change is required, it may be filed simultaneously and in
accordance with the procedures of Article VII of this zoning ordinance.
Information submitted as part of the preliminary development plan shall include
at least the following:
         (1)   Site plans showing:
            a.   Size and location of the proposed development in relation to
the surrounding areas.
            b.   Existing topography of the land including significant natural
features.
            c.   Location of present and proposed streets, parking facilities
and pedestrian ways.
            d.   Location of present and proposed utilities and easements.
            e.   Location, bulk, height and use of present and proposed
buildings.
            f.   Location of land devoted to common open space, indicating
preservation of natural features where applicable and proposed improvements.
            g.   Location of any other land devoted to public uses, such as
school sites.
         (2)   Architectural sketches to include building plans.
         (3)   Statement of the proposed character of the development.
         (4)   Agreements, provisions and covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the Planned Unit Development.
         (5)   Present and future ownership of land.
         (6)   Proposed financing of the development.
         (7)   Proposed time schedule of development, including open space and
density proposed for each stage, if development is in stages.
         (8)   Any additional information appropriate for review purposes
requested by the Plan Commission.
         (9)   Filing fee in the amount of $500 to be used to defray
administrative cost and the cost of the public hearing.
   The Plan Commission may reserve the right to request comments from other
departments of the municipal government as deemed necessary.
         C.   Public Hearing - A public hearing shall be held before the Plan
Commission within 30 days of the date of submittal. The staff report must be
publicly available at least 5 working days before the date of the hearing.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once,
not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in one or more
newspapers published in the City or, if no newspaper is published therein, then
in at least one newspaper with a general circulation within the City. This
notice shall contain the approximate location of the proposed development.
         D.   Commission Action - The Plan Commission shall submit its
recommendations to the legislative body within 10 days of the hearing for
ratification.
         E.   Final Development Plan -
         (1)   Within 6 months the applicant shall submit the final development
plan to the Plan Commission. In its discretion and for good cause, the Plan
Commission may extend for six months the period for filing the final
development plan. The final plan shall consist of at least the following:
            a.   Maps as required for the preliminary development plan,
indicating exact locations and time schedule.
            b.   Architectural plans shall be submitted in sufficient detail to
show the basic building lay-out, the number of units per building and the
number of bedrooms per dwelling unit. Landscaping plans shall also be
submitted.
         (2)   The final plan shall be in substantial agreement with the
preliminary plan as approved or modified by the Plan Commission. The final plan
may be submitted in stages in accordance with the time schedule of the
preliminary development plan.
         (3)   The Plan Commission shall approve, modify, or disapprove the
final development plan in writing with a copy to the applicant within 60 days
of submittal.
         (4)   The zoning map shall be modified to indicate the Planned Unit
Development. The final development plan shall be recorded in the manner of
recording plats of subdivisions.
         F.   Development Schedule -
         (1)   If no construction has begun within one year from date of
approval of the final development plan, the final development plan shall no
longer be in effect. In its discretion and for good cause, the Plan Commission
may extend for up to one additional year the period for beginning construction.
         (2)   The Plan Commission may revoke the final development plan if
construction falls behind the filed time schedule. In its discretion and for
good cause, the Plan Commission may extend the final schedule for one
additional year.
         (3)   If the final development plan lapses or is revoked as provided
above, any zoning changes that may have been granted shall also be revoked.
         G.   Building Permits - Building permits shall be issued for buildings
and structures in conformity with the approved final development plan provided
that common open space has been conveyed as provided in the final development
plan. Open space improvements scheduled for any previous stage must not be
behind the filed schedule as revised.
         H.   Compliance with Final Development Plan - The planned Unit
Development shall be developed only according to the approved and recorded
final plan and all supporting data. The recorded final plan and supporting data
together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, and assigns. The Plan shall control the use of premises and
location of structures in the Planned Development as set forth therein. The
Plan Commission may approve minor changes in the final development plan. Minor
changes are those which do not change the concept or intent of the Development
and which do not include increases in density, height of buildings, reduction
of proposed open space or proposed improvements, changes in the final governing
agreements, provisions, or covenants. Major changes may be approved only by
submission of a new development plan in accordance with this section. All
changes to the final plan shall be recorded on the recorded plan or a new
“corrected” plan shall be filed.
      No changes in the development plan which are approved under this section
are to be considered as a waiver of the covenants limiting the use of land,
buildings, structures, and improvements within the area of the Planned
Development, and all rights to enforce these covenants against any changes
permitted by this section are expressly reserved.
         I.   Subdivision and Re-Sale - A Planned Development may be subdivided
or resubdivided for purposes of sale or lease. If the subdivision or
resubdivision of a Planned Development will create a new plot line, the
applicant shall make application to the Plan Commission for the approval of the
subdivision or resubdivision. The Plan Commission shall approve the subdivision
or resubdivision if each section of the subdivided or resubdivided Planned
Development meets the provisions of Section
4.17(j)(5)(E) and (G) of this ordinance, governing density, and common open
space. All sections of a subdivided or resubdivided Planned Development are to
be controlled by the final development plan rather than by the provisions of
the zoning ordinance that would otherwise be applicable. The provisions of
Section
4.17(h), governing changes in the final development plan will apply. The owners
of a resubdivided Planned Development may jointly make application for a
conditional use or for an amendment to the final development plan.
§ 4.18 ADULT USES.
   (a)   DEFINITIONS - When used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
      1.   Adult Bookstore - An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for
rent, sale or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by
coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified
sexual activities,” or “specified anatomical areas,” or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an
establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence
of video preview or coin operated booths, exclusion of minors from the
establishment’s premises or any other factors showing the establishment’s
primary purpose is to purvey such material.
      2.   Adult Entertainment Cabaret - A public or private establishment
which (i) features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators;
(ii) not infrequently features entertainers who display “specified anatomical
areas”; or (iii) features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or
conduct perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron; or (iv) entertainers who engage in or are
engaged in explicit simulation of “specified sexual activities.”
      3.   Adult Motion Picture Theater - A building or area used for
presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
      4.   Adult Use - Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, and other similar uses.
      5.   Specified Sexual Activities - Means (i) human genitals in the state
of sexual stimulation or arousal; (ii) acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; and (iii) fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts.
      6.   Specified Anatomical Areas - Means:
         A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals,
pubic region; (ii) buttock; (iii) female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and
         B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   (b)   ADULT USES PROHIBITED - No property may be used for an adult use.
ARTICLE V
NON-CONFORMING LAND, BUILDINGS, AND USES
§ 5.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this article to provide for the regulation of
non-conforming buildings, structures and uses and specify those circumstances
and conditions under which those non-conforming buildings, structures and uses
which adversely affect the maintenance, development or use and taxable value of
other property in the district in which they are located shall be permitted to
continue.
   (b)   This ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that
district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those
districts that those non-conforming buildings, structures and uses which
substantially and adversely affect the orderly development and taxable value of
other property in the district not be permitted to continue without
restriction.
§ 5.02 CONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (a)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective
date of this ordinance or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to the
use regulations for the district in which it is located, shall be deemed to be
a legal non-conforming use, and may be continued except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (b)   Any legal, non-conforming building or structure may be continued in
use, provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (c)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of the ordinance or of amendments thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within
ninety (90) days and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such building shall
thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
§ 5.03 DISCONTINUANCE OF USE.
   (a)   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a non-
conforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions
of this ordinance, such premises shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
non-conforming use, even though the building may have been originally designed
and constructed for the prior non-conforming use.
   (b)   Whenever a non-conforming use of a building or structure or part
thereof has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months or
whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a
non-conforming use, such use shall not after being discontinued or abandoned be
reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity
with the regulations of the District.
   (c)   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a non-
conforming use for a period of six (6) months constitutes abandonment and shall
not thereafter be used in a non-conforming manner.
   (d)   A non-conforming use not authorized by the provisions of the zoning
ordinance in effect at the time the amendatory ordinance becomes effective,
shall be discontinued and not reestablished, except when the provisions of the
amendatory ordinance find the use to be conforming to the district in which it
is then located.
§ 5.04 CHANGE OF NON-CONFORMING USE.
   The non-conforming use of any building, structure or portion thereof, which
is designed or intended for use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, may be changed to another non-conforming use thereof only if such
other use is permitted by a Special Use Permit as authorized in the
Administrative Section.
§ 5.05 TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING USE, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (a)   The period of time during which the following non-conforming use of
buildings, structures or land may continue or remain, shall be limited from the
effective date of this ordinance or amendment hereto which causes the use to be
non-conforming. Every such non-conforming use shall be completely removed from
the premises at the expiration of the period of time specified below:
      1.   Any non-conforming use of building or structure having an assessed
valuation not in excess of $500 on the effective date of this ordinance shall
be removed after two (2) years.
      2.   Any non-conforming use of land where no enclosed building is
involved or where the only buildings employed are accessory or incidental to
such use, or where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming
building shall be removed after a period of two (2) years.
      3.   A non-conforming use of land (outside of a building) shall be made
to conform to the provisions of this ordinance within a period of five (5)
years.
      4.   All non-conforming signs, billboards, and outdoor advertising
structures shall be removed after a period of two years.
§ 5.06 REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS.
   (a)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a non-
conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
   (b)   No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a non-conforming use, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law.
      2.   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the non-
conforming use.
      3.   When a building in a residential district containing residential
non-conforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability provided no
structural alterations shall be made which would increase the number of
dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
§ 5.07 DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION.
   If a building or other structure containing a non-conforming use is damaged
or destroyed by any means (fire, explosion, act of God, or by a public enemy)
to the extent of sixty (60) percent or more of its valuation (at that time),
the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a
conforming use and in compliance with the provisions of the district in which
it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is forty (40) percent or
less, the building or structure may be then restored to its original condition
and the occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at the
time of such partial destruction.
   In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure
must be started within a period of six (6) months from the date of damage or
destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion.
§ 5.08 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS.
   (a)   A non-conforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to
conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (b)   No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be
altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such non-conforming use.
   (c)   No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space or any land beyond the boundaries of the
lot, as it existed on the effective date of this ordinance or to displace any
conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
   (d)   A building or structure which is non-conforming with respect to yards
or any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered if expanded
in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its non-conforming
with respect to the bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
§ 5.09 USE DISTRICT CHANGES.
   Whenever the boundaries of a use district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one use district to another use district of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall apply to any non-conforming uses
existing therein.
ARTICLE VI
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND SCHEDULES
§ 6.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this ordinance, the
City of Hickory Hills is divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
R-4 Single-Family Residential
R-5 Multi-Family Residential
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Highway Commercial
I-1 Industrial
 
§ 6.02 ZONING MAP, INCORPORATION OF.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this ordinance
are shown upon the district zoning maps, which are attached to and incorporated
into this ordinance. The said zoning maps, together with all notations
references and other information shown thereon, and all amendments thereto,
shall have the same force and effect and be as much a part of this ordinance as
if fully set forth and described herein.
§ 6.03 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION.
   (a)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys or extensions thereof, shall be construed to
follow such center lines or extensions thereof.
   (b)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (c)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
   (d)   Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be
determined by the scale appearing thereon.
§ 6.04 ZONING SCHEDULES.
   No person shall use land or a building or structure or erect, construct,
reconstruct, move or structurally alter a building, structure, or part there
of, except in conformance with the zoning schedules setting forth use
regulation, lot, bulk and coverage regulations, and performance standards which
follow in Sections
6.041,
6.042 and
6.043.
§ 6.041.1 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly residential development
has occurred or is likely to occur in accordance with the General Plan of the
City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   To upgrade the character of all residential areas in the City by
requiring standards of land use and lot and building bulk and size which more
accurately reflect existing development.
      3.   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the
incursion of incompatible non-residential uses.
      4.   To encourage open space.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Single-family dwellings
      2.   Community Residence - Small provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Private garage
      2.   Home Occupation
      3.   Greenhouse for private use
      4.   Sign
      5.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Public parks and playgrounds
      2.   Golf courses
§ 6.041.2 R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare through
the confinement of periodic floods to reasonable limits by regulating and
restricting areas of development along or in natural watercourses, channels,
drainage ditches and streams.
      2.   These districts and the regulations thereof shall apply in addition
to regulations of any other zoning district, which now or in the future may lie
within the boundaries of these districts.
      3.   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the
incursion of incompatible non-residential uses.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Single-family dwellings
      2.   Community Residence-Small provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Private garage
      2.   Home Occupation
      3.   Greenhouse for private use
      4.   Signs
      5.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Public or parochial schools
      2.   Public parks and playgrounds
      3.   Golf courses
      4.   Places of worship
§ 6.041.3 R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly residential development
has occurred or is likely to occur in accordance with the General Plan of the
City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   To upgrade the character of all residential areas in the City by
requiring standards of land use and lot and building bulk and size which more
accurately reflect existing development.
      3.   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the
incursion of incompatible non-residential uses.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Single-family dwellings
      2.   Community Residence-Small provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Private garage
      2.   Home Occupation
      3.   Greenhouse for private use
      4.   Sign
      5.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Public or parochial schools
      2.   Public parks and playgrounds
      3.   Golf courses
      4.   Places of worship
      5.   Municipal operated water utility
      6.   Convents or Monasteries
§ 6.041.4 R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly residential development
has occurred or is likely to occur in accordance with the General Plan of the
City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   To upgrade the character of all residential areas in the City by
requiring standards of land use and lot and building bulk and size which more
accurately reflect existing development.
      3.   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the
incursion of incompatible non-residential uses.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Single-family dwellings
      2.   Community Residence-Small provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      3.   Places of worship.
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Private garage
      2.   Home Occupation
      3.   Greenhouse for private use
      4.   Sign
      5.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Public or parochial schools
      2.   Public parks and playgrounds
      3.   Golf courses
      4.   Municipal operated water utility
      5.   Convents or Monasteries
§ 6.041.5 R-5 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly residential development
has occurred or is likely to occur in accordance with the General Plan of the
City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   To upgrade the character of all residential areas in the City by
requiring standards of land use and lot and building bulk and size which more
accurately reflect existing development.
      3.   To protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the
incursion of incompatible non-residential uses.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Single-family dwellings
      2.   Two-family dwellings
      3.   Multi-family dwellings
      4.   Condominiums (residential)
      5.   Community Residence-Small provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      6.   Community Residence-Large provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      7.   Places of worship
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Private garage
      2.   Off-street parking area
      3.   Home occupation
      4.   Sign
      5.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Public or parochial schools
      2.   Public parks and playgrounds
      3.   Public libraries
      4.   Planned unit development
      5.   Hospitals
      6.   Nursery schools
      7.   Private club
      8.   Institutions of an educational or philanthropic nature
      9.   Police or fire stations
      10.   Municipal service or storage building or yards
      11.   Social halls, lodges and fraternal organizations
      12.   Planned Unit Developments (Mixed Commercial and Residential)
§ 6.041.6 C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly mixed commercial and
residential uses have occurred.
      2.   To encourage the continuance of residential uses to those which
serve primarily the neighborhood.
      3.   Municipal uses that serve the community.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   The following uses are permitted provided they are operating
entirely within an enclosed building except off street parking and loading
facilities:
         A.   Art and School Supplies store
         B.   Bakeries - all goods are sold on premises at retail only
         C.   Banks and other financial institutions
         D.   Barber shops and Beauty Parlors
         E.   Book and Stationary stores
         F.   Business and professional offices, including medical offices
         G.   Camera and Photographic supply stores
         H.   Candy and Confectionery store
         I.   China, Glassware store
         J.   Coin and Philatelic stores
         K.   Currency Exchange
         L.   Drapery store and Fabric
         M.   Drug store
         N.   Dry Cleaning pickup and delivery depot
         O.   Dry Goods store
         P.   Florist
         Q.   Food stores
         R.   Gift shops
         S.   Haberdasheries and Millinery
         T.   Hardware stores
         U.   Hobby and Crafts store
         V.   Ice Cream store
         W.   Jewelry store - repair and sales
         X.   Laundries
         Y.   Locksmith shop
         Z.   Luggage and Leather goods store
         AA.   Musical Instruments - sales and repairs - retail only
         BB.   Photographic studio
         CC.   Radio, T.V., and Tape Recorder shop - sales and repairs
         DD.   Restaurants, excepting night clubs, cabarets, and similar
establishments
         EE.   Shoe Repair shop
         FF.   Shoe sales
         GG.   Small Electrical Appliance shop - sales and repairs
         HH.   Sporting and Athletic Goods store
         II.   Tailor and Dressmaker
         JJ.   Toy store
         KK.   Wearing Apparel store
         LL.   Planned Unit Developments (Mixed Commercial and Residential)
      2.   Apartments and/or living quarters -- subject to the density
requirements of the R-5 District, provided they are located above the main
floor and above a business use permitted in this district.
      3.   Municipal Operated Utilities
      4.   Police or Fire Stations
      5.   Municipal service or storage buildings or yards
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Signs.
      2.   Off-street parking and loading.
      3.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use.
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Dry cleaning plant.
      2.   Nursery Schools.
      3.   Nursing or convalescent homes.
      4.   Taverns and cocktail lounges.
      5.   Package liquor stores.
§ 6.041.7 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate those areas where predominantly commercial development
has occurred or is likely to occur in accordance with the General Plan of the
City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   To encourage the development of modern commercial development with
adequate off-street parking and other amenities to serve customers and
employees.
      3.   Preserve the City’s property tax base and to generate sales tax
revenue by limiting the uses to commercial retail stores, commercial
establishments, service establishments, and professional offices that generate
sales tax revenues, maintain the City’s tax base.
      4.   Provide convenient locations for the public to shop, obtain services
and conduct business.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Any use permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District except
residential (including within a planned development) and municipal uses.
      2.   Department stores
      3.   Funeral parlors
      4.   Hotels and Motels
      5.   Landscape nurseries, garden supplies
      6.   Medical and dental office building and testing laboratories
      7.   Package liquor stores
      8.   Specialty stores
      9.   Taverns and cocktail lounges
      10.   General retail stores
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Signs
      2.   Off-street parking and loading
      3.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Automobile repair shops
      2.   Automobile sales
      3.   Automobile service stations
      4.   Automobile washing establishment
      5.   Dry cleaning plants
      6.   Commercial indoor amusement enterprises including theatres, bowling
alleys, billiard parlors, and other similar uses.
      7.   Night clubs and cabarets
      8.   Commercial parking garages
§ 6.041.8 C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate areas appropriate for commercial uses which are either
oriented to the highway or intended as service to vehicles.
      2.   Preserve the City’s property tax base and to generate sales tax
revenue by limiting the uses to commercial retail stores, commercial
establishments, service establishments, and professional offices that generate
sales tax revenues, maintain the City’s tax base.
      3.   Provide convenient locations for the public to shop, obtain services
and conduct business.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Any use permitted in the C-2 General Commercial District
      2.   Animal hospitals, kennels, pounds
      3.   Automobile or service station training schools
      4.   Furniture stores
      5.   Interior decorating studios
      6.   Landscape nurseries, garden supplies
      7.   Music schools
      8.   Paint stores
      9.   Pet shops with no permanent boarding of animals
      10.   Variety stores
      11.   Wholesale establishments
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USE
      1.   Signs
      2.   Off-street parking and loading
      3.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Automobile repair shops
      2.   Automobile sales
      3.   Automobile service stations
      4.   Automobile washing establishments
      5.   Drive-in restaurants
      6.   Dry cleaning plants
      7.   Mobile home sales
      8.   Night clubs and cabarets
      9.   Commercial parking garages
      10.   Planned commercial developments
      11.   Cannabis Dispensing Organizations provided the organizations
otherwise comply with the provisions of Article IX.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 6.041.9 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT - USE REGULATIONS.
   (a)   PURPOSE
      1.   To delineate areas best suited for industrial development because of
location, topography, existing facilities and relationship to other land uses.
      2.   Uses incompatible with industry are not to be permitted.
   (b)   PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES
      1.   Professional and business offices, including medical and dental
clinics.
      2.   Laboratories and research firms involved in a research,
experimentation or testing of materials, goods or products.
      3.   Printing, publishing, or lithography establishments.
      4.   Miniwarehouses.
      5.   Direct selling establishments, where products are stored and
distributed, but not displayed for retail sales.
      6.   All low nuisance, light manufacturing and industrial activities,
including fabrication, processing, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning,
servicing, testing, packaging and storage of materials, products and goods that
can be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings.
      7.   Contractor offices.
      8.   Rental and sale of motor vehicles and equipment.
      9.   Municipal buildings and facilities including public works and dog
parks.
   (c)   PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
      1.   Signs
      2.   Off-street parking and loading
      3.   Indoor and outdoor storage areas
      4.   Other uses normally accessory to the principal permitted use
   (d)   SPECIAL USES
      1.   Planned industrial developments
      2.   Restaurants
      3.   Cannabis Organizations provided the organizations otherwise comply
with the provisions of Article IX.
(Ord. 19-24, passed 12-12-2019; Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019; Ord. 25-14,
passed 9-11-2025)
§ 6.042 LOT, BULK AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
                                                                                    MINIMUM
         MINIMUM LOT           MINIMUM YARD                              MINIMUM    FLOOR
DISTRICT DIMENSIONS            DIMENSIONS        MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK FOUNDATION AREA
                                                                         AREA       PER
                                                                                    UNIT
              Lot                    Side
         Lot  Area                   (%)         Height            Floor
         Area per  Width Depth Front One | Rear  (Ft |    Coverage Area  (Sq. Ft.)
         (Sq. D.U. (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) Total (Ft.) Stories) (%)      Ratio
         Ft.) (Sq.                   (Ft.)
              Ft.)
                                                                                        MINIMUM
                                   MINIMUM YARD                              MINIMUM    FLOOR
DISTRICT MINIMUM LOT DIMENSIONS    DIMENSIONS        MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND BULK FOUNDATION AREA
                                                                             AREA       PER
                                                                                        UNIT
                Lot                      Side
         Lot    Area                     (%)         Height            Floor
         Area   per    Width Depth Front One | Rear  (Ft |    Coverage Area  (Sq. Ft.)
         (Sq.   D.U.   (Ft.) (Ft.) (Ft.) Total (Ft.) Stories) (%)      Ratio
         Ft.)   (Sq.                     (Ft.)
                Ft.)
R-1      20,000 20,000 75    125   30    10%   25    25 | 2   30       0.6   1,600
R-2      15,000 15,000 75    125   30    10%   25    25 | 2   35       0.6   1,600
R-3      10,000 10,000 75    125   30    10%   25    25 | 2   40       0.7   1,200
R-4      6,600  6,600  60    100   30    10%   20    25 | 2   40       0.8   1,150
R-5
Single-  6,600  6,600  60    100   30    10%   20    25 | 2   40       0.7
Family
Two-     8,000  4,000  60    100   30    10%   25    35 | 2-  40       0.8
Family                                               1/2
Multi-   8,000  2,500  60    100   30    10 |  30    35 | 3   40       1.0              1,100
Family                                   25
C-1                                10    10%   25    35 | 3   70       1.0
C-2      5,000         50    100   15    10 |  25    70 | 6   50       1.0
                                         25
C-3      10,000        80    100   20    10 |  25    70 | 6   50       1.0
                                         25
I-1      10,000        80    100   20    10 |  25    70 | 6   40       1.0
                                         25
 
§ 6.043 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   Permitted and special exception uses enumerated in the I-1 Industrial
District, and uses accessory thereto, are subject to the following performance
standards.
      1.   SOUND - Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the
performance standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that such noises shall
be capable of being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of
being so measured, for the purpose of this comprehensive amendment, shall be
those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level
meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (2) decibels. Noises
incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent
nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
      In the I-1 District, at no point in the boundary of a Residential or
Commercial District shall be sound pressure level of any operation or plant
(other than background noises produced by sources not under control of this
Ordinance, such as the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation
facilities) exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated below:
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second) Decibels) ALONG RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
                                          BOUNDARIES
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second) Decibels) ALONG RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
                                          BOUNDARIES
0 to 75                                   72
75 to 150                                 67
150 to 300                                59
300 to 600                                52
600 to 1,200                              46
1,200 to 2,400                            40
2,400 to 4,800                            34
above to 4,800                            32
 
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second) Decibels) ALONG BUSINESS DISTRICT
                                          BOUNDARIES
                                          Maximum Permitted Sound Level (In
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles per Second) Decibels) ALONG BUSINESS DISTRICT
                                          BOUNDARIES
0 to 75                                   79
75 to 150                                 74
150 to 300                                66
300 to 600                                59
600 to 1,200                              53
1,200 to 2,400                            47
2,400 to 4,800                            41
above to 4,800                            39
 
      2.   VIBRATION - In the I-1 District, any industrial operation or
activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the nearest
adjacent lot line, earth-borne vibrations, (other than background vibrations
produced by some source not under control of this ordinance, such as the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) in excess of
the limits set forth in Column I is prohibited. In addition, any industrial
operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a
Residential District boundary line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the
limits set forth in Column II is prohibited. Vibrations shall be expressed as
displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring
system approved by the Zoning Board.
Frequency (Cycles per I* Displacement (Inches) II* Displacement (Inches)
Second)
Frequency (Cycles per I* Displacement (Inches) II* Displacement (Inches)
Second)
0 to 10               .0008                    .0004
10 to 20              .0005                    .0002
20 to 30              .0002                    .0001
30 to 40              .0002                    .0001
40 and over           .0001                    .0001
Steady-State-Vibrations, for the purpose of this Ordinance are
vibrations which are continuous, or if in discrete pulses are more
frequent than 100 per minute. Impact vibrations, that is, discrete
pulses which do not exceed 100 impulses per minute shall not cause in
excess of twice the displacements stipulated.
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
 
      3.   SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER - In the I-1 District, the emission of
more than twenty (20) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including
smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2. However, once during any six-
hour period each stack may emit up to thirty-five (35) smoke units - not to
exceed Ringelmann No. 2 - when blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during
fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted,
and then for not more than four (4) minutes per period.
      The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of
lot area during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission
per acre the correction factor set forth in the following table.
Allowance for Height of Emission*
Height of Emission Above Grade (feet) Correction Pounds per hour per Acre
Allowance for Height of Emission*
Height of Emission Above Grade (feet) Correction Pounds per hour per Acre
50                                    0.01
100                                   0.06
150                                   0.10
200                                   0.16
300                                   0.30
400                                   0.50
*Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
 
   Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within
the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
         A.   Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each
source of emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area,
thereby obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
         B.   From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in A. above,
deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of emission
set forth in the table, thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in pounds
per acre per hour from each source of emission.
         C.   Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in B.
above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of emission
within the boundaries of the lot. Such total shall not exceed one pound per
acre of lot area during any one hour.
      4.   TOXIC MATTER - In the I-1 District, no activity or operation shall
cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic matter across lot lines in such
concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or business.
      5.   NOXIOUS AND ODOROUS MATTER - In the I-1 Districts, no activity or
operation shall cause at any time, the discharge of matter across lot lines in
such concentrations as to be noxious. The emission of matter in such quantities
as to be readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines is
prohibited.
      6.   FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS - In the I-1 District, the storage,
utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      The storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products
ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted provided
the following condition is met:
      Said material or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured
within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls and
protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
      The storage, utilization, or manufacture of flammable liquids, or
materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be
permitted in accordance with the following table - exclusive of storage of
finished products in original sealed containers, which shall be unrestricted:
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED* (In Gallons)
TOTAL CAPACITY OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS PERMITTED* (In Gallons)
Industries Engaged In Storage Only                           Above      Underground
                                                             Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° F       Prohibited 100,000
From and including 105° F. to and including 187° F.        Prohibited 100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° Prohibited 100,000
F.
Industries Engaged in Utilization and Manufacture of         Above      Underground
Flammable Materials                                          Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° F.      500,000    100,000
From and including 105° F. to and including 187° F.        20,000     100,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 195° 500,000    100,000
F.
*When flammable gases are stored, utilized, or manufactured and measured in cubic
feet, the quantity in cubic feet permitted, at standard temperature and pressure
(32° F. and 14.7 Psi), shall not exceed three hundred (300) times the quantities as
listed above.
 
      7.   GLARE AND HEAT - In the I-1 District, any operation producing
intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in such manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance
across lot lines.
      8.   RADIOACTIVITY OR ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE - No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity or electrical disturbance
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment. All applicable Federal
regulations shall be complied with.
ARTICLE VII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 7.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, ZONING CERTIFICATE, AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner shall be the Enforcement Officer for the
Zoning Ordinance. In addition thereto, such other personnel in the Building
Department as are prescribed with the duty to enforce the Zoning Ordinance by
the building Commissioner shall be deemed to be enforcement Officers.
   (b)   Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of
land or buildings shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of
this City unless the application for such permit has been examined by the
Office of the Building Commissioner that the proposed building or structure
complies with all provisions of this ordinance. Any permit or certificate of
occupancy issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
null and void.
   (c)   No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date
of the Zoning Ordinance, and no addition to a previously existing building
shall be occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective date of the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Office of the Building Commissioner. Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.
   (d)   Every application for a zoning certificate, or occupancy permit, shall
be accompanied by such information, plans, drawings, and plats as deemed
necessary by the Building Commissioner.
§ 7.02 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (a)   CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP - A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
authorized to be established. The word “Board”, when used in this section,
shall be construed to mean Zoning Board of Appeals. The said Board shall
consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of
the City Council. The members of said Board shall serve respectively for the
following terms, or until their respective successors are appointed and
qualifies; one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for
four years, one for five years, one for six years, and one for seven years, for
the first seven appointed, and five years each for those following the first
seven appointed. One of the members of said Board shall be designated by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council, as Chairman of said Board, and
shall hold his office as Chairman until his successor is appointed. The Mayor
shall have the power to remove any member of said Board for cause and after a
public hearing. Vacancies upon said Board shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein provided
for the appointment of such member. The members of the Board shall receive such
salaries as may be determined and fixed by the City Council.
   (b)   MEETINGS AND RULES - All meetings of the Board shall be held at the
call of the Chairman, and at such times as the Board may determine. All
hearings conducted by said Board shall be open to the public. Any person may
appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by his attorney. The
Chairman, or in his absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every
appeal, authorized variation and every recommendation, order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the Board shall be filed immediately in the
office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record. The Board may adopt its
own rules and procedures, not in conflict with the Zoning Ordinance or with the
applicable Illinois statutes. In the absence of any rule adoption, Robert’s
Rules of Order shall prevail.
   (c)   JURISDICTION - The Board is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   To hear and decide all appeals from an administrative order,
requirement, or determination made by the Building Commissioner.
      2.   To hear and decide all applications for variations upon which the
Board is required to decide under the Zoning Ordinance and as directed by City
Council.
      3.   To hear and decide all applications for special uses upon which the
Board is required to decide under the Zoning Ordinance and as directed by City
Council.
      4.   To hear and decide all other matters upon which it is required to
pass under the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 7.03 VARIATIONS.
   (a)   The power to determine and approve variations is reserved to the City
Council and shall be exercised only by the adoption of ordinances. No
variations shall be made without a hearing before the Board, or such other body
as determined by the City Council.
   (b)   Variations may be granted by the City Council if the latter determines
that the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance will be complied
with.
   (c)   The Board shall not decide or recommend variations in the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance, unless it shall have made findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in the following cases:
      1.   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located; and that the variation, if
granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality; or
      2.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
that the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the
locality.
   (d)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Board, in
making its decision or recommendations whenever there are practical
difficulties or particular hardship, shall also take into consideration the
extent to which the following facts favorable to the applicant, have been
established by the evidence that:
      1.   The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter
of the regulations were to be carried out.
      2.   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would
not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification.
      3.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property.
      4.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property.
      5.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located.
      6.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or
otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
   (e)   The Board may require or recommend such conditions and restrictions
upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with
the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the injurious
effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to
implement the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (f)   The City Council may refer any proposed variation back to the Board
for further consideration.
   (g)   Any proposed variation which fails to receive the approval of the
Board of Appeals, said approval meaning the affirmative vote of four members of
the Board, shall not be passed by the City Council except by the affirmative
vote of two-thirds of all the Aldermen of the City.
   (h)   Every variation shall be made after a hearing before the Board, and
shall be accompanied by findings of fact which refer to any exhibits containing
plans and specifications for the proposed variation. The findings of fact shall
specify the reason or reasons for making the variation. The terms of relief
granted shall be specified in the ordinance, and may be conditioned upon such
specific terms as are determined by the City Council.
§ 7.04 SPECIAL USES.
   The procedural provisions of Section 7.03 shall apply to any request for a
special use.
§ 7.05 AMENDMENTS OF REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS.
   (a)   For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, and general welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the
City, and lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways,
the City Council may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth,
amend the regulations imposed in the districts created by the Zoning Ordinance,
provided that in all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this
section, due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation
of property values, the directions of building development to the best
advantages of the entire City, and the uses to which property is devoted at the
time of the adoption of such amendatory ordinance. Zoning districts may also be
amended from time to time by the City Council.
   (b)   No amendment of the regulations or districts shall be made without a
hearing before the Plan Commission or such other Commission designated by the
City Council.
   (c)   In case a written protest is filed pursuant to Section 11-13-14 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, no amendment shall pass the City Council except upon a
favorable vote of two-thirds of the Aldermen then holding office.
§ 7.06 PROCEDURE.
   (a)   An application for a variation, special use, or amendment of a zoning
regulation or district shall be made upon such forms as are prescribed by the
City. An application may be made by any official of the City, or any person
owning the property, or having a contract to purchase the property.
   (b)   The application shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall transmit
the same to the Zoning Board of Appeals or Plan Commission, depending upon the
type of application and who is charged under the Zoning Ordinance with the
responsibility of holding hearings.
   (c)   An application shall be accompanied by a plat of survey of the
property showing all structures located thereon. For all applications involving
vacant property, a plat of survey shall show such topographic data as is deemed
necessary by the City. Any required supplemental information must be filed by
the applicant.
   (d)   All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00, except that
applications for any property located within or asking for reclassification to
an R-5, C-1, C-2, C-3, and I-1 shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00. Any
costs incurred by the City in connection with an application, including the
hearing, court reporter, engineering studies, or other expenses shall be paid
by the applicant prior to any final action of the City Council.
§ 7.07 NOTICE.
   (a)   Notice of all public hearings shall be provided by publication and by
mailing. The publication notice shall appear in a newspaper published within
the City or of general circulation within the City at least once not more than
30 nor less than 15 days before the hearing. The notice shall contain the name
of the property owner, the name of the petitioner, the legal description of the
property, the address of the property, the relief requested, and the date,
time, and place of the public hearing. All public hearings may be continued
from time to time or adjourned, without any further notice being published.
   (b)   A copy of the notice to be published shall be mailed by regular mail
to all parties listed on the current tax records of the County Collector of all
property located within 250 feet in any direction of the property for which the
public hearing is being held. This notice shall be prepared and sent by the
City not more than 30 nor less than 10 days before the hearing. All public
hearings may be continued from time to time or adjourned, without any further
notice being sent.
   (c)   Not less than 10 days prior to the date of any public hearing the
petitioner shall post and maintain on the property a wooden sign not less than
12 square feet containing the following information:
      1.   Date, place and time of public hearing.
      2.   Summary of relief requested.
      3.   Future use of property.
   The sign shall be erected within 5 feet of the front property line so that
it is visible from the street. At the public hearing the petitioner shall
submit an affidavit with a photograph of the sign as evidence of erection.
§ 7.08 HEARING AND RECOMMENDATION.
   (a)   The appropriate body shall conduct a public hearing on all
applications within 35 days of the filing of the completed application. Such
hearing may be continued from time to time or adjourned. Any person who lives
or owns property within 250 feet of the applicant’s property or any person who
proves specific, special, or unique damages to himself or his property or any
adverse effect upon his property if the application is granted shall have the
right to be heard at the hearing. All testimony shall be under oath.
   (b)   Subpoenas shall be issued in compliance with Sections 11-13-7 and 11-
13-7a of the Illinois Municipal Code. All interested parties shall have the
opportunity to present witnesses on their behalf and to cross-examine all
testifying witnesses. These rights may be limited to insure orderly and speedy
proceedings.
   (c)   Any property owners or other parties in opposition to the application
may, upon request, be granted one continuance for the purpose of presenting
evidence to rebut testimony given by the applicant.
   (d)   Upon the conclusion of the hearing a recommendation and finding of
facts shall be issued within 10 days to the City Council.
§ 7.09 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   (a)   Upon receipt of the recommendation and finding of facts, the City
Council shall give due consideration to the applicant. Any relief granted or
application granted shall be by way of ordinance adopted by the City Council.
Such ordinance may contain conditions upon the granting of the relief of
application.
   (b)   All applications not acted upon within 90 days after filing of the
recommendation and finding of facts shall be deemed automatically denied.
   (c)   The City Council may refer any matter back to the hearing board for
further proceedings.
§ 7.10 PENALTIES.
   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, neglects, or
refuses to comply with or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject upon conviction to a fine of not less than $25.00
nor more than $500.00 or imprisonments for not more than six months, or both,
for each offense; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (b)   If any person, firm, corporation or business association violates any
provision of this ordinance, the Building Commissioner shall make such
violation known to said person, firm, corporation or business association, and
shall confirm such notice in writing. Said person, firm, corporation or
business association shall then have 10 days in which to (1) correct such
violation, (2) make arrangements which are satisfactory to the Building
Commissioner to have said violation corrected, or (3) to show cause to the
Building Commissioner why said violation will not be corrected.
   (c)   If, after the expiration of the 10-day period, any person, firm,
corporation or business association has not complied with (1), (2), or (3) of
the preceding paragraph above, the Building Commissioner shall cause a
complaint to be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County citing said person,
firm, corporation or business association for such violation.
ARTICLE VIII
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES
§ 8.01 RESPONSIBILITY.
   The primary responsibility for enforcement of all regulations in this Zoning
Ordinance pertaining to community residences, certifications and the issuance
of administrative permits, shall be in the Laws and Ordinance Committee of the
City Council. The primary responsibility for the issuance of a building permit,
construction and compliance with all building regulations including issuance of
an occupancy permit that construction complies with the Building Code shall
remain with the Building Commissioner.
§ 8.02 APPLICATION FOR COMMUNITY RESIDENCE PERMITS.
   In every application for a community residence permit or certification, the
applicant shall demonstrate that it has either obtained or is eligible for
state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed community
residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or certified or
eligible for licensing or certification. Applicants to operate community
residences for which the state does not require licensing or certification
shall obtain a special use permit prior to obtaining an occupancy certificate.
The Laws and Ordinance Committee of the City Council shall issue such permits
or certifications administratively. The Committee may revoke a certificate of
occupancy for a community residence if its license or certification, or the
operator’s license or certification to operate community residences, is
revoked. A certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or
to another location.
§ 8.03 COMMUNITY RESIDENCE PERMITS.
   No building permit or occupancy permit, administrative or otherwise, shall
be issued unless it is found that such application conforms with the following
standards:
   (a)   That it complies with zoning requirements.
   (b)   That it meets all the qualifications for a group home set forth in
law.
   (c)   That it complies with the current Building Code, Fire Prevention Code
and Property Maintenance Code.
   (d)   That it complies with all state and federal building and occupancy
requirements.
   (e)   That it is duly licensed and certified by the state.
   (f)   That it would not create an institutional setting.
   (g)   That adequate off-street parking is provided.
   (h)   That parking on streets will not interfere with other resident street
parking.
   (i)   That the building is so designed that it will fit in with the
character of the neighborhood in which it is being located; that is, provide a
home-like atmosphere.
ARTICLE IX
CANNABIS ORGANIZATIONS
§ 9.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide regulations
regarding the operation of cannabis organizations within the corporate limits
of the City of Hickory Hills. Such organizations shall comply with all
regulations provided in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
410 ILCS 130/1 and the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705, as may be
applicable, as may be amended from time to time (the “Acts”), regulations
enacted pursuant to authority granted through the Acts, and the regulations
provided herein. In the event that the Acts are amended, the more restrictive
of the state or City regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.02 PROCESS.
   Cannabis organizations shall be a special use in the I-1 Industrial
District, and applications for such use shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions of Section 4.17 of the Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance and as
provided in this article. No cannabis organization shall be sited, opened or
operated unless specifically authorized under and pursuant to the Act and this
Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.03 CANNABIS ORGANIZATION COMPONENTS.
   In determining compliance with Section
4.17 of the Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance, the following components of the
cannabis organization shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the
circumstances affecting the particular property in the context of the existing
and intended future use of other properties in the vicinity:
   (a)   Impact of the proposed organization on existing or planned uses
located within the vicinity of the subject property.
   (b)   Proposed structure in which the organization will be located, total
square footage, security installations/security plan, and building code
compliance.
   (c)   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
   (d)   Anticipated parking demand based and available private parking supply,
including any unique demand for handicapped parking.
   (e)   Traffic generation and adjacent roadway capacity.
   (f)   Site design, including access points, internal site circulation and
commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking.
   (g)   Proposed signage plan.
   (h)   Proximity to a public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home, residential care home, a
public park, or any property lawfully used in a residential manner or any
residential zoning district.
   (i)   Proximity to tollway ramp(s).
   (j)   Compliance with all requirements provided in Section
9.04 (Cannabis Industrial Organizations) or Section
9.05 (Cannabis Dispensing Organizations), as applicable.
   (k)   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
Section
4.17 of the Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.04 CANNABIS INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS.
   In those zoning districts in which cannabis industrial organizations may be
located, the proposed organization must comply with the following:
   (a)   A cannabis industrial organization (the enclosed, locked facility
where cannabis will be grown, harvested, infused, manufactured, packaged, or
otherwise prepared for distribution) may not be located within 2,500 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school,
preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home, or
residential care home.
   (b)   A cannabis industrial organization may not be located within 2,500
feet of the property line of an area zoned residential.
   (c)   No retail sale or distribution of cannabis or cannabis infused
products shall be permitted on the premises of a cannabis industrial
organization.
   (d)   The on-site consumption of cannabis or a cannabis-infused products
shall be prohibited on the premises of a cannabis industrial organization.
   (e)   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by a
cannabis industrial organization shall be devoted to the activities of the
organization.
   (f)   Any cannabis transporting organization shall be the sole use of the
tenant space of the building in which it is located.
   (g)   For purposes of determining the number required parking, cannabis
industrial organizations shall be classified as a “Manufacturing Plant” per
Section
4.11 of the Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance, provided, however, that the City
may require that additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis
completed through Section
9.03 of this article.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.05 CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS.
   In those zoning districts in which cannabis dispensing organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   (a)   A cannabis dispensing organization may not be located within 1,000
feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery school,
preschool, primary or secondary school, day care center, day care home,
residential care home or public park.
   (b)   A cannabis dispensing organization may not be located in a house,
apartment, condominium or a building devoted in whole or in part to a
residential use.
   (c)   A cannabis dispensing organization may not have drive-thru service.
   (d)   A cannabis dispensing organization shall be located in a free-standing
structure of which it shall be the only tenant or occupant.
   (e)   The on-site consumption of cannabis or cannabis-infused products shall
be prohibited on the premises of a cannabis dispensing organization.
   (f)   A cannabis dispensing organization may not engage in any activity
authorized to be conducted by or in a cannabis industrial organization.
   (g)   At least 90% of the floor area of any facility occupied by a cannabis
dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the cannabis
dispensing organization. For purposes of calculating the total square footage
dedicated to retail sales, that portion of the floor area dedicated to the
distribution of cannabis or cannabis infused products shall be excluded from
this calculation; all floor area dedicated to the sale of other cannabis
products and/or paraphernalia shall be included.
   (f)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
classified as a “Medical Office” per Section
4.11 of the Hickory Hills Zoning Ordinance except that the number shall be
calculated based on cannabis dispensing organization agents working on the
property, provided, however, that the City may require that additional parking
be provided as a result of the analysis completed through Section
9.03 of this article.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.06 LOCATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   The following locational restrictions shall govern cannabis organizations in
addition to those set forth in the Acts and this article:
   (a)   All cannabis organizations are prohibited, and no person shall locate,
operate, own, suffer, or allow to be operated a cannabis organization in the
following zoning districts:
 
R-1 Single-Family Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
R-4 Single-Family Residential
R-5 Multi-Family Residential
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
 
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to locate or operate a cannabis organization in
any zoning district on property west of 78th Avenue.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to locate or operate a cannabis dispensing
organization within 1.00 mile of another cannabis dispensing organization.
   (d)   No other cannabis organization, of any type, shall be allowed, and no
person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, or allow to be operated a cannabis
organization within any zoning district unless specifically authorized in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
   (e)   The operation of any cannabis organization in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be
abated by all available remedies afforded under the law.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
§ 9.07 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicant shall install building enhancements, such as security cameras,
lighting, or other improvements, as needed or at the request of the City, to
ensure the safety of employees and customers of the cannabis organizations.
Said improvements may be required by the City in excess of those security
measures required by the Acts.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 12-12-2019)
CHAPTER 23: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
23.01   Approvals, Interpretations, Exceptions and Jurisdiction
   
23.02   Subdivision Regulations Adopted
   
23.03   Streets
   
23.04   Cul-de-sacs
   
23.05   Blocks
   
23.06   Lots
   
23.07   Easements
   
23.08   Drainage and Floodplain Provisions
   
23.09   Recreation Areas, Open Spaces, and Natural Features
   
23.10   Improvements
   
23.11   General Principles
   
23.12   The Preliminary Plat
   
23.13   The Final Plat
   
23.14   Final Approval
   
23.15   Definitions
   
23.16   Engineering Fees
   
23.17   Condominiums
§ 23.01 APPROVALS, INTERPRETATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND JURISDICTION.
   (a)   No land shall be subdivided nor any street laid out nor any
improvements be made until the plan or plans of the subdivision or streets or
improvements shall have been submitted to the Plan Commission for
recommendation to the City Council.
   (b)   All administrative interpretations of these rules and regulations are
reserved to the Plan Commission.
   (c)   The Plan Commission may vary and except from the dimensional standards
and improvement requirements as set forth below in instances where there is
sufficient evidence in its opinion of hardship, where topography indicates, or
where any other reasonable deterrents prevail.
§ 23.02 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The regulations set forth in Sections
23.03 through
23.11 apply to land subdivisions.
§ 23.03 STREETS.
   (a)   All rights of way shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
 
Primary streets (section line)       100 ft.
Secondary streets (1/2 section line) 80 ft.
Minor streets                        60 ft.
Cul-de-sac streets                   60 ft.
Crosswalkways                        15 ft.
Utility basements                    10 ft.
 
   (b)   Clear visibility, measured along the center line of the street, shall
be provided for at least 300 feet on all primary streets, 200 feet on secondary
streets and at least 100 feet on all other streets.
   (c)   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe traffic flow. Street intersections shall conform to the
following standards:
      1.   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60
degrees.
      2.   Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets
shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such intersections shall be
designed with extreme care for both pedestrian and vehicular safety.
      3.   Clear sight triangles of 30 feet measured along street lot lines
from their point of junction shall be provided at all intersections, and no
building shall be permitted within such triangles.
      4.   To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from center
line to center line.
      5.   Streets entering opposite side of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125 feet
between their center lines.
      6.   Minimum curb radii at street intersection shall be 19 feet measured
from edge of pavement for intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet
for intersections involving other type streets, or such greater radius as is
suited to the specific intersection.
      7.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street or
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width in conformance
with the General Plan will be required.
      8.   Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 7 percent, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than 4
percent grades for a distance of 25 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way
line of the intersecting street.
   (d)   Alleys are not permitted.
   (e)   Unless otherwise shown on the Official Plan Map, the arrangement of
streets in a subdivision shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
primary and secondary streets in the surrounding areas; or
      2.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other
conditions make such continuation or projection impracticable.
   (f)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing proposed primary
street, the Plan Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse
frontage with screen planting or such other treatment as may be necessary to
promote the realization of the Official Plan or to provide for the health,
safety, comfort and convenience of the residents of the City of Hickory Hills,
and contiguous territory by the protection of residential properties and the
separation of through and local traffic.
   (g)   No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. Streets which are continuations of existing
streets shall bear the name of the existing street.
   (h)   Streets shall be logically related to the topography to produce usable
lots and reasonable grades.
   (i)   Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders on existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
   (j)   Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs to permit future
street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designed as cul-de-sacs.
§ 23.04 CUL-DE-SACS.
   (a)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 400 feet measured by a
straight line from the intersection at origin through center of circle to end
of right-of-way.
   (b)   Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a
minimum diameter of 125 feet (right-of-way).
   (c)   Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at the closed end with a paved
turnaround having a minimum radius to the outer pavement edge of 42.4 feet.
   (d)   Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, a
turnaround right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried to the
property line in such a way as to permit future extension of the street into
the adjoining tract.
§ 23.05 BLOCKS.
   (a)   The maximum length of blocks shall be 600 feet. The use of additional
crosswalkways in any instance to provide reasonable access will be specified by
the Plan Commission.
   (b)   No specific rules concerning the shape of blocks is made, but blocks
must fit easily into the overall plan and their design must evidence
consideration of lot planning, traffic flow and public areas.
   (c)   Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use must be designated
as such, and the plan must show adequate off-street areas in order to provide
for parking, loading and moving docks and such other facilities that may be
required to accommodate vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two
tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots bordering a major traffic
street are used.
   (e)   Pedestrian crosswalkways may be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such crosswalks shall
have a width of not less than 10 feet and a paved walk of not less than 5 feet.
§ 23.06 LOTS.
   Lots of subdivisions shall conform to the following regulations:
   (a)   Subdivisions containing family dwellings: For minimum dimensions and
yard requirements, refer to Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hickory Hills.
   (b)   Subdivisions containing two family dwellings: For minimum dimensions
and yard requirements, refer to Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hickory Hills.
   (c)   Subdivision containing multiple family dwellings: For minimum
dimensions and yard requirements, refer to Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Hickory Hills.
   (d)   Access from private streets shall be deemed acceptable only if such
streets are designed and improved in accordance with these regulations.
   (e)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (f)   If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use if
acceptable to the municipality.
   (g)   Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where employed to prevent
vehicular access to major traffic streets.
   (h)   Depth and width of parcels laid out or reversed for non-residential
use shall be sufficient to provide satisfactory space for off-street parking
and unloading as required by the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
   (i)   Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings.
   (j)   Driveway grades between the street and the setback shall not exceed 10
percent.
§ 23.07 EASEMENTS.
   (a)   Easements with a minimum width of 10 feet plus the width of any
required pipe or other improvement shall be provided as necessary for
utilities.
   (b)   To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
   (c)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the
line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve
natural drainage.
   (d)   With the exception of fences and public utility poles, no structure,
accessory structure, garage or shed shall be constructed on the exterior 5 feet
of any private utility, public utility, water, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or
other easement (excluding surface drainage easements).
   (e)   Under no circumstances shall any structure, accessory structure,
garage or shed be constructed within 3 feet of any underground utility.
(Ord. 21-4, passed 6-10-2021)
§ 23.08 DRAINAGE AND FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Every proposed subdivision shall make provision for surface drainage
and flooding. The provisions shall be based upon a study prepared by the
subdivider’s engineer of the entire area tributary to streams, channels, or
drainage ways in the subdivision. This study, upon which design of the storm
sewer and drainage system will be based, shall consist of at least the
following:
      1.   Analysis of area tributary to subdivision, including area,
topography, drainage, rainfall intensity and frequency, run-off, and flooding;
      2.   A topographic map of the subdivision, indicating any areas subject
to flooding and showing the surface run-off which will occur in the subdivision
after extreme rainstorms;
      3.   A report of the basis of the design of the proposed sewers, open
channels, and detention basins proposed for the subdivision.
   (b)   The proposed drainage system and outlet of the subdivision shall be
designed so that it will not fail to function when the receiving stream or
channel is in full flood. Streets shall be designed where possible to act as
open channels, with positive drainage toward the major watercourse or channel
in the area.
   (c)   Each river or stream which borders or traverses the proposed
subdivision shall be provided with a storm water easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse and of such further
width as will be adequate to accommodate observed, computed, or anticipated
flood flows and heights and will provide access along the channel for operation
of channel operation and maintenance equipment.
   (d)   Each minor drainageway, channel, or watercourse which borders or
traverses the proposed subdivision shall be maintained as open channels with a
storm water easement or right-of-way of adequate width to accommodate observed,
computed, or anticipated run-off and flood flows. Upon indication of adequacy
of design, as evidenced by the studies of subsection (a) the upper reaches of
such drainageways may be enclosed as a part of a storm sewer system.
   (e)   Where a surface drainage easement or public utility easement is
platted for a rear yard or side yard, such easement shall be centered on the
lot lines and shall be a minimum of 5 feet in width on each lot. With the
exception of fences and public utility poles, no structures, accessory
structures, garages, landscaping berm or sheds shall be constructed thereon
without the approval of the City. No structures will be allowed if the flow of
water is impeded.
   (f)   The elevation of the finished surface of any street proposed in an
area of a subdivision subject to flooding shall be not less than one foot above
the observed, computed, or anticipated flood level.
   (g)   When a subdivision drainage plan proposes use of retention basins or
ponds, which are to be dedicated for public use, provision shall be made that a
public access be possible through extension of a street stub to connect the
facility to a public street.
(Ord. 21-4, passed 6-10-2021)
§ 23.09 RECREATION AREAS, OPEN SPACES, AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   (a)   Where a proposed park, playground or open space shown on the General
Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the Commission shall
require that such area or areas be shown on the Plat in accordance with the
requirements specified in subsection (b) below. Such area or areas may be
dedicated to the city by the subdivider if the City Council approves such
dedication.
   (b)   The Plan Commission shall require that the Plat show sites of a
character, extent, and location suitable for the development of a park,
playground, or other recreation purpose. The Plan Commission may require that
the developer satisfactorily grade any such recreation areas shown on the Plat.
   The Plan Commission shall require that not less than 3 acres of recreation
space be provided per 100 dwelling units shown on the Plat. However, in no case
shall the amount be more than 10 percent of the total area of the subdivision.
Such area or areas may be dedicated to the city by the subdivider if the City
Council approves such dedication.
   (c)   In the event that an area to be used for a park or playground is
required to be so shown, the subdivider shall submit, prior to final approval,
to the Plan Commission 3 prints (one on cloth) drawn in ink showing, at a scale
of not less than 30 feet to the inch, such area and the following features
thereof:
      1.   The boundaries of the said area, giving lengths and bearings of all
straight lines; radii, lengths, central angles and tangent distances of all
curves.
      2.   Existing features such as streams, ponds, clusters of trees, and
structures.
      3.   Existing and, if applicable, proposed changes in grade and contours
of the said area and of area immediately adjacent.
   (d)   Reserve strips of land which might be used to control access from the
proposed subdivision to any neighboring property or to any land within the
subdivision itself shall be prohibited.
   (e)   The Plan Commission shall, wherever possible, establish the
preservation of all natural features which add value to residential
developments and to the community, such as large trees or groves, watercourses
and falls, beaches, historic spots, vistas and similar irreplaceable assets. No
trees with a diameter of 8 inches or more as measured 3 feet above the base of
the trunk shall be removed unless such tree is within the right-of-way of a
street as shown on the final Subdivision Plat. Removal of additional trees
shall be subject to the approval of the Plan Commission. In no case, however,
shall a tree with a diameter of 8 inches or more as measured 3 feet above the
base of the trunk be removed without prior approval by the Plan Commission.
§ 23.10 IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   Plans, profiles, and specifications for all required improvements
shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications herein in this
section set forth. No improvements shall be made, installed or constructed
unless and until all such plans, profiles and specifications shall have been
submitted to and approved by the city engineer, and such county, state and
other public officials as may be concerned or have jurisdiction therein. All
construction shall comply with design specifications approved by the Illinois
Department of Transportation and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
Greater Chicago.
   (b)   The following improvements shall be required:
      1.   Storm Drainage. A system of storm water drainage shall be
constructed and installed, consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets and
other necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect roadway
pavements. In all drainage improvements provision must be made for carrying off
storm water which will eventually find its natural way to or through the area
being developed. Such provision shall be designed to take water at the
anticipated rate of run-off which will result when a population density of
approximately 13 persons per gross acre shall reside upstream. Such facilities
shall remove storm water to flood areas adjacent to the subdivision. The design
capacity shall be such that the drainage system will provide for the removal of
storm water resulting from rainfall with an intensity rate of 2 inches per
hour. All storm sewers shall be shown in plan and profile on both preliminary
and final plans.
      If as the result of special studies, the city shall find that certain
areas may require additional consideration because of the inherently poor
conditions of drainage, the following shall apply to those areas. Special curbs
and gutters may be required in order to store portions of the storm water for
short periods; certain minimum house elevations and street grades may be
specified where studies indicate that removal of water may not be accomplished
for prolonged periods; reservation of certain areas may be required for
impoundments of run-off in excess of what the natural channels area capable of
removing; storm water either in conduits or in ditches.
      In the event that any of the conditions above may apply, and that special
structures may be required, it shall be the burden of the builder to construct
these insofar as they benefit his development, and to make adequate provisions
for future construction by others where such provision is called for.
      2.   Sewage Disposal. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete sanitary sewer system which shall connect all lots and tracts within
the subdivision with the public sanitary sewer system.
      3.   Water Supply. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete water main supply system which shall be connected to the public water
supply system. Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire
subdivision when served by a public water supply system. Water mains should be
not less than 6 inches in diameter, and shall include installation of shut-off
valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at intervals of not
to exceed 300 feet.
      4.   House Services. House services shall be constructed to connection
with the utility service mains constructed within any street to serve each
adjoining lot, tract or building site; such house services shall extend from
the main to a point of at least 8 feet beyond the outside curb lines of the
proposed roadway pavement in the street. Plans shall indicate the location of
all such house services connected with utility mains constructed within any
street or thoroughfare. The minimum size of sanitary house service pipes shall
be 6 inches internal diameter.
      5.   Streets. All streets within the subdivision shall be graded and
improved with a durable hard surface roadway. Before the base course of the
roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work, such as sewer, water and
gas mains, house service connections therewith, and any underground conduits
for electric and telephone lines, shall be complete and installed in place and
approved.
      6.   Curbs and Gutters. The dimensions and materials of curb and gutter
shall conform to the specifications of the city engineer.
      7.   Sidewalks and Crosswalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in the
street right-of-way and not more than one foot from the abutting property line.
      8.   Street Trees. One hardwood tree having a diameter of not less than 2
inches shall be planted at a location approved by the Building Commissioner in
the parkway in front of each lot, except that a lot with frontage in excess of
74 feet shall require two hardwood trees.
      9.   Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided by the
subdivision throughout the subdivision at all street intersections and at
intervals of not more than 300 feet between intersections. Specific street
light locations shall be approved by the city engineer.
      10.   Street Signs. An appropriate street sign shall be erected at each
street intersection within the subdivision. The type of sign and the location
thereof shall be subject to the approval and direction of the Director of
Public Works.
   (c)   All utility distribution lines for telephone and electric service to
be installed shall be placed underground within easements or dedicated public
ways. The installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with
applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission
now or hereafter effective, and the owner or subdivider of any property to be
served from such underground installations shall be responsible for compliance
with the rules and regulations, now or hereafter effective and filed with said
Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/1-101, of
any public utility whose services will be required with respect to the
provision of such underground facilities.
   (d)   No approval of a final Plat will be made until improvements as
required by the Plan Commission are made, or until the Plan Commission has been
provided proper guarantee of performance.
   (e)   The following procedure for the required public improvements shall be
followed:
      1.   In all cases, the subdivider shall be responsible for the
installation of all required improvements under supervision of the city
engineer.
      2.   No Final Plat shall be recorded until provision has been made for
the proper installation of required improvements. The subdivider must post with
the City Clerk a cashiers check, certified check or letter of credit made out
to the city in an amount equal to 110% of the amount required to install the
required public improvements as determined by the city engineer. The form of
the letter of credit shall be approved by the city attorney and shall provide
for a one-year guarantee after acceptance of the public improvements.
      3.   The subdivider shall guarantee maintenance and repair of all public
improvements for one year after the construction thereof has been approved by
the city engineer.
§ 23.11 GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
   (a)   All street lot layouts shall conform to the existing layout of the
city or of adjacent areas under its jurisdiction and shall constitute
reasonable extension of these, and shall not violate any part of the Master
Plan of the city.
   (b)   It is the duty of the subdivider to furnish evidence that any proposed
subdivision is in the best interest of the public.
   (c)   The Commission will assure the preservation of space and areas
appropriate and required for public use.
   (d)   The Commission will judge as to whether sufficient regard for natural
features and historic sites is evidenced by the subdivider, and whether
adequate provision for planting strips are made.
   (e)   Where railroads are involved, provision of grade separations, buffer
strips and other protective treatment shall be required to the extent and type
as may be practicable.
§ 23.12 THE PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (a)   Filing. Upon application for approval of the Preliminary Plat, three
copies of each of the following shall be submitted to the Plan Commission:
      1.   Preliminary Plat of the proposed subdivision.
      2.   Key map.
      3.   Maps shall be on 8-1/2" x 11", 12" x 18", or 24" x 36" sheets,
minimum size 8-1/2" x 11".
      4.   Written statement of the intent of the developer with respect to
land use and proposed public improvements on and adjacent to the subdivision
tract.
   (b)   Contents. The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following:
      1.   Identification and description.
      2.   Proposed name of the subdivision.
      3.   Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal
description.
      4.   Names and addresses of developer and surveyor who made the plat.
      5.   Scale of plat, 1 inch to 100 feet.
      6.   Date.
      7.   Delineation of existing conditions.
      8.   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line
and the total approximate acreage encompassed thereby.
      9.   Location, widths and names of all existing and prior platted streets
or other public ways, railroad and utility right-of-ways, parks and other
public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, houses or permanent
easements, and section and corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract.
      10.   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract indicating pipe sizes, grades and exact location.
      11.   Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided or subdivided
land, showing owners where possible.
      12.   Existing zoning of proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts in
zoned areas.
      13.   Contours at one-foot intervals.
      14.   Delineation of proposed conditions.
      15.   Prints should be easily readable and discernible.
      16.   Layout of streets and widths and also the widths of crosswalkways
and easements.
      17.   Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots.
      18.   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily reserved
for public use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision.
      19.   Building setback lines, showing dimensions.
   (c)   Key Map. The Key Map shall consist of a print of the appropriate base
map or its equivalent, at a scale of not less than 1 inch to 200 feet, with the
boundaries of the proposed subdivision indicated thereon and covering the area
within a half-mile radius thereof.
   (d)   Approval. The following qualifications shall govern approval of the
Preliminary Plat:
      1.   The approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Plan Commission is
strictly tentative, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout
and proposals as submitted.
      2.   The Plan Commission may introduce such changes or revisions as are
deemed necessary to the interests and needs of the community.
      3.   Subsequent approval by the city engineer will be required of the
engineering proposals for improvements. However, in order that a determination
may be had of the general feasibility of such proposals, the Plan Commission or
city engineer shall require profiles showing existing ground surface and
proposed street grades, including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond
the limits of the subdivision, typical cross sections of proposed grading,
preliminary plan of proposed storm and sanitary sewers with grades and sizes
indicated, and such other information as may be reasonably necessary.
      4.   Tentative approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12
months unless, upon application of the developer, the Plan Commission grants an
extension. If the Final Plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the
Preliminary Plat must again be submitted to the Plan Commission for approval.
§ 23.13 THE FINAL PLAT.
   (a)   Filing. After approval of the Preliminary Plat by the Plan Commission,
and the fulfillments of the requirements of these regulations, application may
be made for Plan Commission approval of the Final Plat. Application for
approval of the Final Plat shall be accompanied by the following supplementary
information:
      1.   One original tracing drawn with India ink on tracing cloth, a
reproduced or vandyke negative, and four prints of the Final Plat drawn to
scale of 1 inch to 100 feet.
      2.   Size of sheets shall be 8-1/2" x 11" (minimum), 12" x 18" or 24" x
36". More than one sheet to be bound at one end.
      3.   Certificates signed by the city engineer stating that the plans,
profiles and specifications for improvements have been approved by him.
      Action must be taken by the Commission by the first Wednesday of the
second month after submission of the plat.
      When applicable, submittal of the Final Plat shall be accompanied by
written statements from county, state, Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago, or other public officials as may be concerned, indicating
that proposals for storm drainage, sewage disposal and water supply meet
minimum requirements for such installations.
   (b)   Contents. The Final Plat shall contain the following:
      1.   Identification and description.
         A.   Name of subdivision.
         B.   Location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal
description.
         C.   Names of owners and surveyor.
         D.   Scale of 1" to 100' shown graphically.
         E.   Date.
         F.   Northpoint.
      2.   Delineation.
         A.   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse with angular and
lineal dimensions.
         B.   Exact location, width and name of all streets within and
adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks.
Proposed street names shall be checked with proper city officials.
         C.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines
or official monuments (not less than three) which shall be accurately described
in the plat.
         D.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to
the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
         E.   Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and
lengths of all arcs.
         F.   All easements for right of ways provided for public services and
utilities.
         G.   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths.
         H.   Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be concrete 6" x
30" with iron pipe case in center. Permanent stone of concrete monuments shall
be set at each corner or angle on the outside boundary. Pipes or other physical
markers shall be placed at each intersection of street center lines. All U.S.,
state, county, or other official bench - markers, monuments, or triangulation
stations in or adjacent to the property shall be retained and preserved in
precise position.
         I.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and
of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property
owners.
         J.   Building setback lines accurately shown with dimension.
      3.   Attendant Items.
         A.   Protective covenants shall be recorded with the Final Plat.
         B.   Certification by registered surveyor to the effect that the plat
represents a survey made by him and that the monuments and markers shown
thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are
correct.
         C.   Notarized certification, by the owner or owners or of any
mortgages on record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets
and other public areas.
         D.   Proper form for the recommendation of the Plan Commission and
proper for signatures recording final action of the City Council.
         E.   Approval by signature of the Plan Commission. This approval of
the Final Plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the
public of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space
shown on the plat.
§ 23.14 FINAL APPROVAL.
   (a)   Following the final approval by the Plan Commission, the Commission
shall present its recommendation to the City Council.
   (b)   Prior to final approval by the City Council the developer shall
present such bonds guaranteeing completion of off-site improvements as shall be
required by the City Council.
   (c)   The subdivider shall pay a deposit of $200 for each subdivision filed
and all charges (including attorneys fees, filing fees, County Clerk fees and
duplication fees) will be allocated on a direct billing system to be paid by
the subdivider prior to the issuance of any building permits or the return of
documents.
§ 23.15 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   General Terms. Unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this
chapter.
   Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word “building”
shall include the word “structure” and shall be construed as if followed by the
phrase “or part thereof”; the word “street” includes avenue, boulevard, court,
expressway, highway, lane, arterial, and road; the word “watercourse” includes
channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring and stream; the word “shall” is
mandatory and not permissive; the word “abut” shall include “directly across
from”; and the word “lot” includes the words “plot”, “tract”, and “parcel”.
   (b)   Specific Terms. The following terms mean as follows:
      1.   Alley. A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to
the side or rear of two or more properties.
      2.   Block. A tract of land bounded by streets.
      3.   Building Line. A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of an
enclosed structure or portion thereof is to be prohibited.
      4.   Clear Sight Triangle. An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance from
the intersection of street right-of-way lines.
      5.   Crosswalkways. An area, dedicated to public use, which cuts across a
block to provide pedestrians access to adjacent areas.
      6.   Cul-de-sac. A street having one open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turnabout.
      7.   Dedication. The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for
any general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as
are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which
the property has been devoted.
      8.   Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of a strip of land
by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons, for a
specified purposes or purposes.
      9.   Lot. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development.
      10.   Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
      11.   Lot, double frontage. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines
along two substantially parallel streets.
      12.   Lot, reverse frontage. A lot extending between and having frontage
on a major traffic street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
      13.   Plat, final. Means a drawing, in final form, showing a proposed
subdivision containing all information or detail required by law and by these
regulations to be presented to the Plan Commission for approval, and which if
approved by the City Council, is to be duly filed or recorded by the City Clerk
in the office of the County Recorder within 3 months.
      14.   Plat, preliminary. Means a drawing or drawing clearly marked
“Preliminary Plat” showing the salient feature of a proposed subdivision,
submitted to the Plan Commission for purposes of consideration prior to
submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise the
Plan Commission of the layout of the proposed subdivision.
      15.   Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a road, walkway, crosswalkway, railroad, electric transmission line, or
another special use. Every right-of-way established under this chapter and
shown on the Final Plat is separate and distinct from the lots and is adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels.
      16.   Sight distance. The maximum extent of unobstructed vision (in a
horizontal or vertical plane) along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street.
      17.   Street. A street is an area which serves or is intended to serve as
a vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting lands or to other streets.
      18.   Street, half. A street, generally parallel and adjacent to a
property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required for
satisfactory improvement and use.
      19.   Street, minor. A street intended primarily as access to abutting
properties.
      20.   Street, primary. A street of considerable continuity which serves
or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting large areas.
      21.   Street, public. All primary, secondary, and minor streets which are
shown on the plat and are dedicatable.
      22.   Street, secondary. A street supplementary to the primary street
system providing access between this system and smaller areas and streets.
      23.   Street Width. The shortest distances between lines of lots
delineating the street.
      24.   Subdivider. The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of a
subdivision.
      25.   Subdivision. A subdivision is the division of a lot, tract, or
parcel of land into two or more lots or other divisions of land, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of changes in street or lot lines;
provided, however, that division of land for agricultural purposes, in parcels
of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of access, shall
be exempted.
§ 23.16 ENGINEERING FEES.
   To defray the engineering expenses incurred by the city in checking of the
preliminary and final cost estimates, working drawings, specifications, in
checking the Final Plat, the subdivider shall be required to reimburse the city
in the following manner:
   The subdivider shall apply in writing to the City Clerk making a request
that all drawings, specifications and estimates be checked by the city
engineer. The application shall be accompanied by two sets of construction
prints, specifications and estimates. The City Clerk shall inform the
subdivider of the amount of the charge for this service and the charge will be
based upon practices recommended by the Manual of Professional Practice for
Civil Engineers. Checking shall proceed after the subdivider has paid for
rechecking of drawings, specifications and estimates arising from revisions
made by or required of the subdivider. There shall be no refund of fees if the
project is abandoned by the subdivider for any reason whatsoever. The
aforementioned engineering fee does not include inspection.
§ 23.17 CONDOMINIUMS.
   (a)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all divisions of land or
property into residential and commercial condominium units.
   (b)   Definitions. The terms and words used shall have the definitions set
forth in the Condominium Property Act of Illinois, 765 ILCS 605/18.
   (c)   Subdivision Plat of Condominiums. A subdivision plat of any conversion
into or construction of condominium units shall require a public hearing using
the procedures set forth in the Chapter 23 for subdivisions.
   (d)   Condominium Plat Approval; Recording. No condominium plat shall be
recorded without the prior approval of the city, nor permits issued for the
construction or conversion of the same without said approval. No plat of
condominium shall be recorded without complying with the requirements of this
section.
   (e)   New Condominium Construction Requirements. All newly constructed
condominiums shall comply with the Condominium Property Act and shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   No unit in any condominium may be sold or transferred unless a
condominium declaration with a plat has been approved by the Building
Commissioner and recorded.
      2.   All condominium buildings shall comply with the current regulations,
including open space and parking requirements for the land use zone in which
they are located.
      3.   A separate gas, electric, and water meter and shut-off valve shall
provided for each unit. In a residential condominium, a common water meter may
be provided for each building. Each unit shall have a separate hot water
heater, furnace, and if provided, air conditioning system.
      4.   All wall, ceiling, and floors separating units shall be soundproof.
      5.   Common garbage and trash disposal containers shall be provided in a
location screened from view in an area to avoid a minimum of noise and smell.
Pickup shall be at least twice weekly for all structures containing 12 or more
units.
   (f)   Condominium Conversion Requirements. All buildings converted into
condominiums shall comply with the Condominium Property Act and shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   Condominium conversions of existing buildings are favored provided
that such conversion improves the interior and exterior of the existing
building and does not have a deleterious effect on surrounding properties.
Factors to be considered by the City are landscaping improvements, parking lot
improvements, floor covering improvements, HVAC facilities, common area
provisions, size of units, easements, utility connections, neighboring property
uses, and market targeted for purchase.
      2.   No unit in any condominium may be sold or transferred unless a
condominium declaration with a plat has been approved by the Building
Commissioner and recorded.
      3.   No building or land previously granted a variation to any zoning,
building, or subdivision ordinance shall be converted into condominiums unless
the current requirements of the applicable ordinance are met. Buildings which
exist as legal nonconforming uses may be allowed to convert to condominiums
provided that such conversion improves the interior and exterior of the
existing building and does not have a deleterious effect on surrounding
properties.
      4.   Common garbage and trash disposal containers shall be provided in a
location screened from view in an area to avoid a minimum of noise and smell.
Pickup shall be at least twice weekly for all structures containing 12 or more
units.
      5.   All buildings shall have an automatic sprinkler system complying
with the provisions of NFPA 13R.
   (g)   Common Elements. All condominium associations shall be responsible for
traffic and parking control, snow removal, signing, sewers, water lines, and
lighting. The city shall have the right of easement to enter such common areas
for the purpose of emergency for fire, police, and enforcement of its
ordinances and the plat shall so provide. Such common area shall remain the
property of the condominium and the city shall not accept a dedication of these
elements or the responsibility of maintenance. The association shall maintain
the public area and parkway in a clean condition, free of debris, leaves, and
trash.
   (h)   Certificate of Inspection. Once a certificate of inspection has been
issued, no new certificate of inspection need be secured for the resale of any
unit for which a certificate of inspection has been previously issued, or to
the sale or resale of any unit which was originally designed and sold under the
Condominium Property Act if a certificate of occupancy has been issued with
respect thereto, unless one is requested by an owner or the city.
   (i)   Fees. The fees for such inspection shall be paid by the applicant or
the owner association, or owner, if the city is compelled to inspect to insure
compliance with this section. The fee shall be $100 plus $30 for each unit.
   (j)   Bond Requirements. All buildings converted into condominiums shall
require that a cash bond in the amount of $500 per unit be posted to guarantee
that the requirements of paragraph (f) are met. The cash bond shall be refunded
upon completion of an inspection by the Building Commissioner finding that all
of such requirements have been completed.
CHAPTER 24: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
24.01   Building Codes
   
24.02   Building Permit Fees
   
24.03   Additional Fees
   
24.04   Building Inspection Fees
   
24.05   Bond Required
   
24.06   Time Limitations for Building Permits
   
24.07   Fences
   
24.08   Smoke Detectors
   
24.09   Exterior Walls, Industrial Areas
   
24.10   Excavations, Grading, Dumping, and Filling
   
24.11   Foundations
   
24.12   Garages
   
24.13   Utility and Storage Sheds
   
24.14   Garbage and Refuse Facilities
   
24.15   Automatic Sprinkler Systems
   
24.16   Certain Structures Prohibited
   
24.17   Fire Resistance
   
24.18   Cable TV
   
24.19   Room Addition Foundations
   
24.20   Water Meters
   
24.21   Bathroom Outlets
   
24.22   Illegal Occupancy
   
24.23   Satellite Earth Stations
   
24.24   Entry of Extraneous Flows Into Sanitary Sewer System
   
24.25   Hours of Construction
   
24.26   Flood Plains
   
24.27   Mobile Homes, Permanent Structures
   
24.28   Mechanical Code
   
24.28.1   Mechanical Inspection Fees
   
24.29   Residential Construction Requirements
   
24.30   Permits Required for Outside Home Improvements
   
24.30.1   Energy Conservation Code
   
24.31   Parking Lot Design and Maintenance
   
24.32   Architectural Design Standards
   
24.33   Post Construction Storm Water Runoff
   
24.34   Erosion and Sediment Control
   
24.35   Storage Containers
   
24.36   Elevator Standards
   
24.37   Demolition of Buildings
   
24.38   Tarps and Temporary Roof Coverings
   
24.40   Minimum Office and Commercial Space
   
24.40.1   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations
   
24.41   Occupancy and Leasing Prohibited
§ 24.01 BUILDING CODES.
   (a)   “The 2021 International Building Code” as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
City with the following changes, additions or insertions:
   Section 101.1, insert “City of Hickory Hills.”
   Section 101.4.3, change the words “International Plumbing Code” to “Illinois
Plumbing Code”. Change the last sentence to read “Private sewage disposal
systems are prohibited”. Add the following sentence: “Whenever the
International Plumbing Code is referenced, the reference shall be to the
Illinois Plumbing Code”.
   Section 102.4.l, change to read “In the event of conflict between this code
and any referenced code or other ordinance of the City, the most stringent
provisions shall be applied unless the building official otherwise determines.”
   Section 103.1, delete in full.
   Section 103.2, change first sentence to read “The building official shall be
the Building Commissioner.”
   Section 105.2, delete paragraph 1, 2, 4, and 6 under Building.
   Section 109.4, add the following to read “A penalty of not less than $100
nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
   Section 113.1, delete the last two sentences and add “The board of appeals
shall be the City Council.”
   (b)   The “2021 International Residential Code,” as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the International
Residential Code (for One- and Two-Family Dwellings) of the City with the
following changes, additions or insertions:
   Section R10 l.l, insert “City of Hickory Hills.”
   Section R102.4.1, change to read “In the event of conflict between this code
and any referenced code or other ordinance of the City, the most stringent
provisions shall be applied unless the building official otherwise determines.”
   Section R103.l, delete in full.
   Section R103.2, change first sentence to read “The building official shall
be the Building Commissioner”.
   Section R105.2, delete paragraph 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, and 10 under Building.
   Section R108.6, add the following to read “The additional fee for commencing
work without obtaining the necessary permits shall be $50 per day measured from
the time that work began until the required permits are obtained. This fee
shall be paid at the time that the permits are issued.”
   Section R112.1, change to read “All appeals shall be taken as provided in
the Building Code.”
   Section R112.3, delete in full.
   Section R112.4, delete in full.
   Section R113.4, add the following, “A penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
   Table R301.2(1), insert “The building official shall determine the
applicable criteria from the referenced tables and figures.”
   Section R401.2, insert “All foundations and foundation walls shall be poured
concrete and no other materials may be used.”
   Section R402.1, delete in full, including.Section R402.1.1 and Section
R402.1.2.
   Section R402.3, delete in full, including Section R402.3.1.
   Section R402.4, delete in full.
   Section R403.1, change the first sentence to read “All footings shall be
poured concrete footings and no other materials may be used.”
   Section R404.l, change the last sentence to read “All foundation walls and
retaining walls shall be poured concrete and no other materials may be used.”
   Section R404.1.1, delete the last sentence as masonry foundation walls are
prohibited.
   Section R404.1.2, delete in full, including Section R404.1.2.1.
   Section R404.1.4.1, delete in full.
   Section R404.1.5.1, delete in full.
   Section R404.1.5.3, delete in full.
   Section R404.1.8, delete in full.
   Section R404.2, delete in full.
   Section R404.5, delete in full.
   Section R408.1, add the following, “The minimum height for a crawl space
shall be 3 feet. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum 2 inch concrete cement
floor with vapor barrier.”
   Section R-703.1 change to read “General. Exterior walls shall provide the
building with a weather-resistant exterior wall envelope. The exterior wall
envelope shall include flashing as described in R703.4. All exterior siding
shall be uniform in quality, material, color and size.”
   Section R807.1, add the following, “Where a furnace is located in an attic,
the furnace shall be located in an enclosed insulation room of not less than 64
square feet of flat area with a walkway of a minimum 24 inches wide to the
furnace from the access opening.”
   Section R904.2, add the following, “Compatibility of materials. Roof
assemblies shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and with
the building or structure to which the materials are applied. Roofing materials
and shingles must be uniform for the total roof on a structure. Replacement
roofing must match in quality, color and size of existing roofing, such that
replacement shingles must match exactly and have a uniform appearance. In the
event that the Building Commissioner determines that replacement roofing is not
uniform, then the complete reroofing of the structure shall be required.”
   Section P2601.1, change paragraph to read “Only methods, materials,
construction and systems allowed by the Illinois Plumbing Code, as modified
herein, are permitted.”
   Section P2603.5.1, delete in full as private sewage disposal systems are not
permitted.
   Section P2904.1, add the following: “Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only as provided in Section
24-15 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.”
   Section E3401.1, change paragraph to read “Only wiring methods, materials,
construction and systems allowed under the Chicago Electrical Code are
permitted.”
   The following Appendixes are hereby declared to be mandatory: Appendix AA,
Appendix AB, Appendix AC, Appendix AD, Appendix AF, Appendix AG, Appendix AH,
Appendix AJ, Appendix AK, Appendix AM, Appendix AN, Appendix AP, and Appendix
AT.
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022; Ord. 25-21, passed 10-23-2025)
§ 24.02 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   The fees to be charged for building permits for erecting, altering,
repairing, or adding to buildings or structures shall be as follows:
   (a)   The fees for building permits shall be as follows:
      1.   for single-family and multi-family residential structures the fee
shall be $20 per $1,000 of “construction cost” with a minimum of $250;
      2.   for all other structures the fee shall be $30 per $1,000 of
“construction cost” with a minimum of $500; and
      3.   the building permit fee does not include inspection fees, plan
examination fee, engineering fee, occupancy permit fee and water/sewer
connection fees.
   (b)   The fee to renew a building permit which has expired for failure to
complete construction within 1 year or the failure to commence construction
within 6 months shall be an additional fee of 5 percent of the original
building permit fee for each month construction continues after the above
periods.
   (c)   For remodeling or additions, the plan examination fee shall be $150
for an existing single-family residential structure and $300 for all other
existing structures. For new construction, the plan examination fee shall be
$250 for single-family residential structures and $500 for all other
structures.
   (d)   The building permit fee for detached garages shall be $300 which
includes all costs for inspection and occupancy.
   (e)   The permit fee for a new driveway or extension of existing driveway
shall be $60.
   (f)   The permit fee for a utility or storage shed shall be $25.
   (g)   The permit fee for demolition of a primary structure shall be $300 and
the permit fee for the demolition of an accessory structure shall be $100.
   (h)   The permit fee for a fence shall be $25.
   (i)   The permit fee for a removal and replacement of curb and gutter
adjacent to any driveway shall be $40.
   The term “construction cost” means the reasonable value of all services,
labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other devices entering into and
necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy.
The construction cost is provided by the permittee subject to final approval of
the Building Commissioner. The construction cost does not include City permit
and other fees. The Building Commissioner may use construction cost data from
RS means to determine “construction cost”. Prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit, the Building Commissioner may
require that the permittee submit a sworn contractor’s statement showing the
actual cost of construction which shall be used to determine the construction
cost.
§ 24.03 ADDITIONAL FEES.
   (a)   No person shall dig, excavate for or install any water line or sewer
line on the dedicated public right-of-way. All such work shall be done by the
City plumber at rates authorized by the City.
   (b)   The fees to be charged for a permit to tap or otherwise make a
connection to any water line shall be established by the Building Commissioner
and set forth on a schedule. Fees shall include a charge for a water meter,
which water meter shall remain the property of the City. In addition, a fee
shall be charged for making the actual tap, including digging, backfilling,
corporation stop, roundway, B box installed, and cutting and repairing of
street and right-of-way. Said fee shall be based upon the size of connection
and the distance of installation. Fees for auguring shall be extra and stated
separately.
   (c)   The fees to be charged for a permit to tap or otherwise make a
connection to any sewer line shall be established by the Building Commissioner
and set forth on a schedule. Fees shall include a charge for making the actual
tap, cut in tee or coring hole, digging, backfilling, and cutting and repairing
of street and right-of-way.
§ 24.04 BUILDING INSPECTION FEES.
   A building inspection fee of $50 is established for each building
inspection.
§ 24.05 BOND REQUIRED.
   (a)   Generally. The following bonds shall be deposited, in cash, with the
city before a building permit or plumbing permit is issued which requires said
bonds. The bond inspection fee is for inspection of the site and is not
refundable. The cash bonds shall be refunded after the operating departments
have inspected the site and have certified that all requirements of this
chapter have been complied with by the permittee, except in the case of
restoration or repair of streets or other public property. The cash bonds shall
not be refunded if work remains to be completed by the permittee to meet the
requirements of this chapter. If the permittee refuses or is unable to complete
the work, the city shall send written notice to the permittee at his address
listed on the permit that work remains to be done. If the work is not
satisfactorily completed within 30 days after notice, the city shall cause the
work to be completed, payment for said work to be deducted from the cash bonds
and any remainder refunded to the permittee. In cases involving the repair or
restoration of the street or public property to its condition prior to the
opening, the city shall do all the work, and the cost thereof, together with
the sum of 25 percent for overhead, shall be deducted from the cash bond on
deposit and the balance returned to the depositor. In the case of public
utilities, the city shall do all the work and the public utilities billed on
the same basis for the work done. If the bonds are not sufficient to cover the
payment, the full amount of the bonds shall be used or be forfeited and the
permittee shall be billed for the difference. All bonds shall remain on deposit
for a minimum period of two years, except bonds issued under subsection (b)(1)
and (2) below, which bonds shall be refundable within 30 days after the
certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (b)   Single-Family Buildings. For new construction, the general contractor
shall deposit a $3,000 cash bond for each single family residence being
constructed, which bond shall cover the drainlayer and plumbing contractor, lot
grading, landscaping, required tree in parkway, restoration of parkway, and
repair of street, curb, gutter and sidewalk. The Building Commissioner may
waive or reduce the amount of the cash bond where the public improvements
(sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer and streets) are being installed by the
developer of a subdivision where a letter of credit has been provided.
   (c)   Multi-Family Buildings. For new construction, the general contractor
shall deposit a cash bond in the sum of $5,000 for each multi-family building.
The bond covers the drainlayer and plumbing contractor.
   (d)   Commercial and Industrial Buildings. For new construction or for
substantial remodeling, the general contractor shall deposit a cash bond in the
sum of $5,000 for each commercial and industrial building. The bond covers the
drainlayer and plumbing contractor.
   (e)   Applicability. The above bonds as required in subsections (a) through
(d) shall only apply in cases of new construction. In all other cases the
required surety bond must be in effect for each contractor as set forth in this
code.
   (f)   Temporary Occupancy Permit. In cases where weather prohibits the
completion of certain work to be performed on the public right-of-way for
public improvements, or other improvements outside of the structure on private
property, the Building Commissioner may issue a temporary occupancy permit
providing that everything except the above is completed. A cash bond in the
amount of 125 percent of the cost of the improvements as determined by the city
shall be posted.
   (g)   Forfeiture of Bond. In the event that there is noncompliance with the
terms or conditions of a cash bond, the cash bond shall be forfeited to the
City if such noncompliance shall continue for a period of 6 months after
written notice is provided detailed the noncompliance. Any cash bond which has
not been refunded within 3 years after deposit shall be forfeited to the City
except in cases where the Building Commissioner extends such date because of
the unexpected delays in construction.
§ 24.06 TIME LIMITATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   (a)   Construction of any building for which a building permit has been
issued must be started within 3 months after the date of the issuance of the
building permit, weather permitting.
   (b)   Construction of any building for which a building permit has been
issued must be completed within one year of the date of the issuance of the
building permit, except where it is not feasible to construct a building within
12 months because of the size and complexity of the construction involved. In
such a case, the Building Commissioner may provide for a longer termination
date for the original building permit. However, such extended original building
permit must be granted by the Building Commissioner prior to the construction
of the building.
   (c)   lf construction of the building is not completed within one year from
the date of issuance of the building permit, no certificate of occupancy may be
issued for the building unless an additional payment equal to 100% of the
building permit fee is paid to the City to compensate for the additional time
and work involved under the building permit.
   (d)   If the holder of any building permit fails to comply with the
provisions of this section, the building permit may be declared null and void
by the Building Commissioner. In such case, all construction work shall cease
until the additional payment equal to 100% of the building permit fee is paid
to the City.
(Ord. 19-8, passed 7-25-2019)
§ 24.07 FENCES.
   (a)   Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to build,
construct or erect any fence within the city without a fence construction
permit from the Building Commissioner. The application for a fence construction
permit shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the proposed location of the
fence in relation to lot lines, and existing permanent improvements, the type
of construction, the material to be used, and the proposed height of the fence.
   (b)   Definition. A fence is defined as a man-made structure forming a
barrier.
   (c)   Construction Requirements. Every fence shall be designed and
constructed to resist a horizontal wind pressure of not less than twice that
required for buildings as set forth in the Building Code. Where the distance
from the lot line to the face of any fence is less than the height of the
fence, such fence shall have lateral supports on one side with structural
braces extending to the top of the fence. All fences shall be constructed so
that the posts are located on the interior thereof in relation to the property
on which the fence is being constructed (facing away from streets, alleys, and
adjoining properties). Any suitable construction material may be used for a
fence except chicken wire, square welded mesh wire, barbed wire, electrically
charged wire, snow fence, solid concrete block, or be topped with sharp-edged
material except that this shall not be construed to prohibit picket fences.
   (d)   Utility Easements. Any fence which is constructed in a utility
easement shall be constructed so that the posts may be removable or with gates
to allow access to the easement.
   (e)   Residential Property Requirements. The maximum fence height on a
residential property shall be 6 feet. All height dimensions shall be measured
from the established grade to the topmost section of the fence. A gate or
opening shall be provided in all fence enclosures. The entire length of the
fence shall be constructed of the same or harmonious material. No fence shall
be erected in any public right-of-way. No fence shall be erected so as to
extend forward of the front yard building line, nor shall any fence be
constructed to extend forward of the side yard building line facing a street on
a corner lot.
   (f)   Back-to-Back Fencing. Back-to-back fencing (double fencing) is
prohibited. In the event that an adjacent property owner already has a fence
erected on or near a lot line where new fencing is proposed, such fencing must
be removed before new fencing can be installed.
   (g)   Commercial and Industrial Property Requirements. Fences for commercial
and industrial properties shall meet the same requirements are residential
properties, except that the maximum height of such fence shall not exceed 8
feet, except where the fence abuts a residential property in which case the
maximum height of the fence shall not exceed 6 feet. Fences may be constructed
in side yard setbacks except where the setback adjoins a public street or a
residential property.
   (h)   Variation. The Building Commissioner, with the approval of the
Aldermen of the Ward where a property is located, may grant administrative
variances to the requirements of this section where the variation is caused by
unique circumstances and granting the variation will not alter the essential
character of the immediately surrounding area. The decision of the Building
Commissioner and Aldermen shall be final subject to appeal within 5 days
thereafter to the City Council which shall render a final decision, subject to
review in the Circuit Court of Cook County.
(Ord. 18-15, passed 10-25-2018; Ord. 25-02, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 24.08 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   (a)   Smoke detectors on new construction of residential units or all units
having mixed occupancy with residential units in the City of Hickory Hills
shall be equipped with approved smoke detectors in the manner described in this
section.
   (b)   At least one approved smoke detector shall be installed on each living
level in every single family residential unit and in each unit of multi-family
dwelling units including the residential units contained in buildings of mixed
occupancy with commercial zoning classifications or other zoning
classifications. The smoke detectors shall be installed on the ceiling and at
least 6 inches from any wall located 6 to 12 inches from the ceiling and within
15 feet of all rooms used for sleeping purposes.
   (c)   All multi-dwelling buildings and buildings of mixed occupancy having
any residential units shall contain not less than one approved smoke detector
at the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells. All approved smoke
detectors herein required shall be installed on the ceiling at least 6 inches
from the wall or a wall located 6 to 12 inches from ceilings.
   (d)   Smoke detectors shall be approved by Underwriters Laboratory Inc. All
approved smoke detectors shall be permanently wired to the electric service of
each dwelling.
   (e)   In all instances where a building permit is required and issued for
remodeling of any main structure which contains a residential unit and the cost
of the remodeling shall exceed $500, then the provisions of this section shall
be applicable, except that the smoke detector may be of a battery type, and
such structure shall be required to be equipped with a smoke detector as
provided for in this section.
   (f)   The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to buildings
which contain an automatic sprinkling system throughout.
§ 24.09 EXTERIOR WALLS, INDUSTRIAL AREAS.
   All new construction in the I-1 Industrial Zoning Classification in the City
of Hickory Hills shall have at least 70 percent of the exterior walls
constructed of solid masonry or of brick veneer with at least one course of
face brick as approved by the Building Department.
§ 24.10 EXCAVATIONS, GRADING, DUMPING, AND FILLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or the owner of a property to allow any
excavation, dumping, grading, filling or change in the contour of any property
without securing a permit from the city. The fee for such permit shall be $25
unless the work is done in conjunction with a building permit issued for the
property, in which case there shall be no permit fee.
   All grades shall be established by the Building Commissioner. No grading
will be allowed which causes flooding or drainage onto adjacent properties or
impedes the natural flow of water. If the Building Commissioner determines that
such prohibited acts will occur, the owner will be required to install the
necessary internal drainage structures or other construction to protect others.
§ 24.11 FOUNDATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a wood foundation in any
construction.
§ 24.12 GARAGES.
   All attached garages in residential zoning districts shall not exceed 900
square feet or more than 3 garage spaces. All detached garages in residential
zoning districts shall not exceed 900 square feet in area, have more than 3
garage spaces, nor have a garage door opening exceeding 8 feet in height. The
height of a detached garage shall not exceed 16 feet or the height of the main
building on the zoning lot, whichever is lesser, but the height of the garage
may be at least 12 feet in any event. Only one detached garage shall be allowed
for each single family dwelling or on any one residential zoning lot.
   No garage shall be located closer than 10 feet to any structure located on
the lot. No garage shall be erected within 3 feet of any side yard lot line,
within 5 feet of any rear yard lot line, within 15 feet of any street or in
such a manner that any portion of the garage extends past the front of the
principal structure on the lot.
   A detached garage is not permitted on a zoning lot with an attached garage.
If an attached garage is converted to living space, the garage door removed and
replaced with permanent wall structure, and the driveway removed, then a
detached garage can be constructed on a zoning lot. The driveway need not be
removed if it services the detached garage on a direct route.
(Ord. 19-20, passed 9-26-2019)
§ 24.13 UTILITY AND STORAGE SHEDS.
   No utility or storage shed shall exceed 192 square feet in area, 12 feet in
height, or have a wall that exceeds 8 feet in height (with the preceding two
measurements taken from the ground level). All sheds shall be erected on a
permanent concrete or a treated wood floor to which they shall be bolted or
otherwise attached. All sheds must comply with the setback requirements set
forth in Section
24.12 for garages. Only one shed shall be allowed for each single-family
dwelling or on any residential zoning lot. All sheds shall be located rear of
the back of the principal building on the premises.
(Ord. 19-9, passed 7-25-2019)
§ 24.14 GARBAGE AND REFUSE FACILITIES.
   All buildings, except single family dwellings, shall have a fenced in or
otherwise shielded area for all garbage and refuse containers where the same
are visible from the street or from a window of another building.
§ 24.15 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   (a)   New Construction and Additions. All newly constructed structures
(including additions to existing structures other than in Residential Group R)
ln Assembly Group A, Business Group B, Educational Group E, Factory Industrial
Group F, High Hazard Group H, Institutional Group I, Mercantile Group M,
Residential Group R and Storage Group S shall have an automatic sprinkler
system installed conforming to the following requirements:
      1.   Automatic sprinkler systems (except in Residential Group R
structures) shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13
(Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems), 2019 Edition, and Section
903.3 of the International Fire Code, 2021 Edition.
      2.   Automatic sprinkler systems for single family residences, 2-family
residences and attached townhouses where no portion of a dwelling unit is
located above or below any portion of another dwelling unit shall be designed
and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D (Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes),
2022 Edition, provided further that sprinklers shall not be required in
bathrooms, clothes closets, linen closets and pantries (regardless of size)
where the walls and ceilings are surfaced with noncombustible or limited-
combustible materials as defined in NFPA 220 (Standard on Types of Building
Construction), 2021 Edition.
      3.   Automatic sprinkler systems for Residential Group R (excluding
single family residences, 2-family residences and attached townhouses where no
portion of a dwelling unit is located above or below any portion of another
dwelling unit) shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13R
(Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise Residential
Occupancies), 2022 Edition, provided further that sprinklers shall not be
required in bathrooms, clothes closets, linen closets and pantries (regardless
of size) where the walls and ceilings are surfaced with noncombustible or
limited-combustible materials as defined in NFPA 220 (Standard on Types of
Building Construction), 2021 Edition.
      4.   Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturers recommendations and must be connected to the City water supply
system through an approved backflow prevention device.
   (b)   Structures Being Substantially Reconstructed or Additions Thereto. In
the event that 50% or more of the aggregate floor area of any structure is
remodeled, reconstructed or undergoes alteration; or in the event that
reconstruction and remodeling exceeds the cost of $100,000; or in the event
that an addition costs more than $50,000, then such structure shall require the
installation of an automatic sprinkler system conforming to the above
requirements. For the purpose of this section the following words shall mean:
      1.   Alteration: Alteration shall include, but not be limited to,
alteration of floors, walls, partitions, ceilings, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical systems. Alterations to decorative coverings of floors, walls,
partitions and ceilings shall not be included, nor shall the alteration or
replacement of electrical fixtures, plumbing fixtures or trims be included, so
long as the underlying piping, electrical raceways, and conduit are not
altered. Exterior facade alterations shall not be included, unless egress
capacity is reduced.
      2.   Aggregate net floor area: The total of the area contained within the
exterior walls of a structure on all stories, including portions of stories
below grade that are occupied for purposes other than storage or mechanical
equipment. For dwellings, areas normally exempt from fire sprinkler
requirements shall not be included.
      3.   Aggregate area of alteration: For the purposes of determining the
area affected by alteration, the Building Commissioner shall include the floor
area of all rooms and areas reduced or enlarged by such work, the floor area of
all rooms and areas whose electrical, plumbing or mechanical systems or
infrastructure are altered, and the floor area of all rooms whose egress
capacity or travel distance is adversely affected. Floor areas shall include
all interior walls, columns, hallways, partitions and stairways. Exterior walls
shall not be included.
   (c)   Structures Being Converted into Condominiums. In the event that a
multi-family residential structure is being converted into condominiums,
automatic sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with
NFPA 13R (Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise
Residential Occupancies), 2022 Edition, provided further that sprinklers shall
not be required in bathrooms, clothes closets, linen closets and pantries
(regardless of size) where the walls and ceilings are surfaced with
noncombustible or limited-combustible materials as defined in NFPA 220
(Standard on Types of Building Construction), 2021 Edition.
   (d)   Business Structures. In addition to any other requirement contained in
or referenced by the Hickory Hills Municipal Code any:
      (1)   Group B, Business Occupancy; or
      (2)   Small Building and Tenant Spaces; or
      (3)   Small Assembly Places; or
      (4)   Restaurants and Food/Beverage Eating Establishments
   which:
      (1)   remain vacant for more than six months; or
      (2)   which are occupied by a new tenant; or
      (3)   which are being remodeled or renovated pursuant to a building
permit must have an approved automatic sprinkler system installed, or an
approved automatic fire detection system installed, or an approved fire alarm
system installed, as determined by the Building Commissioner. Any such system
must have an audible alarm connected thereto which can be heard throughout the
building and must be connected to a monitored fire alarm system approved by the
Building Commissioner. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. Alarm
systems which use a digital dialer or similar messaging are not permitted and
shall not be connected to the City or any fire protection district offices.
(Ord. 21-10, passed 8-12-2021)
§ 24.16 CERTAIN STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
   No canopy, carport, portable or temporary garage or shed, automobile
shelter, garage-in-a-box, or similar structure, shall be constructed, erected,
or maintained on any lot.
(Ord. 19-11, passed 8-22-2019)
§ 24.17 FIRE RESISTANCE.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to all multi-family structures
containing three or more living units; or one or more living units in a
structure containing any other type of use such as business or industrial. The
fire resistance rating of structural elements (including outside walls and
floors) and tenant separation or party walls shall be a minimum of two hours.
   Exterior wall construction shall be of masonry. Brick veneer construction
shall not be permitted. All floors shall be of the flexi-core type, precast
concrete type, poured concrete type, or other type having at least a two hour
fire resistance rating.
§ 24.18 CABLE TV.
   (a)   Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any
portion of a cable TV system prior to obtaining a permit from the city. An
application shall be filed with the office of the Building Commissioner upon
such forms as he shall deem necessary. Said application shall be accompanied by
a complete set of plans showing the location of all work to be performed and
the certification of a licensed electrical contractor that the plans and
specifications comply with the applicable Hickory Hills electrical ordinances.
   (b)   Contractors. Any and all persons constructing or erecting a cable TV
system shall obtain a license as a general contractor.
   (c)   Occupation of streets. No street shall be blocked or occupied by any
person constructing or erecting any portion of a cable TV system without
obtaining a street occupation permit. For the purposes of cable TV, the
locations to be blocked or occupied shall be given to the Building Commissioner
and the Director of Public Works at least two business days prior to their
blockage or occupation. Adequate warning devices, including barricades, shall
be supplied to direct traffic to other areas by the contractor.
   (d)   Fees. The permit fee for the construction and erection of a cable TV
system shall be equal to the city’s reasonable costs and expenses for the
supervision and inspection thereof, but in no event shall exceed $100.00 per
mile of cable installed or mile of strand installed. The distance of cable to
and from any residence or building from the main line shall not be calculated
for the per mile cost. In addition, an inspection fee equal to the city’s
reasonable costs and expenses for the supervision and inspection thereof, but
in no event in excess of $5.00 per building to which a connection in made from
the main line shall be paid, except in the case of buildings wherein more than
one dwelling unit or more than one commercial unit is being serviced, in which
case the inspection fee shall not exceed $5.00 per building nor $2.50 for each
additional unit serviced therein. The permit per mile fee shall be paid at
completion of work performed, but may be paid in installments if work is to be
by sections. The inspection fee shall be paid at completion of inspection
performed on a weekly basis. The fee for the blockage of a street shall be
$5.00 per location per week. In addition, a $500.00 cash bond shall be posted
by such person at the city. The permit fees herein are in lieu of all other
permit fees required. The provisions of this article shall apply to the
construction of any and all cable TV systems from and after the date of its
passage, regardless of whether or not a portion of that cable TV system may
have already been erected.
§ 24.19 ROOM ADDITION FOUNDATIONS.
   All room addition foundations shall be constructed as an inverted “T”. The
footing shall be at least 20" wide and 10" high with an 8" foundation wall
extending upwards a minimum of 3'6" from the bottom to 6" above the established
grade for the site. The foundation wall shall be keyed into the footing.
§ 24.20 WATER METERS.
   Only water meters approved by the City shall be installed in any new
construction or shall replace any present meter. For all buildings any newly
installed meter shall be of the remote reading type.
§ 24.21 BATHROOM OUTLETS.
   All electrical outlet receptacles located in bathrooms shall be of the
ground fault type. Wherever the Building Commissioner determines that there is
a danger or risk of electrical shock or electrocution due to the location of an
electrical outlet receptacle, he can order the receptacle to be of the ground
fault type.
§ 24.22 ILLEGAL OCCUPANCY.
   (a)   No building or structure shall be used or occupied in whole or in part
until a certificate of occupancy (also known as a certificate of use and
occupancy under BOCA) has been issued by the City.
   (b)   The cash bond deposited with the City pursuant to Section 24.026 shall
also serve as a deposit to ensure that no occupancy of any building or
structure is made prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the
event of occupancy of a building or structure prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, whether such occupancy be by the contractor, owner,
lessee, buyer, agent or other party, the sum of $50.00 per day shall be
forfeited to the City to be taken out of the cash bond in payment for the
violation. The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized to issue citations
for a violation of this section. The minimum amount of the fine on said
citation shall be $50.00 per offense. Each day that a violation exists shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 24.23 SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS.
   (a)   Satellite earth station means an antenna with a radius of more than
one foot or containing a surface area of more than 10 square feet designed for
receiving communication or other signals from satellites. Said antenna may have
a low-noise amplifier (LNA) and be connected with coaxial cable to a television
or other receiver. A satellite earth station is also commonly referred to as an
earth station, a ground station, or a satellite dish.
   (b)   No person shall erect a satellite earth station without a permit.
   (c)   An application for permit shall be on such forms as required by the
Building Commissioner and shall be accompanied with a current survey showing
the dimensions of the lot, the location of all buildings or structures thereon,
and the proposed location of the satellite earth station. In addition, plans
and specifications describing the earth station and its structural and
engineering components (the manufacturer’s specifications) shall be attached.
All such applications shall be signed by the property owner and shall be
accompanied by a fee of $75.00. The exact location, height and other proposed
construction of the satellite earth station shall not be varied without written
approval of the Building Commissioner.
   (d)   No satellite earth station shall be erected:
      1.   In any front yard.
      2.   In any side yard forward of the rear wall of the main structure
located on the lot.
      3.   Within 15 feet of the side lot lines.
      4.   In any required side yard.
      5.   Within 15 feet of the rear lot line.
   (e)   All satellite earth stations shall meet the following construction
requirements:
      1.   The dish shall not exceed 4 meters in diameter.
      2.   Galvanized metal supports or equivalent must be used.
      3.   Installation must conform to the provisions of the Chicago
Electrical Code.
      4.   A concrete base or caissons extending not less than 42 inches below
the surface must be used to anchor the dish to the ground.
      5.   The maximum height of the highest part of the dish shall not exceed
15 feet above the ground on which it is constructed.
      6.   The dish and structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force
of 75 miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
      7.   No linkage, physically or electronically, shall be permitted to a
receiver not located on the same lot.
      8.   Wiring to the satellite earth station shall be placed at least 4
inches beneath the surface of the ground.
      9.   Any driving motor shall be limited to 125-volt maximum design
voltage and be encased in protective guards. Grounding to a grounding rod must
be provided.
      10.   No satellite earth station exceeding 3 feet in diameter shall be
mounted on any roof of a residential structure. Any dish of less than 3 feet in
diameter may be mounted upon a roof of a primary or accessory structure on the
lot but shall not be mounted on chimneys, towers, trees, poles, or spires. A
roof-mounted dish shall be mounted directly to the part of the roof not visible
from the street immediately in front of the structure or from the side street
in case of a corner lot. Roof-mounted dishes may only be mounted on the rear
portion of any roof and not on the front or side of any roof. Any roof-mounted
dish must be designed to withstand a wind support of 85 miles per hour.
   (f)   The provisions of this section may be varied in cases of hardship or
impracticability by the City Council by the passage of a motion at a committee
meeting or regular meeting to that effect.
§ 24.24 ENTRY OF EXTRANEOUS FLOWS INTO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (a)   All down spouts or roof drains (including gutters) shall discharge
onto the ground, into a dry well, or into the storm sewer system. Connections
of down spouts or roof drains to a sanitary sewer, or into the ground are
prohibited. Down spouts and roof drains may be connected into a dry well or
storm sewer system only after approval by the Building Commissioner and the
issuance of a permit.
   (b)   Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, and discharge shall
be made into storm sewers (non-residential), drainage ditches or onto the
ground. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer.
   (c)   Floor drains in basements shall be connected directly to sanitary
sewers or to sump pumps which discharge to the sanitary sewer.
   (d)   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or storm
waters shall be connected to the storm sewer or discharge into a drainage ditch
or onto the ground. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain
flow or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump
pump shall be used for one function only, either the discharge of storm waters
or the discharge of sanitary sewage.
   (e)   No window well or area-way drains shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer.
   (f)   All water discharged onto the ground shall be directed so as not to
flood neighboring properties.
§ 24.25 HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (a)   No person shall perform any construction operation except during the
hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
   (b)   No person shall allow another person to perform on property owned or
occupied by them any construction operation except during the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
   (c)   No person shall perform any construction operation on any Sunday.
   (d)   No person shall perform any construction operation on any holiday.
   (e)   “Construction operation” means the erection, alteration, repair,
renovation, demolition or removal of any building or structure; and the
excavation, filling, grading and regulation of lots.
   (f)   “Holiday” means New Years Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas.
   (g)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the occupant of property from
performing, by himself only, construction operations not requiring any building
permit on Sundays and holidays.
§ 24.26 FLOOD PLAINS.
   See Ordinance No. 08-4.
§ 24.27 MOBILE HOMES, PERMANENT STRUCTURES.
   No person shall live in any mobile home, motor home, mini motor home, van
camper or other temporary structure.
§ 24.28 MECHANICAL CODE.
   The “2021 International Mechanical Code” as published by the International
Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City with
the following changes, additions or insertions:
   Section 101.1, insert “City of Hickory Hills.”
   Section 103.1, delete in full.
   Section 103.2, change first sentence to read “The code official shall be the
Building Commissioner.”
   Section 108.5, change the last sentence to read: “Any person violating a
stop work order shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$750 for each violation. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate violation and subject to penalty.”
   Section 109.2, change to read “The code official shall establish a schedule
of permit fees and plan review fees.”
   Section 109.6, change to read “The code official may authorize a refund of
fees.”
   Section 113.4, change the first sentence to read “A penalty of not less than
$100 nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each
day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and
subject to penalty.”
   Section 114, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in the
Building Code.
   Section 115.4, change to read “A penalty of not less than $100 nor more than
$750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022)
§ 24.28.1 MECHANICAL INSPECTION FEES.
   An inspection fee of $50 is established for each mechanical (HVAC)
inspection.
§ 24.29 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Single-Family Detached Dwellings. All single-family detached
residential dwelling units shall have exterior walls constructed of solid face
brick masonry or face brick veneer for the first ground level floor thereof
extending at least eight feet or to the underside of the roof soffit, whichever
is higher. If a floor is partially in the ground, then the exterior walls above
ground level shall also be constructed of solid face brick masonry or face
brick veneer extending to the underside of the level constructed on top of that
floor.
   (b)   Existing Single-Family Frame Detached Dwellings. Frame additions
without any type of brick masonry may be constructed to existing single-family
detached residential dwelling units.
   (c)   Single-Family Detached Garages and Storage Sheds. Detached garages and
storage sheds for single-family residential dwelling units may be of frame
construction.
   (d)   Multi-Family Dwelling Units. All multi-family residential structures
shall have exterior walls constructed of solid face brick masonry and floors
constructed of precast concrete or poured concrete with a minimum fire
resistance rating of two hours. A townhouse multi-family dwelling unit (where a
separate dwelling unit is not located on top of another) may be constructed to
conform to the requirements for single-family detached dwellings provided that
the wall between dwelling units has a minimum fire resistance rating of two
hours.
   (e)   Multi-Family Detached Garages and Storage Sheds. Detached garages and
storage sheds for multi-family residential dwelling units shall have exterior
walls constructed of solid face brick masonry or face brick veneer.
§ 24.30 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR OUTSIDE HOME IMPROVEMENTS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to replace, resurface or install
siding upon a structure without a permit from the Building Commissioner.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to replace, resurface or install a
roof covering upon a structure without a permit from the Building Commissioner.
No more than one roof covering is permitted upon any structure.
   (c)   All contractors who replace, resurface or install siding or a roof
covering upon a structure shall be licensed by the City.
   (d)   The permit fee for the outside home improvements designated in (a) and
(b) above shall be $50.00.
§ 24.30.1 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The “Illinois Energy Conservation Code” as published by the Capital
Development Board of the State of Illinois (71 I.A.C. § 600.110) is hereby
adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City.
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022)
§ 24.31 PARKING LOT DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   All areas used for parking of vehicles, including driveways, shall meet the
following requirements of design, construction and maintenance:
   (a)   All parking areas shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete
surface (except for single family residences which may be improved with paver
bricks) over a proper base. All parking areas shall be maintained so as to be
free of potholes, broken curbs and other damaged areas.
   (b)   Concrete or other all-weather bumpers shall be installed on all
parking areas so as to prevent access or damage to any public sidewalk,
building, fence, adjoining property or landscaping except where there is not
less than a 4-foot setback from the parking area.
§ 24.32 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to create an aesthetically
pleasing character of the single-family residential districts in the City in
order to protect and enhance property values. The construction of single-family
residences which are substantially similar in appearance to other nearby
single-family residences are prohibited in accordance with the provisions of
this Section.
   (b)   Similarity in Appearance Prohibited in Single-Family Residential
Construction.
      1.   No building permit shall be issued for any new dwelling unit (the
“Subject Lot”) in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Single-Family Residential Districts
which is similar in front facade appearance to any dwelling unit meeting the
following requirements:
         A.   The Subject Lot shall be dissimilar to the dwelling units on the
immediately adjacent lots on the same side of the street;
         B.   The Subject Lot shall be dissimilar to the dwelling unit directly
across the street;
         C.   With respect to lots with frontage on the bulb of a cul-de-sac,
the Subject Lot shall be dissimilar to dwelling units on the immediately
adjacent lots or directly across the cul-de-sac from the Subject Lot;
         D.   With respect to front yards, in the event the lot adjacent on
either side of the Subject Lot, the lot directly across the street from the
Subject Lot has a different yard type (i.e., side, rear) adjacent to the shared
street, then the restrictions shall not apply to those lots; and
         E.   When calculating lots for purposes of dissimilarity, an
intervening street shall be counted as the adjacent lot.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued for any new dwelling unit in the
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Single-Family Residential Districts which is similar in
side or rear facade appearance to the adjacent dwelling on the same side of the
street.
      3.   A single-family dwelling on a corner lot may be considered
dissimilar to another if the front of the two dwelling units face different
streets.
      4.   Single-family dwelling units must comply with the dissimilarity
provisions which are applicable to the front facade, side facades, and rear
facade.
   (c)   Standards for Determining Similarity in Appearance.
      1.   Distinguishing Characteristics, Front Facade: For the purpose of
this subsection, the term “similar in appearance” shall mean a dwelling unit
which is identical, or substantially similar, to another in any three of the
following characteristics with respect to the front facade:
         A.   Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, flat or combination).
Mixtures of roof types and design are sufficient to render dwelling units
dissimilar.
         B.   Roof height or roof pitch shall be significantly different.
         C.   Approximate dimensions (height and length) of the front wall
closest to the front lot line.
         D.   Shape of the front elevation silhouette.
         E.   Relative locations, types and sizes of windows in the front
elevation. The addition or subtractions of muntin bars, small gable or hip
projections above windows, and window dormers are not sufficient to make
adjacent structures dissimilar.
         F.   Relative location, design and dimensions of garage door, if
included on the front elevation.
         G.   Type and color of front facade materials (e.g., brick veneer,
lapped horizontal siding, half timber, board and batten, shakes, etc.). Changes
in materials must occur throughout the front facade or elevation for a minimum
of one story in height. Color change shall be made by significant changes in
shades of color.
      2.   Distinguishing Characteristics, Side and Rear Facades on Corner
Lots, and Rear Facades Fronting a Public Right-of-Way: For the purpose of this
subsection, the term “similar in appearance” shall mean a dwelling which is
identical, or substantially similar, to another type and color of side and rear
facade (e.g., brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, half timber, board and
batten, shakes, etc.). Changes in materials must occur throughout the entire
facade or elevation for a minimum of one story in height. Color change shall be
made by significant changes in shades of color.
      3.   Housing Styles: Housing style is in and of itself a significant
enough characteristic to constitute dissimilarity with respect to the Subject
Lot and the similarity standards delineated in subsection (A) and (B) do not
apply. Housing styles shall consist of the following: ranch, bi-level, tri-
level, one and one-half story, and two-story.
   (d)   Administration and Enforcement; Appeals.
      1.   Rules: The Building Commissioner is authorized to make rules
regarding the interpretation of the provisions of this Section.
      2.   Determination: The Building Commissioner shall make the initial
determination as to similarity in appearance and shall not issue a building
permit for any dwelling unit which violates the provisions of this Section. If
a permit is denied, written reasons shall be provided detailing why the
proposed dwelling unit is similar in appearance to another dwelling unit.
      3.   Appeal: A decision by the Building Commissioner denying a permit may
be appealed in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      4.   Waiver: The City Council reserves the right to waive the provisions
of this Section by motion approved at a Board meeting.
      5.   Applicability: The provisions of this Section apply only to the
issuance of building permits for a newly constructed dwelling unit and not to
remodeling or reconstruction.
§ 24.33 POST CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      1.   Findings of Fact. It is hereby determined that:
         A.   Land development projects alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase storm water runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
         B.   This storm water runoff contributes to increased quantities of
water-borne pollutants, and;
         C.   Storm water runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution
can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of storm water runoff
from development sites.
   Therefore, the City of Hickory Hills establishes this set of water quality
and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable
guidance for the regulation of storm water runoff for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of
storm water runoff discharges from land development projects and other
construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in storm
water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with storm water runoff is in the public
interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
      2.   Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish minimum storm
water management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this
jurisdiction. This Section seeks to meet that purpose through the following
objectives:
         A.   Minimize increases in storm water runoff from any development in
order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and
streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels.
         B.   Minimize pollution caused by storm water runoff from development
that would otherwise degrade local water quality.
         C.   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that
flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the
pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
         D.   Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
pollution, wherever possible, through storm water management controls and to
ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
      3.   Applicability. This Section shall apply to all sites, as defined
herein provided that the following may be exempted by the City:
         A.   Additions or modifications to existing single family structures.
         B.   Repairs to any storm water treatment practice deemed necessary by
the City.
   Decisions on permitting shall be made by the Building Commissioner and on-
site storm water requirements shall be made by the City Engineer. This
determination shall be dependent upon the amount of impervious area created by
the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the City.
      4.   Compatibility with Other Permit and Section Requirements. This
Section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this Section should be considered minimum requirements, and
where any provision of this Section imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other Section, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards
for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
   (b)   Definitions.
   “Applicant” means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has
filed an application for a storm water management permit.
   “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
   “Detention” means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water
management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
   “Detention facility” means a detention basin or alternative structure
designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff
and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
   “Illinois Urban Manual” means the Illinois Urban Manual developed by the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, current edition.
   “Infiltration” means the process of percolating storm water into the
subsoil.
   “Land disturbance activity” means any activity that changes the volume or
peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may
include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil,
placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of
vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion
or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse.
   “MWRDGC” means the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago.
   “Off-site facility” means a storm water management measure located outside
the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
   “On-site facility” means a storm water management measure located within the
subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
   “Redevelopment” means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding
1.0 acre in areas where existing land use is high density commercial,
industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
   “Site” means a parcel of land or a combination of contiguous parcels
containing not less than 1.0 acre where any land disturbance activity occurs as
part of a common plan of development.
   “Storm water management” means the use of structural or non-structural
practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
   “Storm water runoff” means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
   “Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
   (c)   Permit Procedures and Requirements.
      1.   Permit Required. No person shall conduct or permit any land
disturbance activity on any site without a storm water management permit issued
by the City.
      2.   Application Requirements. A permit application shall bear the name
and address of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm
retained by the applicant and shall be accompanied by a filing fee and a storm
water management concept plan and a maintenance agreement. The filing fee shall
be $250 per acre, or part thereof, of the site, plus any review fees incurred
by the City to independent contractors.
   (d)   Waivers to Storm water Management Requirements.
      1.   Waiver Eligibility Criteria. Every applicant shall provide for storm
water management as required by this Section, unless this requirement is waived
by the City. The minimum requirements for storm water management may be waived
in whole or in part upon request of the applicant, provided that at least one
of the following conditions applies:
         A.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not
likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this Section.
         B.   Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of storm
water discharges have been established in a storm water management plan that
has been approved by the City and the implementation of the plan is required by
local Section.
         C.   Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site
facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and
adequately sized to provide a level of storm water control that is equal to or
greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a
legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of
the storm water practice.
         D.   The City finds that meeting the minimum on-site management
requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site.
         E.   Non-structural practices will be used on the sites that reduce:
(i) the generation of storm water from the site, (ii) the size and cost of
storm water storage and (iii) the pollutants generated at the site. These non-
structural practices are explained in detail in the Illinois Urban Manual.
      2.   Assurances Required for Waiver. In instances where one of the
conditions above applies, the City may grant a waiver from strict compliance
with these storm water management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the variance will not
result in the following impacts to downstream waterway.
         A.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures.
         B.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
         C.   Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation.
         D.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and
property.
   (e)   General Performance Criteria for Storm water Management. Unless judged
by the City to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance
criteria shall be addressed for storm water management at all sites:
      1.   All site designs shall, to the maximum extent possible, establish
storm water management practices to control the peak flow rates of storm water
discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
storm water runoff. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for
storm water treatment and to infiltrate storm water runoff from driveways,
sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practical.
      2.   To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel
protection criterion shall be provided as prescribed in the Illinois Urban
Manual.
      3.   Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a
storm water pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI)
under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) general permit. The storm water pollution prevention plan requirement
applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
      4.   Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the City to
determine if they are subject to additional storm water design requirements.
      5.   The calculations for determining peak flows as required by the
MWRDGC shall be used for sizing all storm water management practices where
applicable.
   (f)   Basic Storm Water Management Design Criteria.
      1.   Detention basins shall incorporate design features to capture
stormwater runoff pollutants. In particular, designers shall give preference to
wet bottom and wetland designs in locations adjacent to or near existing
wetlands or in other areas where they are suitable and acceptable to the City
and all flows from the development shall be routed through the basin.
      2.   Dry basins with low flow bypasses may be preferred in certain
developments to enhance multiple uses where suitable and acceptable to the
City. Retention and infiltration of stormwater shall be promoted throughout the
property’s drainage system to reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and to
reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants.
      3.   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where
practicable. Uses considered compatible with stormwater management include open
space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation, wetlands and water quality
mitigation. The applicant should try to avoid using portions of the property
exclusively for stormwater management.
   (g)   Post Construction Management.
      1.   The requirements of Section IV (D)(2)(b) of NPDES permit No. ILR10
including management practices, controls and other provisions at least as
protective as the requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual.
      2.   The long term operation and maintenance of all BMP’s shall be
provided for.
§ 24.34 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   (a)   Scope. These regulations apply to all developments which disturb areas
of not less than 1.0 acre, either alone or as part of a larger common plan of
development.
   (b)   Definitions.
   “City” means the City of Hickory Hills.
   “Clearing” means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
   “Drainage way” means any channel that conveys surface runoff.
   “Erosion control” means a measure that prevents erosion.
   “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a plan prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures
and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion during and after
construction.
   “Grading” means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof, whether or not materials are brought onto or taken off of
site.
   “IEPA” means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Illinois Urban Manual” means the Illinois Urban Manual developed by the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, current edition.
   “Perimeter control” means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.
   “Phasing” means clearing an area in distinct phases, with the stabilization
of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
   “Sediment control” means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving
a site.
   “Site” means a parcel of land or a combination of contiguous parcels
containing not less than 1.0 acre where grading work is performed as part of a
common plan of development.
   “Site development permit” means a permit issued by the City for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff, and grading.
   “Stabilization” means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
   “Start of construction” means the first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
   “Watercourse” means any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources (IDNR/OWR), the
United States Geologic Survey (USGS), the United States Army Corps of Engineers
or the City.
   “Waterway” means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the public storm drain.
   (c)   Site Development Permit Required.
      1.   No person shall clear, grade or disturb any site without a site
development permit issued by the City or without an NPDES permit issued by the
IEPA.
      2.   No site development permit is required for the following activities:
         A.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources
         B.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted or accessory use.
      3.   Each application shall bear the name and address of the owner or
developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant
together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee, erosion and sediment control plan, and
such other information as required by the City. The filing fee shall be $250
per acre, or part thereof, of the site, plus any review fees incurred by the
City to independent contractors.
      4.   The applicant may be required to file with the City a faithful
performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount
deemed sufficient by the City to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping,
maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the City, and
engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the site.
   (d)   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
      1.   The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:
         A.   A sequence of construction of the site, including stripping and
clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and
buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the
expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and
sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
         B.   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
objectives throughout all phases of construction and after completion of
development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the
drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
         C.   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
         D.   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
      2.   Modifications to the plan may be authorized by the City by written
authorization to the permittee, and shall include:
         A.   Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan
submitted to the City.
         B.   Field modifications of a minor nature.
   (e)   Design Requirements.
      1.   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent
version of the Illinois Urban Manual, and shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the City. Cut
and fill slopes shall be no greater than 2:1, except as approved by the City to
meet other community or environmental objectives.
      2.   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other
chapters of this Code. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and
drainage patterns, as described in the Illinois Urban Manual, shall be used to
the satisfaction of the City.
      3.   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed
and have been stabilized.
      4.   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30
acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as
approved by the City.
      5.   Erosion control requirements shall include the following:
         A.   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of clearing
or inactivity in construction.
         B.   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used,
it shall become established within 14 days or the City may require the site to
be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
         C.   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the
Illinois Urban Manual on steep slopes or in drainage, ways shall be used to
ensure stabilization.
         D.   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday.
         E.   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the
close of the construction season.
         F.   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
         G.   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall
be employed.
      6.   Sediment control requirements shall include:
         A.   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls.
         B.   Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows
adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management, if required by the City.
         C.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated
buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.
      7.   Construction site access requirements shall include:
         A.   A temporary access road provided at all sites.
         B.   Other measures required by the City in order to ensure that
sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed
into storm drains.
   (f)   Inspection.
      1.   The Building Commissioner shall make inspections as hereinafter
required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and
sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating,
and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City shall be maintained
at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections, the
permittee shall notify the City at least 2 working days prior to:
         A.   Start of construction,
         B.   Installation of sediment and erosion measures,
         C.   Completion of final landscaping.
      2.   The permittee or agent shall make regular inspections of all control
measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved
erosion and sediment control plan. The purpose of such inspections will be to
determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for
additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written
form and submitted to the City at the time interval specified in the approved
permit.
      3.   The Building Commissioner may enter the property of the applicant as
deemed necessary to make regular inspections.
   (g)   Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit. In the event that any person
violates the terms of a site development permit, clears or grades a site in
violation of this Section, implements site development in such a manner as to
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons or property, the
City may suspend or revoke the site development permit without notice or
hearing and may stop all construction work, including clearing and grading, on
the site.
§ 24.35 STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a storage
container (including truck trailer or PODS container) on the public right-of-
way.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a storage
container (including truck trailer or PODS containers) on private property
except pursuant to a permit issued by the City. A permit application shall be
submitted to the Building Department and shall be accompanied by a $50.00
deposit which shall be refunded if the storage container is removed within 30
days. A permit shall be issued only when the storage container is less than 10
feet in height and being used in conjunction with the reconstruction of the
residence or moving to or from the residence and shall be limited to a period
of 30 consecutive days in any one calendar year. The Building Commissioner,
with notice to the Aldermen of the Ward, is authorized to extend the maximum
30-day period in writing for circumstances beyond the control of the property
owner which were not anticipated and foreseen when the permit was originally
issued.
§ 24.36 ELEVATOR STANDARDS.
   (a)   Codes Adopted. The following are hereby adopted:
      1.   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
         A.   Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2005), A17.1
(a)-2005, and A17.1(s)-2005;
         B.   Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks
(ASME 17.2-2004);
         C.   Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME 17.3-
2005);
         D.   Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME
A18.1-2005); and
         E.   Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-
1-2004).
      2.   American National Standards:
         A.   Safety Requirements for Personal Hoists and Employee Elevators
(ANSI A10.4-2004).
      3.   American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
         A.   Automated People Mover Standards (ASCE 21-2000).
   (b)   Amendment. Should the City amend any of the standards set forth above,
the City shall submit to the Office of the State Fire Marshal a copy of the
amendment and its reason for the change.
   (c)   Upgrades: Upgrades required by ASME A17.3-2005, Safety Code for
Existing Elevators shall be completed no later than January 1, 2009, except
that upgrades to the hydraulic cylinder system and firefighter control system
shall be completed by January 1, 2011.
§ 24.37 DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
   (a)   Demolition permits.
      1.   No demolition of any structure shall be allowed without a demolition
permit issued by the City of Hickory Hills and Cook County; and unless a proper
Notification of Demolition and Renovation is filed with the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, if required due to the presence of asbestos
containing material.
      2.   All applicants for a demolition permit shall complete a rat baiting
program on the property at least 10 days prior to the start of demolition and
maintain the same through the completion of demolition. The rat baiting program
shall be consistent with the guidelines of the City. The Building Commissioner
may, in the event that a demolition is unlikely to disturb a rat harborage,
exempt a demolition from the provisions of this paragraph.
   (b)   Cash bond for demolition permit.
      1.   In addition to any permit fees, a cash bond in the amount of $5,000
shall be deposited with the City for any demolition where all structures on a
lot will be demolished, except where a building permit has been issued for a
new structure to be constructed thereon.
      2.   The cash bond shall be refunded upon the completion of the
restoration of the demolition site and the adjoining public right-of-way as
required in (c) below. In the event that the restoration is not timely
completed, then the full amount of the cash bond shall be forfeited to the City
to be used for such restoration and no refund shall be made. In the event that
the amount of the cash bond is insufficient for such restoration, the
additional cost shall be a lien on the property and no building or occupancy
permits shall issue until such amount is paid in full.
   (c)   Restoration of demolition site.
      1.   All foundation walls, footings, concrete floors and other below
grade construction must be completely removed from the site. No materials or
demolition debris shall be buried below grade. All such materials shall be
removed from site no more than 3 days after demolition.
      2.   Unless a building permit has already issued for the construction of
a new structure on the demolition site, within 7 days after demolition, the
site shall be graded for proper drainage consistent with adjoining properties.
Organic material, dirt or top soil shall be placed in the areas of demolition
and shall be planted with grass. The grass and greenery shall be maintained
consistent with the requirements of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.
§ 24.38 TARPS AND TEMPORARY ROOF COVERINGS.
   No person shall place a tarp on a roof or any temporary roof covering on any
structure (including the sides and walls of a structure), including main
structures and accessory structures, without first obtaining a permit therefor.
All permits issued shall expire 30 days after the date of issuance, unless
extended by the Building Commissioner. The fee for a permit shall be $25.00 for
each 30 days or part thereof. Applicants are required to post a $100.00 cash
bond as a prerequisite to obtaining such permit, which bond shall be returned
to the applicant upon removal of the tarp or temporary roof covering within the
timeframe allowed by the permit. If a tarp or temporary roof covering is not
removed by the expiration date of the permit, the City may cause the removal
thereof and use the cash bond to pay for said removal.
(Ord. 19-6, passed 7-25-2019)
§ 24.40 MINIMUM OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL SPACE.
   (a)   No person shall construct, maintain or rent an office or commercial
space containing less than 600 square feet.
   (b)   No person shall change any interior wall of an office or commercial
space to create a private leasable space containing less than 600 square feet.
   (c)   No person shall change any interior wall of an office or commercial
space without a building permit issued by the City even if such change does not
involve any mechanical system, including plumbing. HVAC or electrical equipment
or outlets.
(Ord. 21-6, passed 6-24-2021)
§ 24.40.1 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
   (a)   Electric Vehicle Charging Act. All newly constructed attached
(townhouse) and detached single-family residences, and small multi-family
residences (two to four units), shall comply with the Electric Vehicle Charging
Act, 765 ILCS 1085/1 et seq.
   (b)   Permit and Fee Required. All electric vehicle charging stations shall
be constructed in compliance with all laws, ordinances, and codes of the City.
An application to construct an electric vehicle charging station shall be filed
with the City and the City shall issue a building permit provided that such
plans are in conformity with all laws, ordinances, and codes of the City. A
building permit fee and inspection fee shall be paid to the City in such amount
that is determined by the Building Commissioner.
   (c)   Location. A private electric vehicle charging station shall be an
accessory use in all residential districts. Where possible, a private electric
vehicle charging station shall be located in the attached garage of all
attached and detached single-family residences. A public electric vehicle
charging station may be located as an accessory use on any commercial or
industrial property. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be designed and
located so as not to impede vehicle, pedestrian, bicycle, or wheelchair
movement. No electric vehicle charging stations may be located within the
public right-of-way.
   (d)   Minimum Parking Requirements. An electric vehicle charging station
parking spot shall be counted in meeting any minimum parking space requirement.
   (e)   Signage. Any public electric vehicle parking space must be posted with
signage indicating that the parking space is available only for parking of
electric vehicles which are actively being connected and charged. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at a public electric vehicle parking
space except when such vehicle is actively being connected to and charging. It
shall not be unlawful to park in a public electric vehicle parking space if no
other parking spaces are available on the property.
(Ord. 24-02, passed 3-28-2024)
§ 24.41 OCCUPANCY AND LEASING PROHIBITED.
   No person, building mover, or building manager shall allow any person to
occupy any building or portion thereof in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District, C-2 General Commercial District, C-3 Highway Commercial District or
I-1 Industrial District, unless that person possesses a license or business
regulation certificate issued by the City as required under Chapter 31 of the
Hickory Hills Municipal Code or under Chapter 32 of the Hickory Hills Municipal
Code. Building owners and managers shall be strictly liable and must consult
the City Clerk’s office to determine whether a license or business regulation
certificate has been issued.
(Ord. 21-9, passed 7-8-2021)
CHAPTER 25: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
25.01   Electrical Code
   
25.02   Electrical Commission
   
25.03   Inspection Fees
   
25.04   Fees--MWRD Sewer Rehabilitation
   
25.05   Approved Unit Battery Equipment for Emergency Systems
§ 25.01 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The “Chicago Electrical Code” (Title 14E of the Municipal Code of Chicago as
amended to July 1, 2022) is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City
with the following changes, additions or insertions:
   “City of Hickory Hills” shall be substituted for “City of Chicago.”
   Any amendments to the Chicago Electrical Code after July 1, 2022 shall be
effective in the City upon the date of applicability in the City of Chicago.
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022)
§ 25.02 ELECTRICAL COMMISSION.
   (a)   Creation. There is hereby established an Electrical Commission which
shall consist of 6 members as follows: The Building Commissioner shall be the
ex-officio Chairman of the Commission; of the other 5 members, one shall be a
registered professional engineer, one shall be an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau maintained
by the Fire Underwriters, and one a representative of an electrical supply
company. If no such representative of the Fire Underwriters shall reside in the
City of Hickory Hills, then the Chief of the Fire Department shall be
substituted.
   (b)   Term of Office. Such members other than the Building Superintendent
shall be appointed for 3 years by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the
City Council. All members shall serve until their successors have been duly
appointed and qualified. All members shall serve without compensation.
   (c)   Function. The Electrical Commission shall recommend safe and practical
standards and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment designed to meet the necessities and conditions that
prevail in the City of Hickory Hills, and shall recommend reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of permits by the Electrical Inspection
Department and shall recommend reasonable fees to be paid for the inspection by
the Electrical Inspection Department of all electrical equipment installed or
altered within the city. Such standards and specifications, rules and
regulations, and fees shall not become effective until they have been adopted
by ordinance by the City Council. All such fees so adopted shall be paid to the
City Treasurer. Upon the adoption by ordinance such standards and
specifications, rules and regulations, and fees shall at once become operative
and thereafter no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except
upon a permit first issued by the Electrical Inspection Department.
§ 25.03 INSPECTION FEES.
   An inspection fee of $50 per inspection shall be paid for all electrical
inspections.
§ 25.04 FEES--MWRD SEWER REHABILITATION.
   There shall be no permit fee, inspection or reinspection fee for the
issuance of a permit requiring electrical work, electricity, or electric power
where the work is being done on existing buildings requiring modification of
plumbing to conform to Metropolitan Water Reclamation District sewer
rehabilitation programs standards requiring the use of electricity or electric
power.
§ 25.05 APPROVED UNIT BATTERY EQUIPMENT FOR EMERGENCY SYSTEMS.
   The unit battery enclosure and lamp holder shall be UL approved, and can be
metal or plastic.
CHAPTER 26: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
26.01   Plumbing Code
   
26.011   Metering, Flushing and Installation of Water Saving Plumbing Fixtures
   
26.02   Certified Plumbing Contractors
   
26.03   Inspection Fees
   
26.04   Connections to Potable Water Systems and Other Regulations
§ 26.01 PLUMBING CODE.
   The “Illinois Plumbing Code” as promulgated by the Illinois Department of
Public Health at 77 I.A.C. Part 890 with amendments to July l, 2022, is hereby
adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City with the following changes, additions
or insertions:
   Appendix A, Table A: AU materials shall meet the following requirements or
be approved by the Building Commissioner.
      Approved Materials for Water Service Pipe shall be as permitted by Table
29 (18-29-605.4) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
      Approved Materials for Water Distribution Pipe shall be as permitted by
Table 29 (18-29-605.5) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
      Approved Standards for Fittings shall be as permitted by Table 29 (18-29-
605.6) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022)
§ 26.011 METERING, FLUSHING AND INSTALLATION OF WATER SAVING PLUMBING FIXTURES.
   (a)   All new water services shall be metered. New services include but are
not limited to water service in new construction of all types. All new and
replacement plumbing fixtures shall be labeled as a WaterSense product, as
specified by the USEPA.
   (b)   Flushing of sanitary sewers with potable water shall be performed
through the use of a high velocity type sewer jet.
   (c)   In all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of water
using fixtures, only fixtures not exceeding the following flow rates and/or
water usage shall be installed. These ratings are based on a pressure at the
fixture of 40 to 50 psi.
 
Water closets, tank type        3.5 gal. per flush
Water closets, flushometer type 3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, tank type              3.0 gal. per flush
Urinals, flushometer type       3.0 gal. per flush
Shower heads                    3.0 gal. per minute
Lavatory, sink faucets          3.0 gal. per minute
 
   (d)   Lavatories for Public Use. In addition to the requirements in Item (c)
above, in all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of
fixtures, faucets of lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use
shall be of metering or self-closing type.
   (e)   In all new construction and in all new remodeling, only closed system
air conditioning shall be installed.
   (f)   In all newly constructed or remodeled car wash installations a water
recycling system shall be installed.
§ 26.02 CERTIFIED PLUMBING CONTRACTORS.
   No person shall contract for plumbing work and no person shall do plumbing
work in the City of Hickory Hills unless he shall be currently certified as a
licensed plumber in accordance with the “Illinois Plumbing License Law.”
§ 26.03 INSPECTION FEES.
   An inspection fee of $50 per inspection shall be paid for all plumbing
inspections.
§ 26.04 CONNECTIONS TO POTABLE WATER SYSTEMS AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
      1.   Air Gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
      2.   Approved. Accepted by the Hickory Hills Water Department as meeting
an applicable specification stated or cited in this section, or as suitable for
the proposed use.
      3.   Auxiliary Supply. Any water source or system other than the potable
water supply that may be available in the building or premises.
      4.   Backflow. The flow of any water, foreign liquids, gases or other
substances back into the distribution pipes of the potable water system.
      5.   Backflow Preventer. A device or means to prevent backflow.
      6.   Back-Siphonage. The flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted
water due to a negative gauge or subatmospheric pressure in that pipe.
      7.   Contamination. See pollution.
      8.   Cross-Connection. Any actual or potential connection between the
potable water supply and a source of possible contamination or pollution.
      9.   Director. The Director of Public Works or his authorized designee.
      10.   Drain. Any pipe that carries waste water or waterborne wastes in a
building drainage system.
      11.   Fixture-Plumbing. Installed receptacles, devices or appliances
supplied with water or that receive or discharge liquids for liquid-borne
wastes.
      12.   Flood-Level Rim. The edge of the receptacle from which water
overflows.
      13.   Hazard, Health. Any conditions or devices which, in the judgment of
the Director, may create a danger to the health and well-being of a water
consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect in the water
supply system, whether of location, design or construction, that regularly or
occasionally may prevent satisfactory treatment of the water supply or cause it
to be polluted from extraneous sources.
      14.   Hazard, Plumbing. Any arrangement of plumbing, including piping and
fixtures, whereby a cross-connection is created or is possible.
      15.   Hydropneumatic Tank. A pressure vessel in which air pressure acts
upon the surface of the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the
water distribution piping connection to the vessel.
      16.   Non-Residential. All buildings and uses which do not consist of
single family residential or multi-family (apartment or condominium) housing.
      17.   Outlet. The open end of the water supply pipe through which the
water is discharged into the plumbing fixture.
      18.   Plumbing System. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes,
plumbing fixtures, traps, soil pipes, waste pipes, vent pipes, building drains
and building sewers, including their respective connections, devices and
appurtenances, any of which are located within the property lines of the
premises; and water-treating or water-using equipment.
      19.   Pollution. The presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that, either by itself or in
combination with another substance in the water, tends to, or has the potential
to, degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness
of the water.
      20.   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer. An assembly of
differential valves and check valves, including an automatically opened
spillage port to the atmosphere designed to prevent backflow.
      21.   Receiving Tank. The receiving, non-pressure vessel forming part of
the air gap separation between a potable and an auxiliary supply.
      22.   Vacuum. Any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
      23.   Water, Potable. Water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient
to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and
chemical quality shall conform to the requirements of the Federal and State
drinking water regulations and to any regulations of the applicable public
health authority having local jurisdiction.
      24.   Water, Non-Potable. Water that is not safe for human consumption or
that is of questionable potability.
   (b)   Cross Connections Prohibited
      1.   Cross Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances are prohibited except when and
where approved cross connection control devices such as a reduced pressure zone
backflow preventer are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
      2.   To protect the public water system from contamination due to
contaminants through the water service connection into the public water system,
a program of inspection and regulation shall be provided.
      3.   The Director shall inspect the plumbing in every building or
premises served by the public water system as frequently as in his judgment may
be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed and maintained in
such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of
the City. The Director shall notify or cause to be notified in writing the
owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to
correct, within a reasonable time set by the Director, any plumbing installed
or existing contrary to or in violation of this section or any other applicable
law or ordinance, and which, in his judgment, may therefore permit the
pollution of the City water supply, or otherwise adversely affect the public
health.
      4.   Inspection. The Director shall have the right of entry into any
building during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of the
plumbing systems installed in such building or premises, provided that with
respect to the inspection of any single family dwelling, consent to such
inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age an discretion
therein or in control thereof. Consistent refusal to allow inspection of a
specific dwelling may be cause for requiring installation of suitable backflow
protection device approved by the City, or discontinuation of potable water
service in the manner provided in this section.
   (c)   Technical Requirements. A potable water supply system shall be
designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent contamination
from non-potable liquids, solids, or gases being introduced into the potable
water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the
system.
      1.   Connection to the potable water supply system is prohibited unless
protected against backflow as set out herein. Examples of fixtures and
equipment from which the potable water supply system must be protected include,
but is not limited to are:
         A.   Bidets.
         B.   Operating, dissection, embalming, and mortuary tables or similar
equipment. In such installation, the hose used for water supply shall terminate
at least 12 inches away from every point of the table or attachments.
         C.   Pumps for non-potable water, chemicals or other substances.
Priming connections may be made only through an air gap.
         D.   Building drainage, sewer, or vent systems.
      2.   Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air
gap or provided with a City-approved backflow preventer.
      3.   Refrigerating Unit Condensers and Cooling Jackets. Except where
potable water provided for a refrigerator condenser or cooling jacket is
entirely outside the piping or tank containing a toxic refrigerant, the inlet
connection shall be provided with a City-approved check valve. Also adjacent to
and at the outlet side of the check valve, a City-approved pressure relief
valve set to relieve at 5 PSI above the maximum water pressure at the point of
installation shall be provided if the refrigeration units contain more than 20
pounds of refrigerants.
      4.   Protection Against Backflow and Back-Siphonage.
         A.   Water Outlets. A potable water system shall be protected against
backflow and back-siphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet, an air
gap, as specified below, between the potable water outlet and the flood level
rim of the fixture it supplies, or between the outlet and any other source of
contamination, or, an approved device or means to prevent backflow.
         B.   Minimum Required Air Gap.
         (1)   How Measured. The minimum required air gap shall be measured
vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or
line of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
         (2)   Size. The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective
opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than
three times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface,
in which case the minimum required air gap shall be three times the effective
opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air gap be less
than one inch.
      5.   Before any device for the prevention of backflow or back-siphonage
is installed, it shall have first been certified by the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control Research of the University of Southern California, and the
National Sanitation Foundation. Devices, other than reduced pressure zone
backflow preventers, installed in a residential potable water supply
distribution system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good
working condition by the person or persons responsible for the maintenance of
the system. Reduced pressure zone backflow preventers installed in a non-
residential building potable water supply distribution system shall be tested
and maintained by a State Certified Backflow Preventer Maintenance/Tester in
accordance with Title 35 I.A.C Subtitle F, § 653.802(d) as adopted by the State
of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, including any subsequent
amendments thereto. The Director shall inspect routinely such devices and if
they are found to be defective or inoperative, the Director shall notify the
Owner of his obligation to have the device repaired within 72 hours of oral or
written notice. If the building owner does not perform the necessary repairs
within 72 hours, the Director shall require the replacement thereof and shall
engage the services of a plumber to perform the required work, which cost shall
be invoiced to the building owner, plus a cost of 10% for processing costs, to
be paid to the City. In the case of an emergency repair, the Director may
require the replacement of the device and arrange with a plumber for the device
to be removed. The cost of this work will be invoiced to the building owner at
actual cost.
      6.   Installation of Devices.
         A.   A reduced pressure principle type backflow preventer may be
installed subject to full static pressure.
         B.   Backflow and back-siphonage preventing devices containing
backflows to separate fixtures shall be accessibly located, preferably in the
same room with the fixture they serve. Installation in utility or service
spaces, provided they are readily accessible, is also permitted.
      7.   Below Rim Supply.
         A.   Where a potable water outlet terminates below the rim of a tank
or vat, and the tank or vat has an overflow of diameter not less than two
inches, the overflow pipe shall be provided with an air gap as close to the
tank as possible.
         B.   The potable water outlet to the tank or vat shall terminate a
distance not less than 1-1/2 times the height to which water can rise in the
tank above the top of the overflow. This level shall be established at the
maximum flow rate of the supply to the tank or vat and with all outlets except
the air gap overflow outlet closed. The distance from the outlet to the high
water level shall be measured from the critical point of the potable water
supply outlet.
      8.   City-approved devices to protect against backflow and back-siphonage
shall be installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow and back-
siphonage may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between the
water outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood-level rim.
         A.   Connections Subject to Back Pressure. Where a potable water
connection is made to a line, fixture, tank, vat, pump, or other equipment with
a hazard of backflow or back-siphonage where the water connection is subject to
back pressure, and an air gap cannot be installed, the Director will require
adequate protection which will include the use of an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer.
      9.   When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system, and
the possibility exists that a positive pressure of less than 20 PSI may occur
on the suction side of the pump, there shall be installed a low pressure cutoff
on the booster pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum or negative pressure on
the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to other outlets.
   (d)   Backflow Prevention Devices Required
      1.   All new residential and non-residential construction, and all
remodeling, additions, or rehabilitations of existing residential and non-
residential construction involving revisions or additions to the potable water
system shall require the installation of a backflow prevention device
immediately downstream of the water meter. Such installation shall be made as
part of the construction and shall be a condition of any building permit.
Backflow prevention devices shall also be installed by August 1, 1987 on any
existing building used for any of the following purposes:
      Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes. Laboratories. Piers,
docks, water front facilities. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations
or storm water pumping stations. Food or beverage processing plants. Chemical
plants. Metal plating industries. Petroleum processing or storage plants.
Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors. Car washes. Other
hazardous uses determined by the Water Department.
      2.   For residential construction permits, backflow preventers will be
issued by the Water Department upon receipt of payment. For non-residential
construction, backflow preventers (reduced principle) shall be furnished by the
permittee.
      3.   Backflow preventers shall be installed by a licensed plumber at the
sole expense of the owner of the premises being served. All devices shall be
installed in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. Reduced pressure
principle backflow preventers shall be installed as follows:
         A.   Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be installed on fire
lines and potable water service lines separately, downstream of the respective
meters for both the fire lines and water service lines.
         B.   Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be installed with two
(2) resilient seat gate valves, with a test cock on the No. 1 gate valve.
         C.   Installation shall be in a location where the unit is readily
accessible for maintenance and testing. Location should be immediately
“downstream” of the water meter.
         D.   Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be
observed.
         E.   The unit shall be protected against flooding and freezing.
         F.   Free draining of the relief port must be maintained under all
conditions, and provisions to accomplish the same, such as floor drains, shall
be provided.
         G.   If installed at ceiling level, a collection system shall be
installed with a fixed and proper air gap under the drain port to protect areas
below the unit from drainage, and a proper air gap between the discharge of the
collection system and structure accepting the discharged water.
         H.   There shall be no reduction made in the size of the relief port
drain.
         I.   Provision shall be made for easy and unrestricted removal of the
unit.
      4.   Testing of Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers.
         A.   Each year the City may cause the testing of each reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer installed.
         B.   Testing of units shall be the responsibility of the building
owner and be performed in accordance with manufacturers recommendation. Minimal
maintenance such as internal cleaning, if needed, shall be provided. Costs for
tests, parts and replacement of units will be the responsibility of the
building owner.
         C.   Testing of initial installation before occupancy shall be
required. Initial certification test will be done at no charge.
         D.   The Water Department may perform random inspections and testing
each year, based on the anniversary date of the installation. Such tests shall
be conducted, where possible, within 60 days of said anniversary date.
         E.   The building owner shall be responsible for authorizing a
qualified licensed plumber to perform all necessary tests and file all
necessary reports with State and local authorities, and will certify that
owners reduced pressure backflow preventers are operating and being maintained
in accordance with existing State code requirements and manufacturers
recommendations. These reports shall be submitted annually to the Director. A
copy of the maintenance and inspection records shall be on file at the plant
facility and shall be made available to the inspector or backflow maintainer on
request.
         F.   Cost of subsequent annual inspections and testing of units shall
be the owners responsibility. The charge for random inspection and test by the
City will be based on its actual cost to the City.
         G.   All parts necessary to rebuild a unit to meet factory and State
Standards shall be provided by the manufacturer of the backflow preventer, and
shall be new parts.
         H.   Any maintenance and inspections and testing requested of the
Water Department by owner between annual inspections will be performed by the
Water Department and invoiced at then current prices or rates.
         I.   Tampering Prohibited. No persons other than the Director or other
State certified backflow preventer maintenance/tester shall remove, repair,
test or perform any maintenance on any reduced pressure principle backflow
preventer.
         J.   Owners of all reduced pressure principle backflow preventers
shall provide easy access to units and necessary tools and equipment, and shall
furnish the Water Department with necessary ladders and scaffolding, and shall
assign an employee or employees to assist the Water Department in performing
any necessary testing and service according to this Code, as may be necessary,
all at owners expense. The owner of each device shall maintain in a neat and
orderly manner, a manufacturer’s maintenance manual and manufacturer’s testing
instructions at the point of installation of the device.
      5.   Out of Service - Repair. When a unit is out of service, or otherwise
is in need of service, the Water Department shall be notified within 24 hours.
      6.   By-Passes. If there is only one service line and the water service
cannot be interrupted, a second backflow preventer may be installed in parallel
with the first. Under no circumstance will a backflow preventer be bypassed by
unprotected piping. For buildings where water service cannot be interrupted
during normal City working hours, a bypass will be required with a backflow
preventer.
      7.   Specifications. Reduced principle backflow preventers shall be of
the type approved by the Foundation for Cross Control Research of the
University of Southern California or as otherwise approved by the Director.
   (e)   Notification of Violation. The Director shall notify the owners, or
authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there is
found a violation of this ordinance, of such violation. The Director shall set
a reasonable time, based on the level or hazard to health, for the owner to
have the violation removed or corrected, and shall include in such notification
an indication that water service may be terminated if the owner fails to
correct the defect in such time. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect
corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the Director may, if in
his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the
building or premises to be terminated, and recommend such additional fines or
penalties to be invoked as herein may be provided.
   (f)   Hearing. Any party involved may request a hearing before the Director
by notifying the other party and request a hearing. The Director may request or
initiate a hearing or the owner or his or her authorized agent shall request a
hearing within five days of the receipt of the notice. All hearings shall be
held within 15 days of the request or initiation.
CHAPTER 27: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
27.01   Compliance Required
   
27.02   Definition
   
27.03   Location
   
27.04   Permit Required
   
27.05   Drawings, Plans and Permits
   
27.06   Recirculation Pools
   
27.07   Materials
   
27.08   Structural Design
   
27.09   Walk Areas
   
27.10   Fences and Safety Pool Covers
   
27.11   Steps or Ladders
   
27.12   Skimmers
   
27.13   Water Supply
   
27.14   Inlets
   
27.15   Outlets
   
27.16   Recirculation System and Appurtenances
   
27.17   Electrical Requirements
   
27.18   Safety Precautions
   
27.19   Inspection
   
27.20   Permit Fees
   
27.21   Inspections Required
§ 27.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming
pool in the City of Hickory Hills except in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 27.02 DEFINITION.
   The term “swimming pool” is defined as a receptacle for water, or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than 2 feet,
intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human
beings, and including all appurtenant equipment.
§ 27.03 LOCATION.
   No portion of a swimming pool outside of a building shall be located at a
distance less than 8 feet from any side property line.
§ 27.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the city without a permit therefor from the Building
Commissioner.
§ 27.05 DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS.
   (a)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented
to the Building Commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location
and construction.
   (b)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-
eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink or by some process
that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot
line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk, and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all
appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical
elevations shall also be provisions in accordance with the Building Code.
   (c)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply
and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved
plans.
§ 27.06 RECIRCULATION POOLS.
   All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation
of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the
pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool.
§ 27.07 MATERIALS.
   Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious
material which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and
easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a
non-slip finish as smooth as possible. The side and wails of a pool shall
present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least 6 feet or
shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
   (a)   The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the water level,
below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point
equal to the difference between the depth at that point, and 30 inches.
   (b)   To a depth of 6 feet, except as in subsection (a) above, the wall’s
slope shall not be less than one foot horizontal in 6 feet vertical.
§ 27.08 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
   Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within
and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure
of 2,200 pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool
in which the water is less than 5 feet in depth shall not be more than one foot
in 10 feet. The maximum slope where water is 5 feet or more in depth shall not
exceed one foot in two feet.
§ 27.09 WALK AREAS.
   Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided to
extend entirety around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of
impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and
easily cleaned and of non-slip construction. The slope of the walks shall have
a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back
drainage from entering the pool.
§ 27.10 FENCES AND SAFETY POOL COVERS.
   All permanently constructed outdoor swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a fence of the type required for residential use by Section
24.04(d) of the Building Code. Such fence shall be of a height of not less than
6 feet and shall be equipped with a self-closing gate, with the gate latch 4-1/
2 feet over grade.
   All temporary type outdoor swimming pools with a height of one foot or more
shall have either (1) a fence as provided in this section, or (2) a safety type
pool cover with tie-downs and locking devices. Where safety type pool covers
are used in lieu of a fence as provided herein, such pool cover shall be kept
in place and secured at all times when the pool is not in operation.
§ 27.11 STEPS OR LADDERS.
   Two or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all swimming pools. At least one such means of egress shall be
located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool.
Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of non-slip material and at
least 3 inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a
handrail on both side.
§ 27.12 SKIMMERS.
   In every swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided for
each 800 square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be
located at least 30 feet apart. Handholds shall be provided and consist of a
bull-nosed coping not over 2-1/2 inches thick for the outer two inches or an
equivalent approved handhold. The handhold must be no more than 9 inches above
the normal water line. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall,
shall adequately remove floated oils and waste and shall meet the following
general specification:
   (a)   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least 30
gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool shall be at
least 50 percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system.
   (b)   They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level
over a range of at least 3 inches.
   (c)   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all
overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
   (d)   The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the
suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an adequate amount
of make-up water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the
weir level. This pipe shall be at least two inches in diameter and shall be
located at least one foot below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.
   (e)   An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain
tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will automatically open
at a differential or not more than 4 inches between the pool level and the
level of the overflow tank.
   (f)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of
flow of at least 20 gallons per minute per lineal foot of weir line.
§ 27.13 WATER SUPPLY.
   No source of water other than that secured from the city water distribution
system shall be used in swimming pools.
§ 27.14 INLETS.
   (a)   Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as
to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool
without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the
outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of 10 inches below the pool
overflow level. A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided
for every 615 square feet of surface area of the pool.
   (b)   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up
water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line and the pool system. If the make-up water is added directly to the pool,
the outlet shall be at least 6 inches above the rim of the pool. If the make-up
water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of discharge
shall be at least 6 inches above the rim of the tank. If a hose connection from
a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying make-up
water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock
or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection. The vacuum breaker
shall be installed at a height not less than 7 feet 6 inches above the floor,
platform or ground upon which a person would stand when operating the sill cock
or control valve. Maximum size of the flllpipe shall be 2 inches.
§ 27.15 OUTLETS.
   (a)   In swimming pools 30 feet in width or less, water circulation system
outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest
point in the pool. If the pool width is more than 30 feet multiple outlets
shall be provided and spaced not more than 30 feet apart, nor closer than 4
feet to any wall. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having
an area of opening not less than four times the cross-sectional area of the
outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily
removable by bathers and will not injure bathers’ fingers. One outlet shall be
provided for each 800 square feet of surface area.
   (b)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not
exceeding 200 gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the
sewer.
   (c)   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer
system during the periods of rain or storm. At no time shall the rate of drain
water discharge exceed a flow of 200 gallons per minute.
§ 27.16 RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES.
   (a)   The swimming pools’ recirculation systems shall consist of pumping
equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe
connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections
necessary for back washing filters, and facilities and equipment for
disinfecting the pool water.
   (b)   Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly
capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight.
   (c)   The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to
discharge the volume of water required for an eight hour turnover of the pool
against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
   (d)   The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity
to provide a filter backwash rate of at least 12 gallons per minute per square
foot of filter area.
   (e)   A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction
side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter
from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed
that they can be easily dismantled for the cleaning and inspection and shall be
so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall
be as follows: Water passes through the strainer from the outside; the strainer
is made of non-corrosive material; the width of diameter of strainer openings
is not more than one-eighth inch; the area of the strainer openings shall be at
least five times the cross-sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
   (f)   Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient
filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in 18
hours at the rate of not more than three gallons per square foot of filter area
per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash
at a rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. All backwash
water and effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect
connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air
relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes,
and an access head or hole large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and
repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be
provided in the effluent line from the filter units.
   (g)   Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water.
Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be
subject to the approval of the Building Commissioner. Disinfection equipment
installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to
maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per million. The
disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the
filters.
   (h)   Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a
disinfection method for pool water.
§ 27.17 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be of conformance
with the Electrical Code.
   (b)   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within 15 feet of
such pools.
   (c)   All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming
pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken
overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
§ 27.18 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys
not more than 15 inches in diameter and having 60 feet of 3/16 inch manila line
attached, and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less
than 12 feet in length, for making reach assists or rescues.
§ 27.19 INSPECTION.
   The Building Commissioner periodically shall inspect all swimming pools to
determine whether or not the provisions of the ordinances regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with.
§ 27.20 PERMIT FEES.
   The permit fee for the erection, construction, and inspection of any in-
ground swimming pool shall be $35.00 and for any above-ground swimming pool
shall be $20.00.
§ 27.21 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   All swimming pools shall comply with all of the requirements of the City
ordinances and Building Code, Plumbing Code, and Electrical Code, and shall be
subject to the appropriate structural, plumbing, and electrical inspections as
determined by the City.
CHAPTER 28: SIGNS
Section
   
28.01   Hickory Hills Sign Ordinance
   
28.02   Purpose
   
28.03   Definitions
   
28.04   Standards and Permit Requirements
   
28.05   Permission of Property Owner
   
28.06   Sign Permit Application
   
28.07   Sign Permit Fees
   
28.08   Annual Inspection Fees
   
28.09   General Construction and Maintenance Standards
   
28.10   Appearance Standards
   
28.11   Setback Requirements
   
28.12   Prohibited Signs
   
28.13   Signs Allowed in All Zoning Districts With Permit
   
28.14   Signs Allowed in All Zoning Districts Without a Permit
   
28.15   Signs Allowed in Residential Zoning Districts
   
28.16   Signs Allowed in Commercial Zoning Districts
   
28.17   Signs Allowed in Industrial Zoning Districts
   
28.18   Signs Allowed for Automobile Dealers and Automobile Service Stations
   
28.19   Nonconforming Signs
§ 28.01 HICKORY HILLS SIGN ORDINANCE.
   This Chapter shall be known as the “Hickory Hills Sign Ordinance.”
§ 28.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the use of signs in the City which
are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible with their surroundings and
legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. This Chapter also
recognizes the need for a well-maintained and attractive physical appearance of
the community and the need for adequate business identification for the conduct
of competitive commerce. This Chapter is also adopted for the purpose of
reducing sign or advertising distractions which may increase traffic accidents
by distracting driver’s attention from the roadway.
§ 28.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms used in this Chapter unless the context otherwise indicates, mean as
follows:
   (a)   Animated Sign means any sign which includes action or motion.
   (b)   Attention-Getting Device means a flag, propeller, spinner, streamer,
search light or similar device or ornamentation which is designed or used for
the purpose of promoting, advertising, or attracting attention for commercial
purposes.
   (c)   Banner Sign means a temporary sign composed of lightweight material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted to an
existing structure.
   (d)   Canopy or Awning means a permanent roof-like shelter which may be
freestanding or extending from part or all of a building face and which is
constructed of durable material such as metal, cloth, glass or plastic.
   (e)   Canopy or Awning Sign means any sign which is affixed to, painted on
or suspended from a roof-like shelter, either permanent, retractable, or
removable, which is self-supporting and provides protection from sun, rain,
snow and other elements.
   (f)   Copy, Changeable or Message Board Sign means a sign on which the copy
changes automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means, such as
electrical or electronic time and temperature units, or is changed manually in
the field in or upon the surface area of the sign.
   (g)   Directional Sign means a sign which directs or guides persons to an
establishment or to facilities intended to serve the public, including
entrances, exits, restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking areas, full-
service and self-service gasoline pumps, and similar facilities, but which does
not identify the establishment itself or other goods or services available at
the establishment and does not contain other advertising messages.
   (h)   Flashing Sign means any sign which contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or which produces the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light.
   (i)   Freestanding Sign means a sign which is completely or principally
supported by one (1) or more posts or other support of which 75% is visually or
physically attached to the ground, which is not attached to the principal
building on the property, and is anchored in or upon the ground. This shall
include, but not be limited to, signs attached to poles or supports for lights,
canopies, and other items or structures.
   (j)   Height means the vertical distance measured from the natural grade at
the base of the sign support to the highest point of the sign.
   (k)   Hologram Sign means a three-dimensional picture that is made on a
photographic film or plate without the use of a camera, that consists of a
pattern of interference produced by a split coherent beam of light and which
for viewing is illuminated with a coherent light from behind.
   (l)   Identification Sign means a sign which states the name of the business
or establishment, including either the national company or local proprietor,
and/or the address of a building.
   (m)   Illuminated Sign means any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign faces.
   (n)   Indirectly Illuminated Sign means any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it, for example by means of a flood light.
   (o)   Marquee means a roof-like structure that projects over an entrance to
a building.
   (p)   Nameplate means a sign which displays only the name and/or street
address of the occupant.
   (q)   Nonconforming Sign means any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of this Chapter and any
amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this Code, or a sign previously deemed to be nonconforming for
which a special permit has been issued.
   (r)   Off-Premises Sign (Off-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities or that
directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.
   (s)   On-Premises Sign (On-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that is
located on the same premises as the sign itself.
   (t)   Portable Sign means any sign that is not permanently attached to the
ground, a structure, or a building and which is designed to be transported to
another location.
   (u)   Projecting Sign means any sign that is attached to a wall in a
perpendicular manner.
   (v)   Public Sign means a sign of a non-commercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of a public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or public
officer, including official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois Revised
Statutes or the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (w)   Public Right-of-Way width means any dedicated street, alley or public
property.
   (x)   Sight Triangle means the area of the corner lot closest to the
intersection which is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Marked by a point at which the 2 curb lines
intersect, measuring back 15 feet on each street front, and drawing a line
across the 2 back points to form a triangulated area. Only public signs may be
installed in this area.
   (y)   Sign means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
which is used primarily to advertise, identify, display or direct or attract
attention to an object, person, establishment, product, service, event or
location by any means including, without limitation, words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images,
visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are situated
or visible from any public thoroughfare or right of way. This includes, but is
not limited to, wall signs, freestanding signs, ground signs, window signs,
awning or canopy signs, marquees, changeable copy signs, message boards,
illuminated signs, moving signs, temporary signs, portable signs, pennants,
banners, streamers or any other attention-getting device, flag, or other
display, whether affixed to a building or erected elsewhere on the premises.
The term “sign” excludes those features of a building which are an integral
part of the building’s design and structure.
   (z)   Sign Area means the entire area of all sign faces, cumulatively,
including sign faces on which no copy is currently displayed.
   (aa)   Sign Face means that part of the sign which is or can be used to
identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual
representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. This
shall include any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or self-
illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure,
backdrop surface, or object upon or against which it is placed. This shall not
include any portion of the support structure for the sign, provided that no
message, symbol, or any part of the aforementioned sign face criteria is placed
on or designed as part of the support structure.
   (bb)   Temporary Sign means a sign which contains information which is not
of a permanent character. Such signs include, but are not limited to, political
signs, garage sale signs and real estate signs.
   (cc)   Wall or Facia Sign means any sign attached to or erected against a
wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in plan
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall.
   (dd)   Window Display means 1 or more objects set inside a building in a
display case or on a window ledge which displays merchandise or relates to
services offered but which is not affixed to any window.
   (ee)   Window Sign means a sign that is installed inside, painted upon or
placed against a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises, not
including merchandise located in a window display.
§ 28.04 STANDARDS AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (a)   Physical standards such as sign height and area contained herein are
to be construed as maximum standards.
   (b)   Except as provided in Section 28.14, it is unlawful for any person to
erect, construct, enlarge, move or convert any sign in the City, or cause the
same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit from the Building
Commissioner. No new sign permit is required for signs which have previously
been issued valid permits and which conform with the requirements of this
Chapter on the date of their adoption unless the sign is hereafter permanently
altered, relocated, or reinstalled. Every sign permit issued shall become null
and void if installation is not commenced and completed within 180 days from
the date of such permit.
   (c)   As a condition to the issuance of a sign permit, all persons engaged
in the business of installing, maintaining, erecting or altering signs hereby
agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the City, its officers, agents and
employees from any and all claims regarding the sign work authorized by the
permit.
§ 28.05 PERMISSION OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property,
structure or building without the prior written consent of the owner or person
entitled to possession of the property, structure or building, or authorized
representative. The written consent must accompany the application for a sign
permit.
§ 28.06 SIGN PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on a form furnished
by the Building Department, accompanied by a fee to be determined by the
Council from time to time. The permit shall be accompanied by such information
as may be required to assure compliance with this Chapter and all other
appropriate ordinances and regulations of the City. The Building Commissioner
shall decide whether to issue or deny the permit within 10 days of receiving a
complete application. Permits shall be issued for the life of the sign, or any
shorter period as stated on the approved permit application by the Building
Department. However, any permit may be revoked at any time by the Building
Department upon finding that the sign violates any provision of this Chapter or
that the permittee made false representations in securing the sign permit. No
fee which the permittee paid for the permit shall be refunded when a permit is
revoked.
§ 28.07 SIGN PERMIT FEES.
   The permit fee for a sign shall be $1.00 per square foot, but in no event
shall the permit fee be less than $50.00.
§ 28.08 ANNUAL INSPECTION FEES.
   The annual inspection fee for a sign shall be $.30 per square foot, but in
no event shall the annual inspection fee be less than $10.00 nor more than
$100.00.
§ 28.09 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following limitations and requirements:
   (a)   Access to Building and Roof. No sign shall be erected so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door or window, or any other point of access
into a building nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair access to the
roof of a building.
   (b)   Wind Pressure and Dead Loan Requirement. All signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of 30 pounds per square foot and
shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the Building Code and
other applicable City ordinances.
   (c)   Metal Signs. A metal sign shall have its face or background
constructed of metal not thinner than No. 28 B & S gauge. The face or
background may cover a wooden frame and may be provided with letters, figures,
characters, borders, or mouldings of wood. No wooden border around a metal sign
shall exceed a width of 3 inches.
   (d)   Glass. All glass that is part of a sign shall be safety glass.
   (e)   Legibility. All letters and characters on each sign shall be legible,
with the edges of the letters and characters cleanly defined, unfaded, and
maintaining a clear contrast with the background.
   (f)   Maintenance. The permittee for each sign shall paint and maintain all
arts and supports thereof as necessary to prevent rusting, rotting,
illegibility, or other deterioration. All broken or missing parts shall be
promptly replaced. All seams between panels or the components of the sign shall
be maintained in a closed condition.
   (g)   Removal. The Building Department is authorized to institute court
action and issue tickets in order to remove any sign that is not maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
   (h)   Design and Engineering Requirements. All freestanding identification
signs shall be designed and engineered by an engineer licensed in the State of
Illinois. Stamped drawings shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner
along with the permit application.
§ 28.10 APPEARANCE STANDARDS.
   All sign designs and lettering shall be approved by the Building Department
to meet the following standards:
   (a)   Every sign shall have appropriate scale and proportion in its design
and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
   (b)   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building, structure, or site to which it principally relates.
   (c)   The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious
with the building, structure or site to which it principally relates. Opaque
backgrounds with illuminated lettering shall be preferred for internally
illuminated signs.
   (d)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum
needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be composed in proportion
to the area of the sign face.
   (e)   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining and neighboring
premises and shall not unreasonably obstruct the view of existing signs.
   (f)   Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall
conform to the appearance criteria required for all other signs.
   Once a sign design and lettering has been approved by the Building
Department, that sign shall be deemed to meet the provisions of this Section
unless its design and lettering is changed.
§ 28.11 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   The minimum setback requirements for all freestanding or pole identification
signs shall be as follows:
   (a)   The minimum setback from the right of way property line shall be 1
foot.
   (b)   Signs shall not be permitted in parkways.
   (c)   No signs may be permitted within a sight triangle, except for safety-
related signs.
§ 28.12 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Chapter, the following
signs and displays shall be strictly prohibited throughout the City:
   (a)   Portable signs except for new businesses for a maximum of 30 days.
   (b)   Signs which are painted directly onto any exterior wall of any
building or other structure.
   (c)   Signs in public rights of way which are not public signs or located on
permitted bus shelters.
   (d)   Streamers, posters, ribbons, light strings, light bulbs, light bands,
spinners, attention-getting devices that move, blinking, and festoon lighting,
signs (other than neon signs) which contain bare, unshielded light or tubes
which are visible from a public street or a private residence. Christmas lights
and ornaments shall be permitted during the period of November 15 to the
following January 15. Signs with strobe lights or flashing lights that have an
appearance similar to emergency vehicle lights, or which are distracting to
motorists on the adjacent streets are prohibited.
   (e)   Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles, standpipes,
gutter drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by government
officials or public utilities.
   (f)   Abandoned or defunct signs, including the posts or other supports
therefor, that advertise or identify an activity, business product or service
that is no longer conducted or available on the premises where such sign is
located. The property owner shall remove said sign within 60 days of
notification by the Building Department.
   (g)   Signs which move, rotate, change position, have moving parts, or
create the illusion of movement, whether the movement is caused by the wind or
mechanically, except for the rotation of barber poles and permissible
changeable copy signs.
   (h)   Hazardous signs. No signs shall be erected, relocated or maintained so
as to prevent free ingress or access from any door, window, fire escape,
driveway or utility lines.
   (i)   “A” frame, sandwich board, sidewalk or curb signs on the public right-
of-way.
   (j)   Projection signs which are suspended from or supported by a wall,
awning or canopy and which are approximately perpendicular thereto.
   (k)   Roof signs or any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof
or on top of or above the parapet of a building, whichever forms the top line
of the building silhouette.
   (l)   Hologram signs which project off-site.
   (m)   Signs which contain advertising matter which is untruthful.
   (n)   Signs which emit an audible sound, odor or visible matter.
   (o)   Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed to be a
traffic-control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or road
equipment vehicle, except where such sign is accessory to a parking area and
gives directions or instructions to drivers or pedestrians.
   (p)   Signs which hide or interfere with traffic flow or any street sign,
signal or device.
   (q)   Signs or any advertising device attached to or located on a parked
vehicle or trailer on a public right of way, public property or private
property for the basic purpose of providing advertising of products or services
or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby
property or any other premises, except for temporary truckload sale signs.
   (r)   Off-premises (off-site) signs, such as billboards, but excluding
public directional signs.
   (s)   Signs which do not meet the standards of, or which otherwise violate,
the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971 (225 ILCS 440/1 et seq.).
   (t)   Signs, other than canopy, awning, or marquee signs which project more
than 18 inches over any street, walkway, public way or public easement or
beyond alley lot lines, and which are less than 8 feet above grade.
   (u)   Signs which contain radio or microwave transmitters, or slots or boxes
for the distribution of pamphlets or similar materials.
§ 28.13 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS WITH PERMIT.
   The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts with a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this Chapter:
   (a)   Construction signs. One sign shall be permitted that lists the
building contractors, professional firms and lending institutions on sites
under construction. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction,
construction shed, or trailer and shall be removed no later than 14 days after
the completion of the project. Construction signs for projects up to 10 acres
shall not exceed 12 square feet per acre, or 40 square feet, whichever is less.
For construction projects exceeding 10 acres, the sign shall not exceed 64
square feet. All construction signs shall be subject to annual review.
   (b)   Real Estate for Sale or Lease Signs Over 6 Square Feet. One temporary
real estate for sale or lease sign, located on the real estate to be sold or
leased, shall be allowed for each lot or parcel. If the lot or parcel has
multiple frontages, 1 additional sign shall be allowed on the property and
shall be placed facing the additional frontage. Under no circumstance shall
more than 2 signs be permitted on the property. For a tract of real estate
containing 1 acre or more, signs shall not exceed 40 square feet. For a tract
of real estate containing less than 1 acre, a sign shall not exceed 6 square
feet in area, except for tracts located on major or minor arterial roads or
major collector roads where signs up to 40 square feet are permitted.
   (c)   Not-for-Profit and Religious Signs. Name and informational signs, and
emblems of service clubs, places of worship and not-for-profit identification
signs shall be permitted, but shall not exceed 1 square foot in area for each 2
feet of lot line and adjoining a street with a maximum of 40 square feet. Such
sign or signs on a corner lot may face each street but the total area shall not
exceed a maximum of 40 feet per sign. Message boards are permitted to occupy up
to 50% of the sign face.
   (d)   Informational Signs for Public, Charitable or Religious Events.
Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational or religious
event, up to a sign area of 40 square feet shall be permitted. Such signs shall
be allowed no more than 21 days prior to the event and must be removed within 7
days after the event.
   (e)   Integral Signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental
citations and commemorative tablets when carved into stone, concrete, or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure shall be permitted.
   (f)   Banners, Pennants and Hot Air Balloons. Banners, pennants and hot air
balloons are permitted for grand openings, sales, and other similar special
events on a temporary basis, for no more than 30 days at a time, and no more
than two times per year. No permit fee shall be charged, but a $35 deposit
shall be required. The deposit shall be refunded only if the permittee obeys
all conditions of the permit including removal of the sign at or prior to the
end of the 30-day period.
   (g)   Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be permitted, provided that
no such sign shall have a sign surface area larger than 8 square feet. The
maximum height of such sign shall be 3-1/2 feet.
   (h)   Signs Designating Parking Areas. Signs Designating Parking Areas and
Entrances and Exits to parking Areas, Other Than Parking Areas for Single
Family Dwellings.
      1.   No more than 1 such sign shall be permitted that identifies each
parking lot.
      2.   No more than 1 sign shall be permitted for each exit or entrance.
      3.   No such sign shall exceed a sign surface area of 4 square feet.
   (i)   Signs on City-Owned Property. Any digital monument sign, including an
off-premises digital monument sign (off-site sign), on real property owned by
the City. Any sign authorized hereunder shall identify “Hickory Hills” or the
“City of Hickory Hills” as a part of the monument structure, and shall be
located and be of such size, shape, design, and function as may be acceptable
to the City. These signs shall be erected and maintained on City-owned property
abutting a county or state thoroughfare. The permittee for such signs shall be
a licensee, lessee, or other person or entity authorized to erect and maintain
the sign pursuant to an agreement with the City.
(Ord. 19-26, passed 11-14-2019)
§ 28.14 SIGNS ALLOWED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this Chapter:
   (a)   Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing approved
painted or printed sign, changeable copy sign or similar approved sign, whether
electrical, illuminated or nonilluminated or painted message, which is
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
   (b)   Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign for which a permit has been previously issued, so long as the sign is
not otherwise modified in any way. Replacement of the plastic face will be
exempted from the permit requirement, provide that it is due to breakage or
deterioration of the face.
   (c)   Changes in the content of a window display; window signs and window
promotional signs.
   (d)   Changes in the content of permitted temporary signs.
   (e)   Public signs.
   (f)   Pennants for model homes.
   (g)   Signs painted on or attached to a truck, bus, trailer, or other
vehicle which is used in the normal course of a business which is not primarily
the display of the sign on the vehicle, and which is not parked overnight
visible to a public right-of-way.
   (h)   Tablets, grave markers, headstones, memorial statuary and plagues, or
other remembrances of persons or events which are noncommercial in nature.
   (i)   Any flag, emblem, or insignia of a government or non-commercial
enterprise, provided that it is not larger than 96 square feet and does not
amount to an attention-getting device for commercial purposes.
   (j)   No trespassing signs, warning signs (such as “Beware of Dog”),
notification signs for emergency personnel, and other such signs, provided that
the sign does not exceed 2 square feet in sign surface area and there are no
more than 2 such signs on the lot.
   (k)   Temporary real estate, personal celebration, special events and garage
sale signs, subject to the following:
      1.   No such sign, other than a personal celebration sign, shall exceed 6
square feet in sign surface area.
      2.   No more than 2 temporary signs shall be placed on the property at
any one time, and no more than 1 temporary sign of a particular type shall be
placed on the property at any one time.
      3.   No such sign shall be illuminated.
      4.   No such sign, other than a personal celebration sign, shall project
higher than 42 inches above the ground level at the base of the sign.
      5.   No such sign shall be located within 10 feet of any other lot,
parcel or tract.
      6.   The sign shall be erected no earlier than 30 days before, and shall
be removed no later than 7 days after the sale, rental or other event to which
it pertains.
      7.   A temporary sale erected in connection with a rummage sale or garage
sale shall in no case be erected for a period longer than 3 days.
      8.   A temporary sign erected in connection with a personal or family
celebration shall in no case be erected for a period longer than 1 week.
   (l)   Signs for candidates seeking public political office and for
referendum appearing on the ballot at any election shall be permitted up to a
total area of 16 square feet for each zoning lot and shall be located only on
private property. Political campaign signs shall not be displayed more than 30
days prior to and three days after the election for which intended.
   (m)   Signs for a public event at a location in the City conducted by a unit
of government not exceeding 8 square feet located on private property (not on
the public right-of-way and not on utility poles) for a period not earlier than
10 days before the event nor 2 days after the event.
§ 28.15 SIGNS ALLOWED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   In addition to those signs allowed in Sections 28.13 and 28.14 the following
signs shall be allowed in residential zoning districts ( R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4,
and R-5), subject to any requirements in this Chapter:
   (a)   Single Family Residential Nameplates. Two single family residential
name signs not exceeding 2 square feet in each area shall be permitted per
single family dwelling. Such signs shall be allowed on mailboxes, but shall
otherwise be located at least 6 feet from the nearest property line.
   (b)   Street Address Signs. Two street number signs not exceeding 2 square
feet in area shall be permitted in any residential district. Such signs shall
be allowed on mailboxes, and near doorways, but shall otherwise be located at
least 6 feet from the nearest property line.
   (c)   Multi-Family Building Nameplate and Identification Signs. In any
multiple family dwelling in which a rental office is permitted, 1 nameplate
sign and 1 identification sign shall be allowed at each vehicular entrance from
a public right-of-way and at each major public entrance to the dwelling for all
offices in the dwelling. The identification sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet. One residential nameplate sign not exceeding 2 square feet in each area
shall be permitted per dwelling unit. Identification signs shall be located at
least 6 feet from any property line, and the top of the sign shall not be over
5 feet above the ground, whether freestanding or on a building or structure.
The identification sign shall indicate only the name, address, telephone number
and rental information.
   (d)   Subdivision Identification Signs. Two subdivision identification
signs, located on or off the real estate, shall be allowed for each subdivision
development. Signs shall not exceed 12 square feet per acre, or 40 square feet,
whichever is less. Signs shall be removed one year after placement or within 7
days after the last lot is sold, whichever occurs first. A permanent
subdivision sign constructed of masonry or other similar material with
foundation may be located at each entrance to the subdivision.
   (e)   Identification Signs for Institutional and Other Non-Residential Uses.
No more than 2 such signs per lot, parcel or tract shall be permitted, no more
than 1 of which shall be a changeable copy sign. The combined surface area of
all such signs on the property shall not exceed 60 square feet in sign surface
area, with no single sign exceeding 30 square feet in sign surface area. The
sign shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any other lot, parcel or tract.
   (f)   Window Signs. For rent signs shall be permitted in windows, but shall
not exceed 20% of the total window area.
§ 28.16 SIGNS ALLOWED IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   In addition to those signs allowed in Sections 28.13 and 28.14 the following
signs shall be allowed in commercial zoning districts (C-1, C-2, and C-3),
subject to any requirements in this Chapter (including the regulations provided
in Section 28.18 which shall apply to auto dealers and gas stations):
   (a)   Freestanding Identification Signs. The maximum sign face area shall be
1 square foot per 1.5 lineal feet of frontage, up to 100 square feet. One
freestanding identification sign shall be allowed per lot, except for lots with
over 300 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way, which may have up to 2
freestanding signs, and except for corner lots with over 300 feet of frontage
on each public right-of-way or major privately owned circulation road, which
may have up to 1 freestanding sign per frontage, and for developments over
400,000 square feet, which may have 1 freestanding identification sign at each
major entrance. The maximum height of such sign shall be 24 feet provided that
the sign shall not be so low as to obstruct the traffic sight triangle. The
maximum thickness of such sign shall be 2 feet.
   (b)   Wall Signs. One wall sign shall be allowed for each side of the
building, not to exceed a total of 4 wall signs. A wall sign shall not be
permitted on any wall facing a residential structure, if the residential
structure is located within 200 feet thereof. The maximum sign area shall be
7.5% of the area of the first 2 stories of building elevation on which it is
placed, or in the case of a multi-tenant retail commercial building or multi-
owner office condominium, each tenant or owner may have a sign area not to
exceed 7.5% of the area of its leased exterior storefront. Commercial buildings
may have an entrance identification sign on a wall other than specified above,
provided that the entrance identification sign does not exceed 10 square feet
and is located on the wall within 10 feet of the primary public entrance which
leads directly into a lobby or waiting area. Wall signs may not cover any part
of a window or extend above the roof line. Canopy signs are considered wall
signs and: canopies must be opaque; lettering must not exceed 20% of the total
canopy area, subject to the other wall sign area limitations in this Chapter;
and canopies are limited to placement above windows and doors. Movie theaters
may have, as additional signs, attraction board wall signs. The traditional
marquee sign shall be permitted. The wall sign shall extend no further than 18
inches from the wall to which it is attached. Wall signs may not be painted
directly onto the exterior wall surface.
   (c)   Window Signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs.
Neon lettering shall be permitted on window signs.
   (d)   Banners. Banners affixed to parking lot light poles shall be allowed
only on light poles bordering or parallel to the street with a maximum of 1 per
30 lineal feet. Banners shall be permitted on interior parking lot light poles.
§ 28.17 SIGNS ALLOWED IN INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   In addition to those signs identified in Sections 28.13 and 28.14, above,
only the following signs shall be allowed in industrial zoning districts (I-1),
subject to any requirements in this Chapter:
   (a)   Freestanding Identification Signs. The maximum sign face area shall be
1 square foot per 5 lineal feet of frontage, up to 40 square feet (for each of
2 sides). One freestanding identification sign shall be allowed per lot and 1
freestanding sign shall be allowed as an identification sign for an industrial
park. The maximum height of such sign shall be 10 feet. The maximum thickness
of such sign shall be 2 feet. The minimum setback of such sign from the right
of way property line shall be 5 feet. Listing of tenants’ names shall be
permitted, but shall occupy no more than 60% of the freestanding identification
sign face. Message boards shall be permitted which may occupy no more than 25%
of the freestanding identification sign face, provided that no tenants’ names
are listed.
   (b)   Wall Signs. Unless the wall faces a minor street with residences
across the street, 1 wall sign shall be allowed per lot frontage on a public
right of way or major privately owned circulation road. The maximum sign area
shall be 7.5% of the area of the first 2 stories of building elevation on which
it is place, or in the case of a multi-tenant industrial building, each tenant
may have a sign area not to exceed 7.5% of the area of its leased exterior
storefront. Industrial buildings may have an entrance identification sign on a
wall other than specified above, provided that the entrance identification sign
does not exceed 10 square feet and is located on the wall within 10 feet of the
primary public entrance which leads directly into a lobby or waiting area. Wall
signs may not cover any pat of a window or extend above the roof line. Canopies
are considered wall signs and: must be opaque; lettering must not exceed 20% of
the total canopy area, subject to the other wall sign area limitations in this
Chapter; and canopies are limited to placement above windows and doors. The
wall sign shall extend no further than 18 inches from the wall to which it is
attached.
§ 28.18 SIGNS ALLOWED FOR AUTOMOBILE DEALERS AND AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS.
   In addition to those signs identified in Sections 28.13 and 28.14 only the
following signs shall be allowed for automobile dealers and automobile service
stations, subject to any requirements in this Chapter:
   (a)   Window Signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs,
provided however, that the total area of all window signs shall not exceed 50%
of the window glass area, which shall be calculated separately for each side of
the building. Neon lettering shall be permitted on window signs.
   (b)   Services Island Canopy Signs (automobile service stations only). Only
1 canopy sign shall be permitted facing each frontage. The gross surface area
of such sign shall not exceed 20% of the gross surface area of the face of the
canopy to which such sign is to be affixed. Such sign shall not project higher
than the top or below the bottom of the canopy to which such sign is to be
affixed.
   (c)   Service Island Identification Signs (automobile service stations
only). Service island identification signs may be permitted to indicate the
type of service offered, the price of gasoline, and other relevant information
or direction to persons using the automobile service station. However, no
advertising material shall be allowed on such signs. There shall not be more
than 1 service island identification sign for each service or pump island
located on the premises. The gross surface area of such sign shall not exceed 6
square feet for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of
12 square feet. Such signs may be located adjacent to or within the service or
pump island to which it relates.
§ 28.19 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any sign legally in existence on January 1, 1993 which violates or does not
conform to its provisions shall be removed, altered, or replaced so as to
conform with the provisions of this ordinance by July 1, 2050. An unlawful sign
is not a nonconforming sign.
CHAPTER 29: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
29.01   Fire Prevention Code
   
29.02   City Fire Inspector
   
29.03   Right of Entry for Inspection
   
29.04   Modifications
   
29.05   Smoke Detectors
   
29.06   Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detectors
§ 29.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   “2021 International Fire Code” as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City with
the following changes, additions or insertions:
   Section 101.1, insert “City of Hickory Hills.”
   Section 103.2, change to read “The code official is the Fire Inspector.”
   Section 107.2, add the following, “The code official shall establish a
schedule of permit fees which are required to be paid in conjunction with the
issuance of any required permit.”
   Section 111, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in the
Building Code.
   Section 112.4, change the first sentence to read, “A penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code.
Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and
subject to penalty.”
   Section 903.2, add the following after the first sentence: “Automatic
sprinkler systems are required to he installed in residential structures only
as provided in Section 24-15 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.”
   Section 1103.5.3, insert “January 1, 2020.”
   Section 5704.2.9.6.1, add the following, “The code official shall establish
the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids and above-
ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited.”
   Section 5706.2.4.4, add the following, “The code official shall establish
the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids and above-
ground tanks is prohibited.”
   Section 5806.2, add the following, “The code official shall establish the
limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers is prohibited.”
   Section 6104.2, add the following, “The code official shall establish the
limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas.”
   Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix E, Hazard Categories, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix F, Hazard Ranking, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids--Weight and Volume Equivalents, is hereby
adopted.
   Appendix H, Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous
Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions, is hereby adopted.
   Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions, is hereby
adopted.
   Appendix K, Constructing Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care
Facilities, is hereby adopted.
   In the event that the 2021 International Fire Code does not contain
provisions on an issue, then the provisions of the Life Safety Code, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association shall govern unless
waived by the code official for due cause in hardship situations.
(Ord. 22-12, passed 7-14-2022)
§ 29.02 CITY FIRE INSPECTOR.
   (a)   There is hereby created the office of City Fire Inspector. The City
Fire Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. The recommendations of the Fire Chief of the several Fire
Protection Districts serving the City of Hickory Hills may be solicited and
considered in such appointment.
   (b)   The City Fire Inspector may designate such subordinates as he may deem
necessary to carry out the duties of his office and shall transmit the names of
such subordinates to the Mayor for his approval. Any such subordinates approved
by the Mayor may be called “Deputy Fire Inspectors”.
   (c)   The City Fire Inspector and his designated subordinates shall be
regular officers or members of any Fire Department serving the City of Hickory
Hills, and shall be paid such compensation as may be determined by ordinance by
the City Council.
§ 29.03 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   The City Fire Inspector is hereby empowered at all reasonable hours, in
accordance with the law and the statutes in such case made and provided, to
enter any building, structure, or premises within his jurisdiction for the
purpose of making any inspection or investigation which he may deem necessary
to be made under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to allow the City Fire Inspector to enter any building in
violation of any constitutional provision.
§ 29.04 MODIFICATIONS.
   The City Fire Inspector in conjunction with and with the approval of the
Building Commissioner of the City of Hickory Hills shall have the power to
modify any of the provisions of the Fire Code upon application in writing by
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, where there are practical
difficulties in the carrying out of the strict letter of the Fire Code as it
would apply to the proposed building or structure provided, however, that the
spirit of the Fire Code shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or
allowed and the decision of the City Fire Inspector together with the approval
of the Building Commissioner thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
department and the Building Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished
the applicant.
§ 29.05 SMOKE DETECTORS.
   Whenever the installation of a smoke detector is required in an existing
multi-family building, the installation of a battery powered smoke detector
shall be sufficient, except that smoke detectors permanently wired to the
electrical service shall be required upon the conversion of such building to a
condominium.
§ 29.06 CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS.
   (a)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in
this Section:
      1.   Approved carbon monoxide alarm means a carbon monoxide alarm that
complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois
State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing
laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters
Laboratories or the Canadian Standard Association.
      2.   Dwelling unit means a room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single family residence as well as each living unit
of a multi-family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building.
   (b)   Carbon monoxide detector.
      1.   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of every room
used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be combined with
smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit is an approved carbon
monoxide alarm and provided that the combined unit emits a warning in a manner
that clearly differentiates the hazard.
      2.   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
      3.   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the responsibility of a
tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the carbon monoxide
alarms within the tenant’s dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that
the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing one tenant
per dwelling unit with written information regarding carbon monoxide alarm
testing and maintenance.
      4.   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries
in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant’s dwelling unit, except that the
owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time
the tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
      5.   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this Section may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into the structure’s AC
power line with secondary battery back-up.
   (c)   Prohibitions.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install or maintain a
carbon monoxide alarm as required by this Section.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, destroy
or disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries from an
installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purpose of contemporaneously
replacing such batteries.
   (d)   Exemptions. The following residential units shall not require carbon
monoxide detectors:
      1.   A residential unit in a building that: (i) does not rely on
combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; (ii) is not
connected in any way to a garage; and (iii) is not sufficiently close to any
ventilated source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the Building
Commissioner, to receive carbon monoxide from that source.
      2.   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the Building Commissioner.
CHAPTER 30: HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Section
   
30.01   Property Maintenance Code
   
30.02   Certificate of Housing Inspection-8 or More Residential Units
   
30.03   Certificate of Housing Inspection - All Property
   
30.04   Definitions
   
30.05   Community Affairs Commission: Expanded Duties
   
30.06   The Public Works Director, Expanded Duties
   
30.07   Permits
   
30.08   Public Nuisances
   
30.09   Interference with the Public Works Director
   
30.20   Maintenance of Exterior Property
   
30.21   Parking Areas and Parking of Vehicles
   
30.22   Structures and Use of Premises
   
30.23   Exterior Structures
   
30.24   Interior Structures
   
30.25   Administration
   
30.26   Storage of Tires
   
30.27   Commercial Store Front Appearance Standards
§ 30.01 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The “2021 International Property Maintenance Code” as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the City with the following changes, additions or insertions:
   Section 101.1, insert “City of Hickory Hills.”
   Section 102.3, Application of other codes, change to read “Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done
in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Building Code, Plumbing
Code, Mechanical Code, and Electrical Code adopted by the City. Nothing in this
Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or negate any provision of the zoning
ordinance.”
   Section 102.4, Existing remedies, add “The City shall have the right to
cause the demolition, repair or enclosure of unsafe buildings as provided for
in the Illinois Municipal Code without following any of the procedures and
notice requirements of this Code.”
   Section 103, Code Compliance Agency, delete in full.
   Section 104.1, Fees, add “The Building Commissioner shall be the code
official. The code official may designate any employee of the City with the
enforcement of this code.”
   Section 105.2, Inspections, change to read “The code official may serve a
notice of violation, but no such notice is a prerequisite to the existence of a
violation or to action by the City to restrain, correct or abate such
violation.”
   Section 105.3, Right of entry, change to read “The code official may
institute court proceedings to restrain, correct or abate any violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of any structure,
or the order or direction of the code official. Any action taken on such
premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.”
   Section 107, Means of Appeal, delete in full.
   Section 108, Board of Appeals, delete in full.
   Section 109.4, Violation penalties, change to read “Any person who violates
any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $750 for each violation thereof. Each day that a violation occurs
shall constitute a separate offense and violation.”
   Section 110.4, Failure to comply, change to read “Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750
for each violation thereof. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense and violation.”
   Section 111.11, Unsafe conditions, add “No structure may be boarded up for
more than 6 months. An unsafe structure includes any structure boarded up for
more than 6 months.”
   Section 111.4.1, Unlawful structure, change to read “Whenever the code
official has condemned a structure or equipment, notice shall be sent by first
class mail to the taxpayer of record or the party responsible for paying any
water bill. The notice shall include a statement of the violations and a
deadline by which to correct the violations.”
   Section 113.1, General, change to read “The code official may order the
demolition of any structure which is:
      1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
      2.   A public nuisance.
      3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than 6 months.
      4.   Boarded up for more than 6 months.
      5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than 6 months.
      6.   Maintain in violation of the provisions of this code for more than 6
months.”
   Section 113.2, Notices and orders, change to read “A notice of order of
demolition shall be served as provided for in the Illinois Municipal Code.”
   Section 201.6, Local Codes, add Section to read “Whenever reference is made
to the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International
Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, or International Mechanical Code,
such reference shall be to the Building Code, Fire Code, Zoning Ordinance,
Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, currently in effect.”
   Section 301.3, Vacant structures and land, add “No structure shall be
maintained which is:
      1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
      2.   A public nuisance.
      3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than 6 months.
      4.   Boarded up for more than 6 months.
      5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than 6 months.
      6.   In violation of the provisions of this code for more than 6 months.”
   Section 302.4, Weeds, insert “8 inches” at the end of the first sentence.
   Section 304.3, Premises identification, add “Street numbers must be attached
to the structure (or light pole or mailbox) and may not be painted thereon.
Street numbers may not be painted on any stairway, stoop, sidewalk, curb, or
other area.”
   Section 304.14, Insect screens, insert “May 1” and “October 1.”
   Section 404.5, Overcrowding, add “If any room used for residential purposes
is overcrowded, the code official may order the number of persons sleeping or
living in said room to be reduced in order to conform to the minimum area
requirements of this Chapter. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping
purposes any kitchen, hallway, closet, basement, storage room, public area,
dining room or living room (except that a living room may be used for sleeping
purposes of a guest for not more than 2 consecutive nights).”
   Section 602.3, Heat supply, insert “October 1” and “May 1.” Delete the
Exception.
   Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, insert “October 1” and “May 1.”
   Appendix A, Boarding Standard, is mandatory and shall be in effect.
   Appendix B, Board of Appeals, is deleted and shall not be in effect.
(Ord. 21-7, passed 7-8-2021)
§ 30.02 CERTIFICATE OF HOUSING INSPECTION-8 OR MORE RESIDENTIAL UNITS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the new lessee of a
residential dwelling unit in a building containing eight or more residential
dwelling units to occupy the same until a Certificate of Housing Inspection
without any deficiencies has been issued for the subject property, within the
prior three months.
   (b)   For the purpose of this ordinance the following words shall have the
meaning set forth below:
      1.   “Lease” means the transfer of occupancy rights of real property for
consideration even if no written agreement is entered into.
      2.   “Owner” means the title holder of the real property including but
not limited to the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a
partnership, and the officers of a corporation or any agent thereof.
      3.   “Sale” means the transfer for consideration of the title to real
estate and includes the purchase of a condominium unit or the share in a
cooperative apartment association or a corporation.
   (c)   All applications for a Certificate of Housing Inspection shall be made
on such forms as prescribed by the Building Department. The Building Department
shall issue a Certificate within 14 days after gaining access to the subject
property, whether by consent or by warrant, and after the payment of a $20.00
inspection fee. The Building Department shall cause inspections of the subject
property to determine compliance with the Building, Housing, Property
Maintenance, Fire, and Zoning Code and ordinances of the City. All deficiencies
shall be noted on said Certificate.
   (d)   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real property
pursuant to this ordinance shall be used in the prosecution of any criminal or
ordinance violation against the owner of the property when inspection was made.
   (e)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any property, no
entry or inspection shall be made without procurement of a warrant from the
Circuit Court of Cook County. The Court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as
to whether a warrant shall issue:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violation.
      2.   Citizen complaints.
      3.   Tenant complaints.
      4.   Plain view violations.
      5.   Violations apparent from City records.
      6.   Property deterioration.
      7.   Age of property.
      8.   Nature of alleged violation.
      9.   Similar properties in the area.
      10.   Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
      11.   Passage of time since last inspection.
      12.   Previous violations on the property.
   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of non-conformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of a City ordinance.
   (f)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the lease of real estate to a new lessee
even if no Certificate of Housing Inspection has been obtained or even if such
Certificate shows deficiencies thereon. The City does not guarantee the
condition of the subject property and is not responsible for any claims arising
out of the subject property or the condition thereof. The City does not warrant
that all deficiencies are listed in a Certificate and does not warrant anything
as to the condition of the property or the habitability thereof.
§ 30.03 CERTIFICATE OF HOUSING INSPECTION - ALL PROPERTY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is the new owner or lessee of
any building to occupy the same until a Certificate of Housing Inspection - All
Property (the “Certificate”) without any deficiencies has been issued for the
subject property, within the prior three months.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section the following words shall have the
meaning set forth below:
      1.   “Lease” means the transfer of occupancy rights of real property for
consideration even if no written agreement is entered into.
      2.   “Owner” means the title holder of the real property including but
not limited to the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a
partnership, and the officers of a corporation or any agent thereof.
      3.   “Sale” means the transfer for consideration of the title to real
estate and includes the purchase of a condominium unit or the share in a
cooperative apartment association or a corporation, or assignment of beneficial
interest in a land trust.
   (c)   All applications for a Certificate shall be made on such forms as
prescribed by the Water Department. The Water Department shall issue a
Certificate within 14 days after gaining access to the subject property,
whether by consent or by warrant. The Water Department shall cause inspections
of the subject property to determine whether there is a proper connection to
the sanitary sewer system, whether there is a proper connection to the water
system (including a properly operating water meter), and whether the use of the
property complies with use regulations of the Zoning Ordinance. All
deficiencies shall be noted on said Certificate.
   (d)   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real property
pursuant to this section shall be used in the prosecution of any criminal or
ordinance violation against the owner of the property when inspection was made.
   (e)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any property, no
entry or inspection shall be made without procurement of a warrant from the
Circuit Court of Cook County. The Court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as
to whether a warrant shall issue:
      1.   Eyewitness account of violation.
      2.   Citizen complaints.
      3.   Tenant complaints.
      4.   Plain view violations.
      5.   Violations apparent from City records.
      6.   Property deterioration.
      7.   Age of property.
      8.   Nature of alleged violation.
      9.   Similar properties in the area.
      10.   Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
      11.   Passage of time since last inspection.
      12.   Previous violations on the property.
      13.   Building plans or lack thereof.
      14.   Building permit or lack thereof.
   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of non-conformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of a City ordinance.
   (f)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale or lease of real estate to a
new owner or lessee even if no Certificate has been obtained or even if such
Certificate shows deficiencies thereon. The City does not guarantee the
condition of the subject property and is not responsible for any claims arising
out of the subject property or the condition thereof. The City does not warrant
that all deficiencies are listed in a Certificate and does not warrant anything
as to the condition of the property or the habitability thereof.
   (g)   In the event that no certificate is issued as required herein, or
there are deficiencies on the property as noted on the certificate which are
not corrected, the city may shut off water service to the building after seven
days written notice.
§ 30.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   As used within this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth in this Section:
      1.   Arboricultural Specifications Manual. A manual prepared by the
Beautification Commission containing regulations and standards for the
planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants upon
city-owned property.
      2.   City-owned Property. Property within the city limits of Hickory
Hills, Illinois, and
         A.   owned by the city in fee simple, or
         B.   implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or
future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public
easements, or
         C.   right-of-way of public streets or alleys.
      3.   Property Owner. The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel
of land.
      4.   Trees, Shrubs, and Other Plants. All vegetation, woody or otherwise,
except lawn grass and flowers less than 24 inches in height.
§ 30.05 COMMUNITY AFFAIRS COMMISSION: EXPANDED DUTIES.
   (a)   Duties. The Community Affairs Commission shall perform the following
expanded duties:
      1.   The Community Affairs Commission, with the assistance of the Public
Works Director, shall develop, and each subsequent year, update the Urban
Forestry Management Plan. The Plan shall outline urban forestry program
activities for a minimum of the next five years. This plan shall describe the
urban forestry activities to be undertaken by the city, the reason for those
activities, the possible funding sources, the means of accomplishing the
activities, the alternatives available to the city to fund or accomplish the
activity, the projected date of completion, and the consequences if the
activity is not completed.
      2.   The Community Affairs Commission, with the assistance of the Public
Works Director, shall develop and annually review and revise, as necessary, the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual. This manual shall contain regulations and
standards for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants upon city-owned property.
      3.   The Community Affairs Commission shall cause the Urban Forestry
Management Plan and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and all revisions
and amendments to it, to be published in pamphlet form and shall cause three
copies of the Manual, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available
for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.
      4.   The Community Affairs Commission shall make available to any
interested person copies of the Shade Tree Ordinance, information about the
activities of the Community Affairs Commission, copies of the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual and copies of the Urban Forestry Management Plan upon
payment of usual copying charges.
      5.   The Community Affairs Commission shall advise and consult the Public
Works Director on any matter pertaining to the Hickory Hills Shade Tree
Ordinance and its enforcement.
§ 30.06 THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR, EXPANDED DUTIES.
   (a)   Duties. The Public Works Director shall perform the following duties:
      1.   The Public Works Director shall administer the Urban Forestry
Management Plan, the Shade Tree Ordinance and the provision of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
      2.   The Public Works Director shall perform whatever acts are necessary,
including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable
trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city-owned property, to insure that
all trees, shrubs and other plants located on city-owned property conform with
the Urban Forestry Management Plan, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual,
and this Ordinance. Pursuant to this duty, the Public Works Director, in
accordance with normal city procedures regarding contracts, may arrange
contractual agreements.
      3.   The Public Works Director shall issue permits and shall obtain as a
condition precedent to the issuance of such permits the written agreement of
each person who applies for such permits that he or she will comply with the
requirements of this Chapter, the Urban Forestry Management Plan, and with the
regulation and standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The
Public Works Director shall have the right to inspect all work performed
pursuant to such permits. If the Public Works Director finds that the work
performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, the Urban
Forestry Management Plan, or with the regulations or standards of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual, the Public Works Director shall provide
written notice of his finding to the permit applicant.
§ 30.07 PERMITS.
   (a)   Scope of Requirement. No person except the Public Works Director, an
agent of the Public Works Director, or a contractor hired by the City may
perform any of the following acts without first obtaining from the City a
permit for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this Section shall be
construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any
additional permits as are required by law:
      1.   Plant on city-owned property, prune any trunk or branch in excess of
1-1/2" diameter, remove, or destroy any tree, shrub, or other plant located on
city-owned property, except that this provision shall not be construed to
prohibit owners of property adjacent to city-owned property from watering or
fertilizing without a permit any tree, shrub, or other plant located on such
city-owned property.
      2.   Trim, prune, or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on city-owned property and
thereby to cause damage to persons or property.
      3.   Place on city-owned property, either above or below ground level, a
container for trees, shrubs, or other plants.
      4.   Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other
plant located on city-owned property.
      5.   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other man-made
object to any shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property.
   (b)   Issuance. Within seven days of receipt of the application, the Public
Works Director shall issue a permit to perform within thirty days of the day of
issuance any of the acts specified in part A, immediately above, for which a
permit is requested whenever;
      1.   such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance; or
      2.   such acts are not inconsistent with the development and
implementation of the Urban Forestry Management Plan or with any regulations or
standards of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and whenever;
      3.   an application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the
Public Works Director detailing the location, number, size, and species of
trees, shrubs or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth
the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any
additional information that the Arborist may find reasonably necessary;
      4.   the applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
sought in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the Urban Forestry
Management Plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and
      5.   the applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands
those provisions of this Chapter, the Urban Forestry Management Plan and of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual which are pertinent to the work for which
the permit is sought; and
      6.   if the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such
felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon city-owned property, and if
such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which such
felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the
City of Hickory Hills harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted
pursuant to the permit and shall deposit with the City Clerk a Liability
Insurance Policy in the amount of $100,000 per person/$300,000 per accident for
Bodily Injury Liability and $50,000 aggregate for Property Damage Liability,
which policy shall name the City of Hickory Hills as an additional insured.
   (c)   Public Utility Companies. Nothing in this Section shall be construed
to exempt public utility companies or their agents from any of the requirements
of this Chapter.
§ 30.08 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (a)   Definition. The following are hereby declared public nuisances:
      1.   Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on
city-owned property or on private property.
      2.   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located
on city-owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or
other plant.
      3.   Any tree, shrub, or other plant, or portion thereof, whether located
on city-owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or
condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of
the general public.
      4.   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on
city-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light.
      5.   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located on
city-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the view
in the “visibility triangle” as such may be established by the Director of
Public Works.
   (b)   Right to inspect. The officers, agents, servants and employees of the
city have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located
a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   (c)   Abatement. The following are the prescribed means of abating public
nuisances:
      1.   Any public nuisance which is located on city-owned property shall be
pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the Public Works Director in whatever
fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable
time after its discovery.
      2.   Any public nuisance which is located on private-owned property shall
be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the property owner or his/her agent
in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance. No
property owner may be found guilty of violating this provision unless and until
the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
         A.   The Public Works Director shall cause a written notice to be
personally served or sent by First Class Mail to the person to whom was sent
the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         B.   Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other plant
or plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance; its location on
the property; the reason for declaring it a nuisance.
         C.   Such notice shall describe by legal description or by street the
premises.
         D.   such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance.
         E.   such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less
than thirty days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom
was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         F.   such notice may include a copy of this ordinance and a copy of 24
ILCS 11-20-11 and 11-20-12.
   In the event that the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the
notice, the Public Works director is authorized to cause the abatement of said
nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien
against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the
property owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be
subject to prosecution under Section 30.16 of this Chapter. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of
obtaining permits under Section 30.13 of this Chapter.
      3.   The Public Works Director is empowered to cause the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by
the Public Works Director to be an immediate threat to any person, or property.
      4.   The Public Works Director is hereby empowered to seek from any court
of competent jurisdiction an order directing immediate abatement of any public
nuisance.
§ 30.09 INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Public Works Director or his agents.
§ 30.20 MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR PROPERTY.
   (a)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
clean, safe, sanitary and free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (b)   Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon. The natural drainage of
water over land shall not be changed. Water from sump pumps or ejector pumps
shall not be directed nor allowed to drain to a neighboring property.
   (c)   Sidewalks and Driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, driveways and paved
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free of
hazardous conditions.
   (d)   Lawn Areas. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained
free from weeds and plant growth in excess of 8 inches (excluding trees,
shrubs, and cultivated flower or garden areas) and shall be maintained with
grass.
   (e)   Ground Cover. No exterior property (except cultivated flower or garden
areas) may be maintained with stone, sand, or other nonliving ground cover.
   (f)   Rat and Rodent Harborage. All structures and exterior property shall
be kept free from rat and rodent infestation.
   (g)   Limitation of Number of Dogs and Cats. No person shall keep or
maintain more than two dogs and two cats of two months of age or older in any
single-family residence, building or lot.
   (h)   Exhaust Vents and Air Conditioning Units. Pipes, ducts, conductors,
fans, blowers and ground air conditioning units shall not discharge onto
adjacent private property.
   (i)   Accessory Structures Including Fences. All accessory structures
including detached garages, sheds, fences and walls shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.
   (j)   Sidewalks. The adjoining property owner shall be responsible for
maintaining the public sidewalk in front and to the side (if any) of their
property in a proper state of repair and free of hazardous conditions.
   (k)   Parkways. The adjoining property owner shall be responsible for
maintaining the public parkway in front and to the side (if any) of their
property to the same standards as if it were their private property.
   (l)   Drainage Ditches and Sewers. No person shall obstruct any drainage
ditch or sewer. No person shall deposit or pour any substance or material into
a storm sewer or sanitary sewer.
   (m)   Corner Lots/Obstructed View. All trees, hedges, and shrubbery within
15 feet of the corner of the lot shall be maintained so as to allow a clear
view of traffic by vehicles approaching an intersection.
   (n)   Sidewalk Obstructions. No person shall obstruct a public sidewalk. All
limbs of trees or shrubs shall be maintained at least 8 foot above the surface
of the public sidewalk.
   (o)   Storage of Materials. Outside storage of building materials,
appliances, motor vehicle parts, furniture, and junk is prohibited.
   (p)   Storage of Firewood. Outside storage of firewood is permitted provided
that the firewood is placed on a platform at least 4 inches above the ground.
   (q)   Garbage Containers. All garbage shall be placed in a refuse container
of not greater than 32 gallons with a tight fitting cover.
   (r)   Trees and Shrubs. All dead trees or shrubbery, or parts thereof, shall
be promptly removed.
§ 30.21 PARKING AREAS AND PARKING OF VEHICLES.
   (a)   Parking Areas and Driveways. No motor vehicle shall be parked or
stored in any area other than a paved parking area. No motor vehicle shall be
parked blocking the sidewalk between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No
motor vehicle shall be parked on the parkway. All parking areas, including
driveways, shall be constructed with a paved surface such as Portland cement
concrete or bituminous concrete. Stone parking areas and driveways are
prohibited; provided however that no such existing area for a single family
residential property need be changed until one year after the sale thereof.
   (b)   Parking of Unregistered Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles not bearing a
current license registration or not bearing a current city sticker may not be
parked, kept or stored on any property for a period in excess of 7 days;
provided that such a vehicle may be parked, kept or stored in an enclosed
garage area.
   (c)   Parking of Dismantled or Inoperable Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles
which are not capable of being driven including those in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled may
not be parked, kept or stored on any property; provided that such a vehicle may
be parked, kept or stored in an enclosed garage area.
   (d)   Parking of Abandoned Motor Vehicles. All inoperable motor vehicles
(including any vehicle upon which the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power)
in view of the general public are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are
subject to towing and removal after 7 days under the provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
   (e)   Parking of Motor Vehicles Other Than Automobiles. No ambulance, bus,
commuter van, farm tractor, medical transport vehicle, road tractor, school
bus, semitrailer, tow truck, trailer, truck tractor, truck (except A and B
plates) or rescue vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any residentially
zoned property.
§ 30.22 STRUCTURES AND USE OF PREMISES.
   (a)   Business Use of Residential Premises. No person shall use or maintain
any business which is not a home occupation on any residentially zoned
property. A home occupation is any occupation or profession, practiced by a
member of the family residing on the premises, and which occupation is clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling; and in
connection with which there is no indication from the exterior, other than one
(1) unanimated, non-illuminated sign of not more than one (1) square foot in
size, that the building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose
than that of a dwelling. No commodity is sold upon the premises and no food
commodity intended for sale or use elsewhere is stored on the premises; no more
than one (1) person is employed other than members of the family residing on
the premises; and no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except for
telephones, calculators, typewriters and computers. A professional person may
use his residence for consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of
religious rites. No accessory building shall be used for such home occupation.
Home occupations, further, shall not utilize more than twenty-five (25) percent
of the total floor area of any one (1) story. No vehicle used in conjunction
with the home occupation may be parked on the premises, based at the premises,
or parked on the public street in the area of the premises, except for one
passenger car designed for carrying not more than six persons.
   (b)   Vacant Structures. All vacant structures shall be maintained in a
clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition so as not to adversely effect the
public health or safety. No vacant structure may have any broken windows,
broken doors, or other means of access thereto.
   (c)   Boarded-Up Structures. No structures may be boarded up for a period in
excess of 90 days. Any structure boarded up for a period in excess of 90 days
shall be considered abandoned and subject to demolition.
§ 30.23 EXTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Appearance. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety and welfare. Any painted surface must be maintained free
of scaling or chipping paint and must have a uniform surface appearance.
   (b)   Street Numbers. Each building shall display a street number on the
premises so as to be visible and readable from the public right-of-way.
   (c)   Structural Members. All structural members shall be maintained free of
deterioration, and capable of safely bearing the imposed dead and live loads.
   (d)   Foundations Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rats.
   (e)   Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks,
loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface-
coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (f)   Roofs and Drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and
not have defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
building. All structures of more than 1,000 square feet in area shall be
provided with gutters and downspouts which shall be maintained in good repair
at all times. Gutters shall not be discharged to neighboring properties.
   (g)   Exterior Surfaces. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applications
of weather-coating materials, such as paint, stain, or similar surface
treatment.
   (h)   Handrails. Any handrail or guardrail shall be firmly attached and
maintained in good condition.
   (i)   Window and Door Frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. All glazing materials shall be
maintained free of cracks and holes. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window
hardware.
   (j)   Screens and Doors. During the period from May 1 through October 1,
every door, window and other outside opening used or required for ventilation
purposes shall be supplied with tightly fitting screens of not less than 16
mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good
working order.
   (k)   Doors and Locks. All exterior doors, hardware and locks shall be
maintained in good condition and shall tightly secure the premises.
§ 30.24 INTERIOR STRUCTURES.
   (a)   Appearance. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
   (b)   Structural Members. The supporting structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound, and capable of carrying the
imposed loads.
   (c)   Interior Surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean sand sanitary condition. Peeling paint,
cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions
shall be corrected.
   (d)   Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage. The interior of every structure
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish, or garbage.
   (e)   Insect and Rat Harborage. All structures shall be kept free from
insect and rat infestation. All structures in which insects or rats are found
shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious
to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.
   (f)   Stairs and Railings. All interior stairs and railings shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
   (g)   Handrails and Guardrails. Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly
fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained
in good condition.
§ 30.25 ADMINISTRATION.
   (a)   Inspections. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer, the Building
Commissioner, and employees thereunder shall be charged with the enforcement of
the Hickory Hills Property Maintenance Ordinance.
   (b)   Notices. Whenever there has been determined to be a violation, a
notice to correct the violation may be sent in lieu of proceeding to court. A
notice to correct a violation is not required before proceeding to court.
   (c)   Unlawful Acts and Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any person
to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, fail to
maintain, provide, fail to provide, use, occupy, permit another to use or
occupy any premises, structure, or equipment in violation of any provision of
the Property Maintenance Ordinance. The owner and occupant of any premises are
jointly and severally responsible to maintain the structures and exterior
property.
   (d)   Court Proceedings. In any court prosecution, the City may request the
court to restrain, correct or remove the violation; to prevent the occupation
or use of a structure or premises; to require the removal of work in violation;
to demolish any structure or part thereof; to remove any motor vehicle; and for
a fine.
   (e)   Schedule of Fines. In the event that a notice of violation is given
and correction is made within the time stated in the violation, there shall be
no fine. In the event that a ticket is given or other court proceedings are
instituted the minimum fine shall be $25.00 if the correction is made within 10
days or before the first court hearing. In any other event the minimum fine
shall be $50.00. The maximum fine shall be $500.00.
§ 30.26 STORAGE OF TIRES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or store any tire
except within an enclosed building or within an enclosed container. It shall be
unlawful for any person to allow water to accumulate in any tire. Any container
storing a tire must be kept shut so as to prevent the accumulation of water in
a tire. No tire shall be left for disposal except within a closed container and
in accordance with the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1.
§ 30.27 COMMERCIAL STORE FRONT APPEARANCE STANDARDS.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this Article, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
      1.   Commercial property means any property any portion of which is used
other than as a dwelling unit.
      2.   Exterior wall, window or door means any wall, window or door one
side of which is on the outside of a building.
      3.   Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting
or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance
by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is
otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the Building Commissioner.
      4.   Security gate means any system employing bars, gates, shutters,
grills, or other similar devices affixed to a structure with the intent of
preventing or which prevents access to or from the interior of the structure,
including roll-down, accordion, or removable systems.
      5.   Solid means any system with a surface that is less than 80% see-
through such that substantial visibility is allowed through the system.
   (b)   Security gates prohibited.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any
commercial property to install, maintain or have any security gate on the
outside of any exterior wall, window or door which faces and is substantially
parallel to the public street.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any
commercial property to install, maintain or have any solid security gate on the
inside of any exterior window or door which faces and is substantially parallel
to the public street.
      3.   Nothing herein shall prohibit security gates on the interior walls
or doors of any building, including shopping malls. Nothing herein shall
prohibit security gates on rear doors and windows.
   (c)   Removal of graffiti.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any
commercial property to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain
defaced for a period of 5 days after service of a notice from the City by
personal delivery or first class mail ordering the removal of the graffiti.
      2.   The existence of graffiti in violation of this section is declared
to be a public nuisance and subject to removal and abatement by the City in
accordance with due process. Any unpaid costs incurred by the City in the
removal of such graffiti shall be a charge and lien on the property where the
graffiti was removed. The Mayor may establish regulations to implement the
provisions of this article.
CHAPTER 31: LICENSES
Section
   
31.01   License Required
   
31.02   License Fee
   
31.03   Licenses
   
31.04   Procedure
   
31.05   Denial of License
   
31.06   Appeals to the City Council
   
31.07   Transfer and Display
   
31.08   Coordination with Business Regulation Provisions
   
31.09   Garage Sales
   
31.10   Coin Operated Amusement Devices
   
31.11   Raffles
   
31.12   Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Dealer & Specialty Dealer
   
31.13   License for Sale of Firearms
§ 31.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, or conduct any
business, activity, or occupation which is licensed by the provisions of this
chapter prior to or without obtaining a license.
§ 31.02 LICENSE FEE.
   (a)   The following businesses, activities, or occupations are hereby
licensed and the fee for such is set forth opposite thereof:
1.   Automatic vending machines (10 cents or less)                             $
                                                                                  18.00
   Automatic vending machines (more than 10 cents)                             40.00
   Billiard tables, pool tables, snooker tables                                100.00
   Cigarette, cigar, and tobacco machines                                      100.00
   Juke boxes                                                                  40.00
   Car washes (per stall non-automated)                                        35.00
   Car washes (automated)                                                      150.00
   Ice or ice refrigerators (outside only)                                     40.00
   Washing, drying, and dry cleaning machines                                  8.00
   Milk refrigerators (outside only)                                           40.00
2.   Public passenger vehicles (taxicabs, limousines, and buses used for       45.00
commercial hire)
   Tow trucks                                                                  45.00
   Ambulances                                                                  45.00
   Vehicles selling food at retail                                             45.00
   Wholesale itinerant food vehicles (as defined in the Municipal Code of      45.00
Chicago)
3.   Automobile service stations (per pump)                                    22.00
4.   Auctioneers (per day)                                                     25.00
5.   Advertising distributor (newspapers, pamphlets, or handbills, etc.) and   35.00
Machine distributors
7.   Tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer                                   150.00
   Tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealer                           300.00
8.   Cigarette, cigar, and tobacco (other than vending machine sale)           100.00
9.   Scavengers (10 customers or less)                                         125.00
   Scavengers (11-50 customers)                                                200.00
   Scavengers (more than 50 customers)                                         450.00
10.   Livery stables (per horse based on the average number of horses stabled p15.00
month over a 1-year period)
11.   Motor vehicle leasing establishments (lease or rental price but not less 1.5%
than $75.00 per year)
12.   Home occupations (only as permitted by Sec. 4.04 of Zoning Ordinance)    25.00
13.   Building movers                                                          100.00
   Carpenter contractors                                                       100.00
   Catch basin cleaners                                                        100.00
   Cement contractors                                                          100.00
   Electrical contractors                                                      100.00
   Excavating contractors                                                      100.00
   Fence contractors                                                           100.00
   Fertilizer dispensers                                                       100.00
   Garage contractors                                                          100.00
   General contractors                                                         100.00
   Glazing contractors                                                         100.00
   Heating, ventilating and refrigeration contractors                          100.00
   House and building wreckers                                                 100.00
   Landscaping contractors                                                     100.00
   Lathing and plastering contractors                                          100.00
   Mason contractors                                                           100.00
   Painting and decorating contractors                                         100.00
   Paving contractors                                                          100.00
   Pool contractors                                                            100.00
   Roofing, siding and insulation contractors                                  100.00
   Sewer and drain layer contractors                                           100.00
   Sheet metal contractors                                                     100.00
   Structural, iron, wood and cement contractors                               100.00
   Tree trimming contractors                                                   100.00
   Tuckpointing and cleaning contractors                                       100.00
   All other contractors not specified above                                   100.00
 
(Ord. 20-10, passed 6-11-2020)
§ 31.03 LICENSES.
   (a)   Except as provided for contractors licenses, all licenses shall be
issued for a period of one year which shall begin on May 1 and which shall
terminate on April 30 of the following year provided that licenses shall be
issued on or after November 1 for an establishment beginning business after
November 1, in which case the fee shall be one-half of the yearly fee.
   (b)   All contractors licenses, as listed in Section 31.02(a)13. shall be
issued for a period of one year which shall begin on January 1 and which shall
terminate on December 31 of that year. No contractors’ licenses shall be issued
for a half-year.
   (c)   An additional fee of 50% of the license fee shall be charged for all
licenses issued after the due date; provided, however, that such additional fee
shall not be charged to applicants who commence business during a year and who
have made application for a license prior to the date of commencing business.
   (d)   No additional fee shall be charged if an application accompanied by
payment was made in time, but the issuance of the license was delayed because
of the required inspections.
§ 31.04 PROCEDURE.
   Licenses shall be issued by the Clerk after investigations by the
appropriate building, zoning, fire, health, and police officials to determine
if any premises are in compliance with City ordinances. No license shall be
issued for any activity which is conducted or operated as a nuisance. No
license shall be issued for any premises wherein the working conditions are
inadequate with respect to overcrowding, light, heat, ventilation, or
cleanliness.
§ 31.05 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   (a)   Should the Clerk not issue a license upon the request of any person,
her denial and the reasons therefor shall be transmitted to the City Council.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Clerk in regard to the denial of a
license shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within 10 days after
notice of the denial has been mailed or given.
   (b)   Whenever the conduct or operation of any premises or business
constitutes a nuisance, is in violation of any City ordinance or State statute,
or presents a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, and
welfare, the Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the closing of the
premises or business. Within three days after a premises or business is closed,
the Mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license shall be revoked or suspended.
   (c)   In addition to the above reasons, the Mayor after notice and hearing
may revoke any license for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application.
      2.   Any violation on the premises of ordinances of the City or State
statutes.
      3.   Conviction of the operator of the premises or business of any felony
or misdemeanor where such conviction indicates an inability to operate a safe,
honest, and legitimate business or establishment.
      4.   Failure of the premises or business owner or occupant to pay any
fine, penalty, charge, fee, water bill, or other bill owed to the City.
      5.   Refusal to permit any inspection officer entry to premises open to
the public or refusal to permit the samplings of any food or beverage.
   The notice for any hearing shall be given by mail or personal service on the
premises at least three days prior to the date of the hearing. After said
hearing, the Mayor shall render his decision within 30 days.
§ 31.06 APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision denying or revoking a license shall have
the right to appeal the decision to the City Council by filing a written notice
of appeal within 10 days after receipt of the denial or revocation of the
license. All notices of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City
Council shall establish a time and place for the appeals hearing after which
they shall make their decision.
§ 31.07 TRANSFER AND DISPLAY.
   No license may be transferred from one person or business to another or from
one location to another. No machine which has a license may have that license
removed to be placed on another machine.
   All licenses must be posted in a prominent place, and all machine licenses
must be posted on the machine.
§ 31.08 COORDINATION WITH BUSINESS REGULATION PROVISIONS.
   As this ordinance and chapter licenses certain businesses, activities, and
machines, it is possible that the business regulation provisions of the City
may also affect the premises or activity being conducted. In that case, the
provisions of this chapter and the business regulation chapter shall both
apply.
§ 31.09 GARAGE SALES.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct any garage sale from residentially zoned
property except upon the following conditions:
   (a)   A no-fee permit shall be issued by the City and shall be prominently
displayed during the hours of the sale.
   (b)   Each property is limited to two permits for the period of January 1
through December 31 each year.
   (c)   The sale is limited to household goods, furnishings, clothing and
personal effects which were located and used by the occupants in the dwelling
unit located on the premises.
   (d)   Garage sales are limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
   (e)   The maximum period of time for a garage sale permit shall be one
Thursday/Friday/Saturday period.
   (f)   No public sidewalk, parkway or street shall be obstructed or used for
the sale of goods.
   (g)   Directory signs and other signs advertising a garage sale may only be
located on private property and may not be located on any public right-of-way
(including parkway) or on any utility pole. Signs may be displayed no sooner
than three days prior to the first day of the sale and must be taken down
within one hour after completion of the sale.
   (h)   Failure to obtain and display a garage sale permit shall be punishable
by a fine of $50 for each day that they garage sale is conducted without the
garage sale permit.
§ 31.10 COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate or maintain
any coin operated amusement device except as permitted in paragraph (b).
   (b)   Not more than four (4) coin operated amusement devices may be
maintained and used on any premise which has in effect a business regulation
certificate issued under the provisions of Chapter 32 under the following
conditions:
      1.   Each coin operated amusement device shall have a current license
thereon.
      2.   No coin operated amusement device shall be operated based upon any
gambling game such as poker, black jack, craps and similar games.
      3.   The owner of the coin operated amusement device shall be licensed as
required in paragraph (c).
   (c)   The owner of any coin operated amusement device shall be licensed by
the City. The owner shall submit an application in such form as provided by the
City and shall undergo a background check. No person may be licensed as the
owner of any coin operated amusement device who is not of good character and
reputation in the community in which he resides, who has been convicted of a
felony, or who has been convicted of gambling or other crime opposed to decency
and morality. If the owner of a coin operated amusement device is a holder of a
business regulation certificate, then no license fee shall be required of the
owner, otherwise a license fee of $250 per year shall be paid.
   (d)   A license fee of $100 per coin operated amusement device shall be paid
per year.
§ 31.11 RAFFLES.
   (a)   License Required. No person may conduct any raffle except in
compliance with the provisions of this section after obtaining a license from
the City.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the definitions set forth
in the Raffles Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.) shall apply.
   (c)   Applications for License.
      1.   Licenses may be issued to bona fide nonprofit business, religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations which have
been in existence continuously for a period of 5 years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had during that entire 5-year
period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects.
      2.   The applicant must specify the area or areas within the City in
which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which
raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning
chances, and the location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined.
      3.   The license application must be on the letterhead of the
organization and must contain a sworn statement of the presiding officer and
the secretary of their organization that the organization is qualified to hold
a license under the provisions of this section.
      4.   A license shall be valid only for the specified number of raffles
during a period not to exceed one year.
   (d)   License Fees, Insurance.
      1.   The license fee for each raffle conducted under the terms of this
section shall be $25 per calendar year.
      2.   When all the requirements of this section have been met, the license
shall be issued by the City Clerk.
   (e)   License Issue Restrictions. No such license shall be issued to:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
      4.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsections 1,
2 or 3 above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
a person is active or employed.
      5.   Any organization in which a person in subsections 1, 2 or 3 of this
Section is an officer, director of employee, whether compensated or not.
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsections 1, 2 or 3
above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined
in this section.
   (f)   Conduct of Raffles. The conducting of raffles is subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      3.   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle.
      4.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this section.
      5.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the licenses.
      6.   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
   (g)   Raffles Manager, Bond. All operation of and the conduct of raffles
shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the
organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount
determined by the City Clerk in favor of the organization conditioned upon his
honesty in the performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not less than 30
days prior to its cancellation. The City Clerk may waive this bond requirement
by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under
this section provided that a unanimous vote of the members of the licensed
organization has approved the waiver of the raffles manager’s bond.
   (h)   Records.
      1.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
the records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deductions, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
      2.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
      3.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report within 7
days after determination of the winners to the City and to its membership, its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
      4.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for 3 years and
organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
   (i)   Additional Restrictions.
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by
a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $1,000,000.
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed $1,000,000.
      3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed $200.
      4.   The maximum period for which chances may be issued or sold is nine
months.
   (j)   Reciprocity. The City Clerk may issue a raffle license to an
organization upon payment of the required license fee if that organization has
been issued a raffle license by any municipality located within 10 miles of the
City of Hickory Hills under an ordinance substantially similar to the
provisions in this section. In that event, the organization need not make
application, need not comply with (g) and (h)3.
(Ord. 19-2, passed 5-23-2019)
§ 31.12 TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE DEALER & SPECIALTY DEALER.
   (a)   Definitions.   For the purpose of this section, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meanings:
   Electronic cigarette means: (1) any device that employs a battery or other
mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol
intended for inhalation; (2) any cartridge or container of a solution or
substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
(3) any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for
use in the device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
Electronic cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of
the Cigarette Tax Act, 35 ILCS 130 and tobacco products as defined in Section
10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995, 35 ILCS 143; tobacco product and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this subsection; any product
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that condition and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic
product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1.
   Smoking herbs means all substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimsonweed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   Tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer means any person, at wholesale or
retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or offering to furnish, tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, or smoking herbs. Tobacco Dealers include
operators of vending machines.
   Tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealer means any person, at
wholesale or retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or offering to
furnish, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or smoking herbs where such
business is the main business being conducted at a specific premises. For
example, a gasoline services station, convenience store, or grocery store would
not be included within this definition.
   Tobacco product means any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product does not include any
item that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
   (b)   License required and maximum number of licenses. No person shall
engage in the business of tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer or tobacco
and electronic cigarette specialty dealer in the city without first having
obtained a license therefor, The maximum number of licenses that the City shall
issue for tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealers is three (3).
   (c)   Prohibited acts.
      (i)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the City without having
first obtained a tobacco dealer’s license.
      (ii)   No person, including any tobacco dealer, shall sell, offer for
sale, give away or deliver any tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb to any person
under the age of 21 years.
      (iii)   No tobacco dealer or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee under 18 years of age may
sell any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb in a licensed premises. This subsection does
not apply to a sales clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the
sales clerk is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
      (iv)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to another person, the person selling, offering for sale,
giving, or furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, smoking accessory or smoking herb shall verify that the
person is at least 21 years of age by examining from any person that appears to
be under 30 years of age a government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person to be 21 years of age or older.
      (v)   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product,
including but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained
within a sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer,
which container, pack, or package bears the health warning required by federal
law, is prohibited.
      (vi)   All single packs of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking herbs must be
sold from behind the counter or in an age restricted area or in a sealed
display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight. The
restrictions described in this subsection do not apply to a retail tobacco
store that (1) derives at least 90% of its revenue from tobacco and tobacco
related products; (2) does not permit persons under the age of 21 to enter the
premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and (3) posts a sign
on the main entrance way stating that persons under the age of 21 are
prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. This
subsection does not prohibit the sale of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking
herbs from vending machines if the location of the vending machines are
otherwise in compliance with the provision of this Section.
      (vii)    No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any
tobacco product or alterative nicotine product within 100 feet of any school,
child care facility or other building used for education or recreational
programs for persons under 18 years of age.
      (viii)   No person shall distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herbs to any other person, regardless of age. This subsection does
not apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb sample in any
adult-only facility.
      (ix)   No person, including shall sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine
product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb without posting at or near every
display of such products, or upon every vending machine which offers those
products for sale, a sign stating the following:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW.
      The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; the
letters to be at least one inch high. Such signs shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises or vending machine as the case may be.
   (d)   Purchase and possession by certain persons prohibited. Unless
otherwise expressly permitted by State law, no person under 21 years of age
shall buy, purchase, or possess any tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb.
   (e)   Proximity to certain institutions. It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell or offer any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb within 100 feet of any
school, child care facility or other building used for education or
recreational programs for persons under the age of 18 years.
   (f)   Vending machines. No tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb may be sold
through a vending machine except if such tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb is not placed
together with any non-tobacco product, other than matches, and only if the
vending machine is in any of the following locations: (i) places to which
persons under 21 years of age are not permitted access at any time; or (ii)
places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and
vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the owner or
manager.
   (g)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this Section shall be
fined not less $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. Each violation
of this Section, or day said violation is permitted to continue, shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (h)   Administration. Violations of this Section shall be administered,
processed and enforced through and in accordance with Chapter 3, City
Government, Section 3.38, Code Hearing Department, of the Hickory Hills
Municipal Code.
   (i)   Suspension and revocation of license, fine. The Mayor may suspend or
revoke any tobacco license in the event of a violation of this section. In lieu
of a suspension or revocation, the Mayor may impose a fine not to exceed $500
for each violation.
   (j)   Hearing. A licensee shall be entitled to a heating before a license is
suspended or revoked, or a fine is imposed by the Mayor. The licensee shall
receive a notice containing the charges not less than 7 days prior to the
hearing date. The notice may be served by certified mail or by personal service
at the licensee’s place of business. The hearing shall be conducted by the
Mayor and any decision shall be based upon evidence at the hearing. The
licensee shall be entitled to an opportunity to defend against the charges.
Evidence is admissible if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   (k)   Decision. The Mayor shall issue a decision within 10 days after the
conclusion of the hearing In the event that the decision determines that the
licensee is guilty of a violation, then the Mayor may assess the costs of the
hearing against the licensee. Failure to abide by any decision shall be grounds
for immediate revocation of the tobacco license without notice and without
hearing.
(Ord. 19-5, passed 7-11-2019; Ord. 20-10, passed 6-11-2020; Ord. 21-8, passed
7-8-2021; Ord. 23-04, passed 4-13-2023)
§ 31.13 LICENSE FOR SALE OF FIREARMS.
   No Deadly Weapons Dealer License or Gun Show Permit shall be issued under
the Cook County Deadly Weapons Dealer Control Ordinance for any property which
is used residentially. No Federal Firearms License shall be issued for any
property which is used residentially. No person shall engage in the business of
dealing in firearms, operate a premises as a gun shop, or operate a gun show
from any property which is used residentially.
CHAPTER 32: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Definitions
   
32.02   Business Regulation Certificates Required
   
32.03   Certificate Fee
   
32.04   Computation
   
32.05   Certificate Period
   
32.06   Procedure
   
32.07   Denial of Certificate
   
32.08   Suspension or Revocation of Certificate
   
32.09   Appeals to the City Council
   
32.10   Coordination with License Provision
   
32.11   Display
   
32.12   Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
32.13   Invalidity of Conflicting Ordinances
§ 32.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   “Accessory Use” is a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a building located on the same lot with the principal use of
the building.
   (b)   “Basement” is the portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
   (c)   “Cellar” is the portion of a building partly or wholly underground but
having one-half or more than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   (d)   “Consumer” is a person who uses goods or services of another to
satisfy his needs, the needs of another, or to resell, or produce other goods
with them.
   (e)   “Floor Area” is the sum total of the gross horizontal area of all the
several floors of a building and its accessory building measured in square feet
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of party
walls separating two buildings or establishments on each of the respective
floors, and shall include the basement floor, cellar floor, floor space used
for mechanical equipment, whether open or enclosed, including such equipment as
may be located on the roof, penthouse, attic space, balconies, mezzanines,
porches and verandas, and floor area devoted to and occupied by accessory uses.
   (f)   “Food Establishment” is a building or premises, or a portion thereof,
the principal use of which is for the sale or dispensing or distributing or
serving of food, foodstuff or drink for consumption on or off the premises, or
in or outside of the building.
   (g)   “Industrial Establishment” is a building or premises, or a portion
thereof, the principal use of which is for manufacturing, including assembly,
processing, fabrication and storage or scientific research and development, and
truck terminals.
   (h)   “Owner” is any person holding legal title to the property, or any
person being a beneficiary under a land trust holding title to the property.
   (i)   “Person” is any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
   (j)   “Retail and Wholesale Establishment” is a building or premises, or
portion thereof, the principal use of which is for the sale or distribution of
any commodity for a price or fee by a seller to a consumer or by one business
to another business.
   (k)   “Service Establishment” is a building or premises or a portion
thereof, the principal use of which is for the rendering of personal or
material services for a price or fee whether or not a commodity is worked upon
or exchanged and shall include a building or premises, or a portion thereof,
the principal use of which is not a food establishment, industrial
establishment, or retail and wholesale establishment.
§ 32.02 BUSINESS REGULATION CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, lease, or occupy any
building or premises, or portion thereof, which is used as a food
establishment, industrial establishment, retail and wholesale establishment, or
a service establishment prior to or without obtaining a business regulation
certificate.
§ 32.03 CERTIFICATE FEE.
   (a)   The following schedule sets forth the fees for the different types of
establishments. Where a portion of a building or premises is used as one type
of establishment, and a portion as another type of establishment, the fee for
each portion of the building shall be calculated using the different fee
schedules. All fees shall be paid at the time of application for the
certificate.
1. Service Establishment Fee Floor Area in Sq. Ft.
1. Service Establishment Fee              Floor Area in Sq. Ft.
$ 75.00                                   0 - 2,500
149.00                                    2,501 - 5,000
224.00                                    5,001 - 7,500
298.00                                    7,501 - 10,000
373.00                                    10,001 - 12,000
448.00                                    12,001 - 15,000
522.00                                    15,001 - 17,500
578.00                                    17,001 - 20,000
672.00                                    20,001 or over
2. Retail and Wholesale Establishment Fee Floor Area in Sq. Ft.
$ 106.00                                  0 - 2,500
213.00                                    2,501 - 5,000
320.00                                    5,001 - 7,500
426.00                                    7,5001 - 10,000
533.00                                    10,001 - 12,000
640.00                                    12,001 - 15,000
746.00                                    15,001 - 17,500
833.00                                    17,501 - 20,000
960.00                                    20,001 or over
3. Industrial Establishment Fee           Floor Area in Sq. Ft.
$ 160.00                                  0 - 10,000
320.00                                    10,001 - 20,000
479.00                                    20,001 - 30,000
640.00                                    30,001 - 40,000
800.00                                    40,001 - 50,000
960.00                                    50,001 - 75,000
1,120.00                                  75,001 - 100,000
1,280.00                                  100,001 - 200,000
1,440.00                                  200,000 or over
4. Food Establishment Fee                 Floor Area in Sq. Ft.
$ 213.00                                  0 - 2,500
320.00                                    2,501 - 5,000
426.00                                    5,001 - 7,500
533.00                                    7,501 - 10,000
640.00                                    10,001 - 12,000
746.00                                    12,501 - 15,000
853.00                                    15,001 - 17,500
960.00                                    17,501 - 20,000
1,067.00                                  20,000 or over
 
§ 32.04 COMPUTATION.
   Total floor area applicable for the determination of the yearly regulatory
fee shall include the sum total of all the floor area in use or reserved for or
retained for the use of the flood, service, retail and wholesale or industrial
establishment, including but not restricted to principal and accessory floor
area, cellars and basements, storage or detached accessory buildings, even
though any such floor area may be temporarily vacant or not in use.
   All measured area expressed in square feet shall be to the nearest integral
square foot; if a fraction is one-half square foot or more, the integral square
foot next above shall be taken.
   Any premises which can be classified as one or more different type of
establishments shall pay the fee which is the largest for the applicable number
of square feet.
§ 32.05 CERTIFICATE PERIOD.
   Certificates shall be issued for a period of one year which shall begin on
May 1 and which shall terminate on April 30 of the following year. All
certificates shall be issued at the yearly rate of fee, except where the
certificate is issued on or after November 1 for an establishment beginning
business after November 1, in which case the fee shall be one-half of the
yearly fee.
   An additional fee of 50% of the enumerated fee shall be charged for all
certificates issued after May 1 of said calendar year; provided, however, that
such additional fee shall not be charged to applicants who have commenced
business after May 1 of said calendar year and who have made application for
the certificate prior to the date of commencing business.
   No additional fee shall be charged if an application accompanied by payment
was made in time, but the issuance of the certificate was delayed because of
the required inspections of the premises were not performed by City officials.
§ 32.06 PROCEDURE.
   Certificates shall be issued by the Clerk after investigations by the
appropriate building, zoning, fire, health, and police officials to determine
if the premises are in compliance with the ordinances of the City of Hickory
Hills.
   No certificate shall be required for any premises which are vacant, as those
premises are not being visited by or used by the public in the transaction of
any of the four listed establishments.
   In the event that a use of a premises, or portion thereof, is changed during
the year, a new certificate must be issued at the established prevailing fee
for the premises. No new certificate need be issued if the ownership or
occupancy of the premises changes if the use of the premises remains the same.
   No certificate shall be issued for any premises if the purpose or activity
of the premises does not comply with the ordinances and regulations of the City
or the State of Illinois. No certificate shall be issued for any premises which
are conducted or operated as a nuisance. No certificate shall be issued for any
premises wherein the working conditions are inadequate with respect to
overcrowding, light, heat, ventilation or cleanliness.
§ 32.07 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE.
   Should the Clerk not issue a certificate upon the request of any person, her
denial and the reasons therefor shall be transmitted to the City Council. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Clerk in regard to the denial of a
certificate shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within 10 days
after notice of the denial has been mailed or given.
§ 32.08 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   Whenever the conduct or operation of any premises constitutes a nuisance, is
in violation of any City ordinance or State statute, or presents a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, the Mayor shall be
authorized to summarily order the closing of the premises. Within three days
after a premises are closed, the Mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the certificate shall be revoked or suspended.
   (a)   In addition to the above reasons, the Mayor after notice and hearing
may revoke any certificate for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application.
      2.   Any violation on the premises of ordinances of the City or State
statute.
      3.   Conviction of the operator of the premises of any felony or
misdemeanor where such conviction indicates an inability to operate a safe,
honest, and legitimate business or establishment.
      4.   Failure of the premises owner or occupant to pay any fine, penalty,
charge, fee, water bill, or other bill owed to the City.
      5.   Refusal to permit any inspection officer entry to premises open to
the public or refusal to permit the sampling of any food or beverage.
   The notice for any hearing shall be given by mail or personal service on the
premises at least three days prior to the date of the hearing. After said
hearing, the Mayor shall render his decision within 30 days.
§ 32.09 APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Clerk as set forth in Section
32.07, or by the Mayor as set forth in Section 32.08, shall have the right to
appeal the decision to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal
within 10 days after receipt of the denial or revocation of the certificate.
All notices of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk. The City Council
shall establish a time and place for the appeals hearing after which they shall
make their decision. Their decision shall be final.
§ 32.10 COORDINATION WITH LICENSE PROVISION.
   As this ordinance and chapter do not license any business or activity in the
City, it is possible that the license provisions of the City may also affect
the premises or activity being conducted. In that case, the provisions of this
chapter and the license chapter shall both apply.
§ 32.11 DISPLAY.
   All certificates must be posted in a prominent place.
§ 32.12 CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW.
   (a)   Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law Adopted. The regulations
of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
cable or video providers offering services within the City boundaries. Any
amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective
after the effective date of this Article shall be incorporated into this
Article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers
offering services within the municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment
that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this Article by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the City.
   (b)   Enforcement. The City does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent
to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the
Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from
residents within the City.
   (c)   Customer Credits. The City hereby adopts the schedule of customer
credits for violations as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501
(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing
cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
§ 32.13 INVALIDITY OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   Employee means any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an
employer regardless of the number of hours worked and of the number of persons
the employer employs.
   Employer means any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
limited liability company, business trust, school district, unit of local
government, or any person or group of persons employing or seeking to employ
one or more employees in, or having its principal place of business in, the
City of Hickory Hills. The term employer does not mean or include: (i) the
government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned by the government
of the United States; (ii) an Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an
Indian tribe; or (iii) the government of the State or any agency or department
thereof.
   Federal and State Law means any and all applicable statutes and/or
regulations of the United States and State of Illinois, as amended from time to
time.
   (b)   Wage and Paid Leave Laws.
      1.   Employers shall comply with all Federal and State Laws governing the
rate, eligibility, applicability, accrual, use or payment of/for paid leave and
minimum wage.
      2.   No employers shall have, or be obligated to adhere to, any
additional or greater obligations with respect to paid leave or minimum wage
than as required or established by Federal and State Law.
      3.   Any additional obligation with respect to paid leave or minimum
wages imposed by law (including Cook County ordinances), other than Federal and
State Law, upon any employer is hereby declared to be, and shall be deemed to
be, in conflict with this section, and superseded and preempted hereby, and
shall have no force, effect, or applicability to such employer.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or interpreted as affecting
or preventing an employer from imposing upon itself any additional or greater
obligation with respect to paid leave or minimum wage voluntarily or by
contract.
(Ord. 25-01, passed 1-9-2025)
CHAPTER 33: OCCUPATION AND USE TAXES
Section
   
33.01   Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
33.02   Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
33.03   Municipal Leasing Occupation Tax
   
33.04   Hotel Tax
   
33.05   Municipal Replacement Vehicle Tax
   
33.06   Motor Vehicle Leasing Tax
   
33.07   Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
33.08   Municipal Gas Tax
   
33.09   Municipal Electricity Tax
   
33.10   Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
   
33.11   Electric Utility Tax
   
33.12   Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
   
33.13   Automobile Renting Use Tax
   
33.14   Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility
Procedures
   
33.15   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
   
33.16   Municipal Motor Fuel Tax
   
33.17   Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
33.18   Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax and Non-Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
33.19   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Tax
§ 33.01 MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city at the rate of one percent of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business, in
accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
§ 33.02 MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-
11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
§ 33.03 MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
or leasing tangible personal property to the users thereof at the rate of one-
half of one percent of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made in
the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of Section 8-11-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS
5/8-11-6.
§ 33.04 HOTEL TAX.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel a tax at the rate of 5
percent of the gross rental receipts from such renting, leasing or letting;
excluding from gross rental proceeds, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or
letting to permanent residents of that hotel.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
      1.   “Hotel” means any building or buildings in which the public may, for
a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes motels, inns, tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, bed and breakfast inns, and apartment houses.
      2.   “Permanent resident” means any person who occupied or has the right
to occupy any room or rooms for at least 30 consecutive days.
   (c)   The City Clerk is hereby authorized to provide forms, and to issue
rules and regulations providing for the payment of the hotel tax. Such tax
shall be paid on a monthly basis by persons liable therefor.
§ 33.05 MUNICIPAL REPLACEMENT VEHICLE TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon each vehicle, as defined in Section 1-146 of
The Illinois Vehicle Code, purchased in this city by or on behalf of an
insurance company to replace a vehicle of an insured person in settlement of a
total loss claim. The tax shall be in the amount of $50.00 per vehicle
purchased.
   Every such insurance company that purchases a replacement vehicle as defined
herein shall complete and file with the Illinois Department of Revenue a
replacement vehicle certificate (Form RVT-7). At the time such report is filed,
there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed.
§ 33.06 MOTOR VEHICLE LEASING TAX.
   (a)   A tax is hereby imposed upon any person doing business in the City,
who leases motor vehicles, for the privilege of leasing motor vehicles within
the City on a daily or weekly basis at the rate of $2.75 per rental period as
specified in the rental agreement.
   (b)   For the purpose of this section, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
   “Person” shall mean any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator,
executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm,
copartnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, non-
profit, or otherwise. Whenever the term “person” is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall
mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof, doing business within the City.
   (c)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes. It shall be the duty of any person subject to the tax herein to pay over
to the City Collector said tax on a quarterly basis. Forms for collection of
the tax shall be furnished by the City.
   (d)   The City Clerk, or any person so certified as deputy or
representative, may enter the premises of any person subject to the tax for
inspection and examination of books and records for the proper administration
of this section and enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It is
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the City Finance
Officer or the duly authorized deputy or representative in discharge of duties
in the enforcement of this article.
   It shall be the duty of every person subject to the tax in the City of
Hickory Hills to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the City
Clerk, deputy or representative authorized, may inspect and shall include a
daily sheet showing:
      1.   The number of vehicles leased, the names of the lessor and lessee
and the periods for which leased during the quarterly period.
      2.   The actual lease for the period in question.
   Every person subject to the tax shall file tax returns showing required in
(1) and (2) of this subsection during each three-month period ending March 31,
June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year, within ten (10) days after
the end of the respective date, upon forms and according to rules and
regulations made by the City Clerk. At the time of filing said tax returns, the
operator shall pay to the City Collector all taxes due for the period to which
the tax return applies. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the City
of all taxes due and owing for the quarter covered by the return.
   (e)   In the event of failure by any person subject to the tax, manager or
operator to collect and pay the tax required hereunder within ten (10) days
after the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax
at the rate of one (1%) percent per month commencing as of the first day of the
month following the month for which the tax was to have collected. In addition,
a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax and interest due shall be assessed
and collected against any person subject to the tax or operator.
   (f)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
City Attorney shall, upon the request of the City Clerk, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of the City in
any court of competent jurisdiction.
   If the Mayor, after hearing held, shall find that any person has willfully
avoided payment of the tax imposed by this section, may suspend or revoke all
City licenses held by such tax evader. The operator shall have an opportunity
to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice
of the time and place of the hearing to be held, addressed to him at his last
known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, and license of
which such person may be possessed shall be temporarily suspended by the Mayor.
Any suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
person subject to the tax, manager or operator from his civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
§ 33.07 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (a)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons engaged in the act
or privilege of originating within the City or receiving in the City intrastate
telecommunications by a person a tax at the rate of 5% of the gross charge for
such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person.
However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such
act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United
States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this State.
   (b)   There is hereby levied and imposed upon all persons engaged in the act
or privilege of originating within the City or receiving in the City interstate
telecommunications by a person a tax at the rate of 5% of the gross charge for
such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such person. To
prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to
taxation, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another
state on such event, shall be allowed a credit to the extent of the amount of
such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not previously
allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State.
However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such
act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United
States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in this State.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined in 65
ILCS 5/8-11-17, as amended, shall apply.
   (d)   The City Collector is hereby authorized to provide forms, and to issue
rules and regulations providing for the payment of the tax authorized by this
section. Such tax shall be paid on a monthly basis by persons liable therefor.
   (e)   On or before the last day of the following month, every retailer shall
file a return with the City Collector and pay any tax due. Any tax required to
be collected shall be collected by the retailer from the taxpayer and shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer. If the retailer fails to
collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay
the tax directly to the City Collector. Failure to pay any portion of the tax
on time shall result in a penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
Failure to pay any portion of the tax for more than 30 days shall result in an
interest charge equal to 1% per month of the amount of the unpaid tax.
   (f)   Any retailer may apply for an adjustment of any tax paid which should
not have been paid as a result of any mistake or error. Upon approval of the
City Collector, an adjustment shall be made by giving a credit on the next
return due for the amount of the adjustment granted. No adjustment for any
reason shall be given 12 months after the return is filed.
   (g)   All taxes paid shall be considered voluntarily paid unless the return
and the check paying the taxes clearly have marked thereon that payment is
being made under protest and the reason for the protest.
   (h)   No tax shall be charged upon a reseller provided that such person
shall have had previously applied for and been granted a resale number and the
telecommunication is a resale.
§ 33.08 MUNICIPAL GAS TAX.
   (a)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption
within the corporate limits of the City, and not for resale, at the rate of 5%
of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined in 65
ILCS 5/8-11-2, as amended, shall apply.
   (c)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to the City by the taxpayer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
   (e)   On or before the last day of each month, commencing April 1992, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the City Collector for the previous month,
stating:
      (1)   His name;
      (2)   His principal place of business;
      (3)   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      (4)   Amount of tax;
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   The City Collector is hereby authorized to provide forms, and to issue rules
and regulations providing for the payment of the tax authorized by this
section.
   (f)   The taxpayer making the return provided for in subsection (e) shall,
at the time of making such return, pay to the City Collector, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts. Willful failure to file a timely return shall result in a penalty
equal to 10% of the amount of the unpaid tax. Failure to timely pay any portion
of the tax shall result in an interest charge equal to 1% per month of the
amount of the unpaid tax.
   (g)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years
prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
   (h)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of such
amount. All taxes paid shall be considered voluntarily paid unless the return
and the check paying the taxes clearly have marked thereon that payment is
being made under protest and the reason for the protest.
§ 33.09 MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY TAX.
   (a)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the City, and not for resale, at the
rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined in 65
ILCS 5/8-11-2, as amended, shall apply.
   (c)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to the City by the taxpayer
as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
   (e)   On or before the last day of each month, commencing April 1992, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the City Collector for the previous month,
stating:
      (1)   His name;
      (2)   His principal place of business;
      (3)   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      (4)   Amount of tax;
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   The City Collector is hereby authorized to provide forms, and to issue rules
and regulations providing for the payment of the tax authorized by this
section.
   (f)   The taxpayer making the return provided for in subsection (e) shall,
at the time of making such return, pay to the City Collector, the amount of tax
herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts. Willful failure to file a timely return shall result in a penalty
equal to 10% of the amount of the unpaid tax. Failure to timely pay any portion
of the tax shall result in an interest charge equal to 1% per month of the
amount of the unpaid tax.
   (g)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years
prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited.
   (h)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of such
amount. All taxes paid shall be considered voluntarily paid unless the return
and the check paying the taxes clearly have marked thereon that payment is
being made under protest and the reason for the protest.
   (i)   The tax imposed under this Section shall not apply with respect to
gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or
sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject
to the tax imposed under Section 33.11.
   (j)   If a taxpayer under this Section is unable to use a credit authorized
by this Section solely because the tax imposed by this Section has been
replaced by the tax imposed under Section 33.1 then the taxpayer may apply such
credit against any tax due under Section 33.1.
§ 33.10 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (a)   Definitions.   As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
      1.   “Bad Debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at
retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that
has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made;
      2.   “Gross Charges” means the amount paid to a telecommunications
retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications within the City, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be
determined, without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or
any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. Gross charges for private line service
shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the City, charges
for the channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and charges
for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the
City. However, gross charges shall not include:
         A.   any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
under: (i) the fee imposed by this Section, (ii) additional charges added to a
purchaser’s bill under Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 220
ILCS 5/1-101, (iii) amounts collected under Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7, (iv) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 35 ILCS 630/1, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi)
the tax imposed by I.R.C. § 4251;
         B.   charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
City;
         C.   charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
         D.   charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
         E.   charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1
of the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/1-101 to the extent of such exemption
and during the period of time specified by the City;
         F.   charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
         G.   bad debts;
         H.   charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or
         I.   charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the City.
      3.   “Public right-of-way” means any municipal street, alley, water or
public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including
utility easements wherein the City has acquired the right and authority to
locate or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. Public right-of-way shall not include any real or personal City
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall
not include City buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
      4.   “Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State”, or any
like term means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the
State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State
under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether
such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed
to do business in this State.
      5.   “Sale of telecommunications at retail” means the transmitting,
supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another
such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for
their use or consumption and not for sale.
      6.   “Service address” means the location of telecommunications equipment
from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as
in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems,
air-to-ground systems, and the like, service address shall mean the location of
the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by
the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
      7.   “Telecommunications” includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, telecommunications shall also include wireless telecommunications as
hereinafter defined. Telecommunications shall not include value added services
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form content,
code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. Telecommunications shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as now or
hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as defined in
the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 and
following) as now or hereafter amended.
      8.   “Telecommunications provider” means (1) any telecommunications
retailer, and (2) any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that
installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that
is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
      9.   “Telecommunications retailer”, or “retailer” or “carrier” means and
includes every person engaged in the business of making sales of
telecommunications at retail. The City may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the City, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the City.
      10.   “Wireless telecommunications” includes cellular mobile telephone
services, personal wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7),
as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services,
and paging services.
   (b)   Registration of telecommunications providers.
      1.   Every telecommunications provider shall register with the City
within 30 days after the effective date of this Ordinance or becoming a
telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by
the City. Any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return shall be
deemed to have registered in accordance with this Section.
      2.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City
has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current
return as required by to the City within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications
provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the City.
   (c)   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
      1.   A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all gross
charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within
the City for telecommunications originating or received in the City.
      2.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee, such
fee shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights-of-
way within the City by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the
infrastructure maintenance fee does not however, serve as a limitation on the
levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (d)   Collection, enforcement, and administration of telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fees.
      1.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the City infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
      2.   Unless otherwise approved by the City Clerk, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
City not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which
a bill is issued to the customer, provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain 2% of the City infrastructure
maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in
accounting for and remitting the fee.
      3.   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Clerk, which
shall contain such information as the City Clerk may reasonably require.
      4.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected and any
such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications
retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the
City. The charge imposed under this Section by the telecommunications retailer
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
      5.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure
maintenance fee due, or to become due from the telecommunications retailer who
made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the City Clerk may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. No claim for such credit may be made more than three years after the
date of the erroneous payment unless, (1) the credit is used only to offset a
claim of underpayment made by the City within the applicable statutory period
of limitations, and (2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
      6.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers shall not be included
in the tax base under any of the following:
         A.   “gross charges” for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
         B.   “gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2;
         C.   “gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/
8-11-17;
         D.   “gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue
of public utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act,
220 ILCS 5/1-101.
      7.   The City shall have the right to audit the books and records of all
telecommunications retailers to determine whether the telecommunications
retailer has properly accounted to the City for the City infrastructure
maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the City infrastructure
maintenance fee due to the City by the telecommunications retailer shall be
paid to the City plus 5% percent of the total amount of the underpayment
determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the City in conducting the
audit, in an amount not to exceed 5% percent of the total amount of the
underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the City within
21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
      8.   The City Clerk may promulgate regulations concerning the
administration and enforcement of this Section consistent with its provisions,
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers of such regulations.
   (e)   Compliance With Other Laws. Nothing in this Section shall excuse any
person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including but not
limited to:
      1.   generally applicable taxes; and
      2.   standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way; and
      3.   any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
      4.   compliance with any ordinance or provision of the Hickory Hills
Municipal Code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within
the right-of-way.
   (f)   Existing Franchises and Licenses. Any franchise, license, or similar
agreements between telecommunications retailers and the City entered into
before the effective date of this Ordinance regarding the use of public rights-
of-way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for
any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
§ 33.11 ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX.
   (a)   Definitions.   As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
      1.   “City” means the City of Hickory Hills.
      2.   “Person” means any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its
political subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court;
      3.   “Person maintaining a place of business in this State” means any
person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or
other affiliate, an office, generation, facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within the State under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in
the State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
      4.   “Purchase at retail” means any acquisition of electricity by a
purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not
include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-
2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the
generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
      5.   “Purchaser” means any person who uses or consumes, within the
corporate limits of the City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
      6.   “Tax collector” means the person delivering electricity to the
purchaser.
   (b)   Tax Imposed.
      1.   Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-2), a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the City at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
      For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.561
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.368
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.331
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.322
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.313
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.294
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.290
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month 0.285
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.280
cents per kilowatt-hour; and
      For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-
hours in a month; 0.276 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      2.   The tax is addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the City, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision
of the State.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
      4.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after September 1, 1998 and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the
Public Utilities Act (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), or the first bill issued to such
nonresidential customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs
sooner.
   (c)   Collection of Tax.
      1.   Subject to the provisions of Paragraph (e) regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Section shall be collected
from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who
delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this Section, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the City
upon request. For purposes of this Section, any partial payment of a billed
amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for
the delivery of electricity.
   (d)   Tax Remittance and Return.
      1.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the City Clerk. The return and accompanying remittance shall be
due on or before the last day of the following month.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax, then the purchaser shall
file a return in a form prescribed by the City Clerk and pay the tax directly
to the City on or before the last day of the following month.
   (e)   Resales.
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the City Clerk
and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and
certifies that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale
for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the City Clerk
for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not
liable for the tax imposed by this Section and shall furnish such additional
information as the City Clerk may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application the City Clerk shall assign a
resale number to the applicant.
      4.   The City Clerk may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this Section for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: (1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this Section
on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect the tax pursuant to Paragraph (c) and remit the tax on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
      Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale
number and complying with all other conditions of the section shall be excused
from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the City Clerk
the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the City Clerk may reasonably require.
   (f)   Books and records. Every person required to pay the tax imposed by
this Section shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Section. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day.
   (g)   Credits and Refunds. Notwithstanding any other provision, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the City, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this Section unless
the persons files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date
on which the tax was paid or remitted.
§ 33.12 AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in the City of Hickory Hills at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such business, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-7.
§ 33.13 AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege in using in the City of Hickory
Hills an automobile which is rented from a rentor outside Illinois, and which
is titled or registered with an agency of the state’s government, at the rate
of 1% of the rental price of such automobile, in accordance with the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8.
§ 33.14 LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
PROCEDURES.
   (a)   Title. This Section shall be known as, and may be cited as, the
“Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Procedures.”
   (b)   Scope. The provisions of this Section shall apply to the City’s
procedures in connection with all of the City’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   (c)   Definitions. Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
   “Act” means the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/
5.
   “Locally imposed and administered tax” or “tax” means each tax imposed by
the City that is collected or administered by the City but does not include any
taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected
by the City other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
   “Notice” means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the City’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   “Tax Ordinance” means any ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   “Taxpayer” means any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the
business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the City.
   (d)   Notices. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than 7 calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act
of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
      (i)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address, or
      (ii)   Personal service or delivery.
   (e)   Late payment. Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required
to be made to the City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late
unless it is (a) physically received by the City on or before the due date, or
(b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City,
with adequate postage prepaid.
   (f)   Payment. Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable
period; second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to
the penalty for the applicable period.
   (g)   Credits and Refunds.
      1.   The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
      2.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
4 years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The City shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly
to the City.
      3.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
         A.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in
writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (1)   the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (2)   the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (3)   the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (4)   the taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (5)   a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the City.
         B.   Within 10 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (1)   grant the claim; or
         (2)   deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
         C.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
   (h)   Audit Procedure. Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this Section.
      1.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
         A.   the tax;
         B.   the time period of the audit; and
         C.   a brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
      2.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
      3.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than 7 days nor more than 30
days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is
unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
      4.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the City.
      5.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or
the City fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
      6.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
City’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
      7.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
   (i)   Appeal.
      1.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
         A.   the reason for the assessment;
         B.   the amount of the tax liability proposed;
         C.   the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         D.   the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
      2.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
      3.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
      4.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within
the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
      5.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
   (j)   Hearing.
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days except by agreement of all parties.
      3.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
   (k)   Interest and Penalties. In the event a determination has been made
that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the
tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
      1.   The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 1% per month
or part thereof that a payment is late.
      2.   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed
within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior
to the City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability,
then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   (l)   Abatement. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file
penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists
for delay or failure to make a filing.
   (m)   Installment Contracts. The City may enter into an installment contract
with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance.
The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered
unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice
by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have 14 days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
   (n)   Statute of Limitations. The City, through the local tax administrator,
shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers
of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving
notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide
any tax still due and owing.
      1.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      2.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be 6 years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
      3.   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return
was filed by the taxpayer.
   (o)   Voluntary Disclosure. For any locally imposed and administered tax for
which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation,
or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to
pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month or part thereof,
for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than 4
years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid
voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax,
interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed.
However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax
due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable
interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud
on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed
invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed
as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
Section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
   (p)   Publication of Tax Ordinances. Any locally administered tax ordinance
shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting
of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request
at the City Clerk’s office.
   (q)   Local Tax Administrator. The local tax administrator shall establish
an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers
for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      (i)   timely remove the lien at the City’s expense;
      (ii)   correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (iii)   correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
   (r)   Application. This Section shall be liberally construed and
administered to supplement all of the City’s tax ordinances. To the extent that
any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this Section, this
Section shall be controlling.
§ 33.15 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
      Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
      Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
      Gross revenues means that term as defined in Section 21-801(c) of the
Act.
      Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer
or provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to Section 5/21-
401 of the Act.
      PEG means public, education and governmental.
      PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this Section and
Section 5/21-801(d) of the Act by the holder to the City for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
      Service means the provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to Section 5/21-401 of the Act.
      Service provider fee means the amount paid under this Section and Section
5/21-801 of the Act by the holder to a City for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
      Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via,
service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or
other services offered over the public Internet.
   (b)   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed. A fee of 5% of the holder’s
gross revenues is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video
service in the City.
   (c)   Notice to the City. A holder shall notify the City at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the City.
   (d)   Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the City. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this Section by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
Section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to Section 5/21-401(b)(6) of the Act
to the City.
   (e)   Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (f)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the City in which a fee is paid.
   (g)   Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to Section 5/21-301(c) of the Act with
credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of
such credit from the fees that operator owes under this Section.
   (h)   PEG Access Support Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee of one
percent (1%) of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the City or its designee
for PEG access support in the City is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the City in addition to the fee imposed
pursuant to (b) hereof.
   (i)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City
or to the entity designated by the City to manage PEG access. The holder’s
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in (d) hereof.
   (j)   Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (k)   Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to Section 5/21-301(c) of the Act
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that operator owes under this Section.
   (l)   Applicable Principles. All determinations and calculations under this
Section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
   (m)   No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder. Nothing contained in this
Section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later
be imposed by the City, including any tax that is or may later be required to
be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video
service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the
holder with respect to payment of the City’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service
provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
   (n)   Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider. The City will notify the
holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service
providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall
comply with the same requirements the City imposes on other cable service or
video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and
records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the City. If all local franchises between the City and cable
operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the City
in Section
33.14 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code. No acceptance of amounts remitted
should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (o)   Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the City’s submission of an invoice for the
sum.
   (p)   Late fees/Payments. All fees due and payments which are past due shall
be governed by the provisions of Section
33.14 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.
§ 33.16 MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX.
   (a)   Definitions. All words, terms and phrases used in this section shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in the Municipal Motor Fuel Tax Law, 65 ILCS
5/8-11-2.3.
   (b)   Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling motor fuel at retail in the city for the operation of motor
vehicles upon public highways or for the operation of recreational watercraft
upon waterways at a rate of three cents ($0.03) per gallon of motor fuel sold
at retail for the purpose of Use or consumption and not for purpose of resale.
The tax is not imposed upon aviation fuel, as defined in Section 3 of the
Retailers’ Occupation and Tax Act.
   (c)   Tax Collections and Reimbursement. Each retailer shall remit to the
Illinois Department of Revenue the tax imposed under this section. A retailer
may reimburse itself for its tax liability hereunder by separately stating the
tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a
single amount, with any Illinois tax the retailer is required to collect,
pursuant to such bracket schedules as the Illinois Department of Revenue may
prescribe.
   (d)   Administration and Enforcement. The tax imposed, and all civil
penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereof, shall be administered,
collected, and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The Illinois
Department of Revenue shall have full power to: (i) administer and enforce this
division; (ii) collect all taxes and penalties due hereunder; (iii) dispose of
taxes and penalties so collected in the manner prescribed by law; and (iv)
determine all rights to credit memoranda arising on account of the erroneous
payment of tax or penalty hereunder.
(Ord. 20-1, passed 2-13-2020; Ord. 20-5, passed 3-12-2020)
§ 33.17 CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   (a)   Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City
at the rate of three (3%) percent of the gross receipts from these sales made
in the course of that business.
   (b)   Collections; Reimbursement. Each retailer shall collect and remit to
the Illinois Department of Revenue the tax imposed under this section. A
retailer may reimburse itself for its tax liability hereunder by separately
stating the tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with any Illinois tax the retailer is required
to collect.
   (c)   Administration and Enforcement. The Illinois Department of Revenue
shall have full power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of
this section. The tax imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as
an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department
of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected, and any tax collected by such
retailer and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue,
shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 19-19, passed 9-26-2019)
§ 33.18 NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILER’S OCCUPATION TAX AND NON-HOME RULE
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (a)   Definitions. All words, terms, and phrases used in this section shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in the Illinois Municipal Code.
   (b)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or
registered with an agency of this state’s government, at retail in this
municipality at the rate of 1.00% of the gross receipts from such sales made in
the course of such business. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3).
   (c)   Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is
hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of
making sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be 1.00%. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4).
   (d)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (e)   Limitation on Use of Proceeds. The City shall only expend the proceeds
generated from any tax imposed by virtue of this section on: (a) expenditures
related to “municipal roads and streets, access roads, bridges, and sidewalks;
waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line extensions, water distribution
and purification facilities, storm water drainage and retention facilities, and
sewage treatment facilities;” (b) efforts to “reduce the levy for real estate
taxes or avoid an increase in the levy for real estate taxes that would
otherwise have been required” by the City; or (c) any other or further
permitted uses under Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be authorized therein.
   (d)   Qualified Exemption of Aviation Fuel from Both Taxes. No provision of
this section shall be interpreted to impose any tax on aviation fuel, as
defined in Section 3 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/3),
unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related purposes, as
that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act (30 ILCS 1005/
6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the certification
requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of the Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22).
(Ord. 24-07, passed - -)
§ 33.19 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ TAX.
   (a)   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in the City of Hickory Hills at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such
sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (see 65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (b)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax. A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in the City of Hickory Hills in the business of making
sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service,
transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax
shall be the same rate identified with subsection (a) above. The imposition of
this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24
of the Illinois Municipal Code (see 65 ILCS 5/8-11- 24)
   (c)   Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (d)   City Clerk to file Section with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section
with the Illinois Department of Revenue.
   (e)   Effective Date. The taxes imposed by this section shall take effect on
January 1, 2026.
(Ord. 25-03, passed 8-28-2025)
CHAPTER 34: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
34.01   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
34.02   Licenses Generally
   
34.03   Application for License
   
34.04   Fingerprinting of Licensed Applicant and Bartenders
   
34.05   Location of Place of Sale
   
34.06   License Classifications
   
34.07   License Fees and Limitations
   
34.08   Temporary Licenses
   
34.09   Hours of Operation
   
34.10   Original Issuance or Transfer of License
   
34.11   Prohibited Conduct
   
34.12   Hours of Operation
   
34.13   Consumption on Public Way, Parking Lot
   
34.14   Minors
   
34.15   State and Federal Law
   
34.16   Suspension or Revocation of License
   
34.17   Coin Operated Amusement Devices
   
34.18   Happy Hour/Reduced Price Drinks
   
34.19   Teen Dances
   
34.20   Entertainment
   
34.21   Restricted Hours for Minors
   
34.22   Video Gaming
§ 34.01 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner. He shall receive
such salary as determined by the City Council. He may make such rules and
regulations to govern the conduct of licensees as are consistent with this
chapter and State law. The local liquor control commissioner may establish a
local liquor control commission. In such event the local liquor control
commission shall exercise all of the powers of the local liquor control
commissioner.
§ 34.02 LICENSES GENERALLY.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale at retail of
any alcoholic beverage of any kind without first obtaining a license therefor
from the local liquor control commissioner.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business to, or
conduct a business where patrons are allowed to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store
alcoholic liquors in any commercial establishment without first obtaining a
license therefor from the local liquor control commissioner.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store
alcoholic liquors on any premises which has not been licensed by the local
liquor control commissioner.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish containers, water or
other beverages for the mixture thereof for alcoholic liquors in any commercial
establishment which has not been licensed by the local liquor control
commissioner.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business, licensee, agent,
servant, or employee to allow or permit any persons to commit any of the acts
prohibited in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of leasing
any premises to allow the use, sale, giving away, or consumption on the
premises of alcoholic liquor, without first securing a license or without the
licensee first securing a license from the local liquor control commissioner.
§ 34.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every person desiring to engage in the business of selling at retail shall
make application in writing on forms furnished by the city for a license,
stating his name, age, residence, length of time in business, whether he then
holds or has theretofore held a license to conduct such business in any other
village or city in the state, whether he has ever been refused such license by
any municipality within the State of Illinois, and whether any license
theretofore granted to him for the conduct of such business has ever been
revoked. Such written application shall be verified; such application shall be
filed with the local liquor control commission; and such applicant shall, at
the time of the filing of the same, pay to said commissioner in cash the sum
required hereunder for license fee.
   Except for applications for new licenses during the course of the annual
year, every application for renewal of a license shall be completed and in the
hands of the local liquor control commissioner at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the beginning of the annual year. No application will be accepted or
approved unless the application is fully completed, the questions answered,
properly signed and verified. Failure to complete said application and to file
the same within the time limit prescribed herein shall be deemed grounds for
refusal of the local liquor control commissioner to renew said license.
   The application shall contain such queries as shall intelligently inform the
local liquor control commissioner as to whether or not the applicant is
eligible for a license and complies with the requirements of 235 ILCS 5/6-21,
in reference to dramshops.
   Applicants may be required to submit information as to sources of funds for
the purchase or operation of their businesses. The commissioner may require
such other information in writing or an oral examination.
   Misstatements in the application shall be deemed grounds for refusal to
issue or renew said license and, if a license is issued, grounds for
revocation.
§ 34.04 FINGERPRINTING OF LICENSED APPLICANT AND BARTENDERS.
   The applicant for a license under this chapter shall be fingerprinted and a
complete set of fingerprints maintained on file with the police department. In
case of corporations, the manager or person in charge shall also be
fingerprinted.
§ 34.05 LOCATION OF PLACE OF SALE.
   No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale,
displayed or advertised for sale at retail or delivered to any person
purchasing same at retail, except at the location, place or premise described
in a liquor license.
§ 34.06 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Licenses for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be divided in the
following classes:
   Class A, Package sales. A Class A license entitles the licensee to make
sales at retail of all package alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises.
   Class B, Package sales, beer and wine. A Class B license entitles the
licensee to make sales at retail of package beer and wine for consumption off
the premises.
   Class C, Consumption on premises. A Class C license entitles the licensee to
make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises.
   Class CL, Consumption on premises, late hours. A Class C license entitles
the licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for consumption
on the premises.
   Class CS, Consumption on premises, early hours. A Class CS license entitles
the licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for consumption
on the premises. All licensed premises shall be opened for business no sooner
than 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and 11:00 a.m. Sunday nor shall they
close later than midnight except on Friday night, Saturday night, and holiday
nights when they must close no later than 2:00 a.m.
   Class D, Consumption on premises, banquets. A Class D license entitles the
licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for consumption on
the premises in conjunction with banquet rooms with service bars only.
   Class DL, Consumption on premises, banquets, late hours. A Class D license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises in conjunction with banquet rooms with service bars
only.
   Class E, Consumption on premises, beer and wine. A Class E license entitles
the licensee to make sales at retail of beer and wine for consumption on the
premises.
   Class F, Consumption on premises and package sales. A Class F license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises and to sell all package alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises.
   Class G, Veterans consumption on premises. A Class G license shall be issued
only to a veteran’s organization organized and existing under a charter issued
by a national organization incorporated by Act of Congress of the United
States. A Class G license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises.
   Class I, Restaurant-Service Bar, consumption on premises. A Class I license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of all alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises only in conjunction with meals and food served at
the premises. No bar is permitted at which customers can order or be served
alcoholic liquors. A service bar is permitted for use of employees only. No
alcohol may be consumed, served or taken outside of the interior premises.
   Class M, Municipal consumption on premises, beer and wine. A Class M license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of beer and wine for consumption
on the premises. A Class M license can only be issued to a municipal
corporation.
   Class W, Entertainment. Entertainment may only be provided in a premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in conformity with a Class C, D, E, F, G, or
I liquor license. For purposes of this chapter, “Entertainment” means any
theatrical performance, musical performance, fashion show or sporting event
including but not limited to live disc jockeys, bands, dancers, actors,
musicians, comedians, athletes, models, magicians, and entertainers.
“Entertainment” does not include music or video which is provided through a
television, radio, tape player, or similar device provided that there is no
disc jockey and that there is no dancing. A Class W license may be issued by
the local liquor control commissioner upon his determination that the provision
of entertainment will not disturb the public health, safety and welfare. In
determining whether to issue such a license the local liquor control
commissioner shall take into consideration the space available for the
entertainment, the compatibility with surrounding property uses, traffic,
availability of parking, the disturbance of neighboring properties, the days
and hours of entertainment, the type of entertainment (but not the content or
message thereof), the ages of patrons, and the legality of the entertainment.
The local liquor control commissioner may provide limitations and conditions
for the provision of entertainment when issuing the Class W license, which
limitations and conditions may be changed upon the basis of complaints arising
from the entertainment. No entertainment shall be provided except in conformity
with such limitations and conditions. A Class W license is a privilege and not
a right. A Class W license can be suspended or terminated for violation of
limitations and conditions thereof, for violation of any ordinance, for
violation of any state law, or if the provision of entertainment creates a
disturbance within the licensed premises or outside of the licensed premises.
   Class X, Caterer. A Class X license entitles the licensee to make sales of
alcoholic liquors for consumption at any location, whether licensed or
unlicensed, as an incidental part of food service with prepared meals and
alcoholic liquors being sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
   For any premises licensed for package sales, the floor area devoted to the
display of alcoholic liquor shall not exceed 15% of the total floor area of the
premises devoted to the sale of goods and services and the sale of beer kegs
(7.75 gallons or more) is prohibited.
   A Class DL license which allows for late hours for banquet hours may only be
used in conjunction with a banquet. For the purposes of this Chapter, a
“banquet” is defined as an event with a meal usually in conjunction with a
charitable gathering, wedding, graduation party, bar mitzvah, funeral, birthday
party, ceremony, quinceanera, celebration, or political event to which the
general public is not admitted and for which an admission fee is not charged.
However, the prohibition against an admission fee does not apply to any event
conducted by a 501(c)(3) organization or a registered political organization
where all of the proceeds benefit the organization.
(Ord. 24-09, passed 10-11-2024)
§ 34.07 LICENSE FEES AND LIMITATIONS.
   All licenses shall be on a fiscal year basis. License fees shall be paid in
full prior to the commencement of the license year, except that local liquor
control commissioner may allow fees to be paid in two equal installments, 50%
prior to the commencement of the license year and 50% prior to the commencement
of the second half of the license year. The license fee for each class of
license and the maximum number of licenses in each class is as follows:
Class Description Number Fee
Class Description                                      Number   Fee
A     Package sales only                               7        $1,210
B     Package sales only (beer, wine)                  5        1,010
C     Consumption on premises only                     9        1,275
CL    Consumption on premises, late hours              0        2,000
CS    Consumption on premises, early hours             1        1,275
D     Consumption on premises, banquets                1        1,675
DL    Consumption on premises, banquets, late hours    3        2,000
E     Consumption on premises, beer and wine           6        1,175
F     Consumption on premises and package sales        2        1,675
G     Veterans consumption on premises                 0        75
I     Restaurant-Service Bar, consumption on premises  2        1,225
M     Municipal consumption on premises, beer and wine 0        0
W     Entertainment                                    no limit 550
X     Caterer                                          0        800
 
   The number of licenses authorized herein for all classes shall remain at the
number set forth in this section; provided, however, that any license in said
classes which is revoked, or not used because of the termination of liquor
business on the premises for which the license has been issued, shall
automatically reduce the number of authorized licenses of the particular class
by the total number of revoked or not used licenses in the particular class.
(Ord. 24-09, passed 10-11-2024)
§ 34.08 TEMPORARY LICENSES.
   The local liquor control commissioner may issue temporary liquor licenses
for a period not to exceed five (5) days for any special event. The type of
alcoholic beverages to be served, the place of service, and the hours of
service shall be established by the local liquor control commissioner. The fee
for a temporary liquor license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) per day.
§ 34.09 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   All licensed premises shall be opened for business no sooner than 6:00 a.m.
Monday through Saturday and 11:00 a.m. Sunday (9:00 a.m. Sunday for Class A and
B licenses) nor shall they close later than 2:00 a.m. (3:00 a.m. Saturday and
Sunday for Class CL and DL licenses). For Class C, Class CL, Class D, Class DL,
and Class E licenses, no person or patron may be admitted into the premises
after the hour of 2:00 a.m. until the opening hour on every day of the week.
§ 34.10 ORIGINAL ISSUANCE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (a)   The local liquor control commissioner may, at his discretion, permit
the transfer of interest in or location of a license issued for the operation
of the sale of alcoholic liquors at any location to which said license has been
issued, suspended or revoked upon the payment to the city of the sum of three
thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($3,250), or two thousand dollars ($2,000)
for a Class B or E license, for such transfer, in addition to any other fees
that may be required by section 34.07. No such transfer shall be made nor shall
any license be issued to any premises to which a license has been issued to
sell alcoholic liquors at retail, whether said business is a going business,
has been previously operated and is now out of existence, or where the license
has been suspended or revoked, without payment of the fee provided for in this
section. For the purpose of this section, a transfer of any interest in a
partnership, association, or in more than five (5) percent of ownership in
shares of the stock of a corporation shall be a transfer of interest and
require the payment of the transfer fee provided for by this section. The fee
in this section shall be waived when the transfer of a license is due solely to
the death of the license holder and no consideration is received for the sale
of the business for which the license has been issued. In the event of a
transfer of less than 100% of the interest in a license or the license holder,
the transfer fee shall be reduced to be equal to the percentage transferred
times the full fee (i.e. if 50% of the shares of a corporation are transferred,
then the fee shall be 50% of the applicable transfer fee).
   (b)   Except with the consent of the local liquor control commissioner, as
provided in subsection (a) above, licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are not subject to sale, assignment, transfer or to a change of
location.
§ 34.11 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (a)   Every licensee hereunder engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall conduct his or her place of business in a quiet, decent and respectable
manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse to admit thereto all persons
rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of undue noise or
other acts disturbing the peace.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member,
agent, representative or employee of such licensee to give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or intoxicating beverage to a person under the influence of
alcohol or drugs. Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.
   (c)   No licensee shall permit his patrons to perform any lewd, lascivious
acts, or an act of obscenity.
   (d)   Every licensee shall immediately report to the police any act by any
person or patron rendering himself or herself objectionable, causing undue
noise or disturbance, breach of peace, unusual conduct, or a person with a
firearm, knife, bludgeon or deadly instrument.
   (e)   No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall suffer any loud
or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling, singing,
fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any street or public
square in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and quiet of
persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.
   (f)   All persons, or employees dispensing or serving food or alcoholic
liquor shall be decently clothed. Topless or similar type of attire is hereby
prohibited. In addition the following rules shall be observed:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter,
waitress or entertainer to:
         A.   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
         B.   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
         C.   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter,
waitress, or entertainer to commit any of the unlawful acts in this section.
      3.   A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if
such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person
is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the
activity is performed.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier
of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful
for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work
in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation
or distribution of such liquor.
   (h)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species
of gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any place adjacent thereto
under his control.
   (i)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit alcoholic liquor,
except in the original package and with the seal unbroken, to be taken out of
the premises wherein it was sold, delivered, or given.
   (j)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, in the conduct of his business,
to commit, suffer or permit, through himself, agent, servant or employee, a
violation of city ordinance.
   (k)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit a violation
of any rule or regulation of the local liquor control commissioner.
   (l)   A licensee shall immediately report to the police a violation of any
city ordinance, Illinois statute or federal law occurring in the licensed
premises, or outside the licensed premises, but adjacent thereto, involving the
conduct of his business or patrons.
   (m)   It shall be unlawful for any person not possessing a Class X license
issued by the City to deliver or serve alcoholic liquor or to allow the
delivery or service of alcoholic liquor in any place of public accommodation.
   (n)   BYOB (bring your own bottle) facilities are prohibited in any place of
public accommodation within the City.
§ 34.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (a)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor
after the closing hour. After the closing hour all doors directly opening into
or out of the licensed premises shall be securely locked and no patrons,
customers or persons shall be allowed into the premises. All premises shall be
vacated within twenty (20) minutes after the closing hour.
   (b)   The above prohibitions shall not apply to licensed premises wherein
the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale or service of other
items therein; such as, grocery stores, restaurants, and bowling alleys.
   (c)   All licensees shall be required to allow police officers into the
licensed premises after the closing hour in order to determine compliance with
this chapter.
§ 34.13 CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC WAY, PARKING LOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry or
possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken, on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot or
semipublic parking lot. The term “semipublic parking lot” shall include any
area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in conjunction with any
business, enterprise, or commercial establishment.
§ 34.14 MINORS.
   (a)   No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall consume,
purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his
or her possession, excepting the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the privacy
of the parent’s or guardian’s home, or the possession and delivery of alcoholic
liquors in pursuit of a person’s employment by a licensee as allowed by state
law.
   (b)   No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty-one (21) years, except as allowed in paragraph (a) above.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years to use false identification or the identification of another to obtain
admittance to or to obtain alcoholic liquor from any liquor establishment.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish any
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years any identification which is used
by any other person for the purpose of gaining entrance into a liquor
establishment or which is used for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to
purchase any alcoholic beverage.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit the employment
of any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years in any licensed premises
where alcoholic liquor is sold where that person is involved in the sale or
delivery of alcoholic liquor. Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) may be
employed in any licensed premises where their employment does not require them
to sell, accept money for, check identification for, or serve alcoholic liquor.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises to
knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to violate
any provisions of this chapter.
   (g)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or
permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of which he may be the
parent or guardian to violate any provisions of this chapter.
§ 34.15 STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee in the conduct of the licensed
premises or upon the licensed premises to violate any law of the State of
Illinois, any law of the United States, or any rule of the Illinois Liquor
Control Commission
§ 34.16 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (a)   At all hearings, proceedings shall be taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter; and an appeal shall be limited to a review of the
certified official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control
commissioner. An attorney designated by the local liquor control commissioner
shall act as law officer, ask questions to clarify statements, advise the local
commissioner on procedure and law, and otherwise assist the local commissioner
in the conduct of the hearings.
   (b)   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the power to suspend
any license for a period of not to exceed sixty (60) days. In the case of
revocation of any license, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the
power to allow the use of the premises for the sale of alcoholic liquors after
ninety (90) days from the date of said revocation upon his determination that
the public good will be served.
   (c)   He shall also have the power to fine the licensee a sum not to exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000) for each act of violation, and the costs of the
proceedings, including reasonable attorney’s fees. The provisions of this
paragraph shall be cumulative to other powers given the mayor.
§ 34.17 COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate or maintain
any coin operated amusement device except as permitted in paragraph (b).
   (b)   Not more than four (4) coin operated amusement devices may be
maintained and used on any premise which is licensed with a Class C, Class D,
Class E, Class F or Class G liquor license under the following conditions:
      1.   Each coin operated amusement device shall have a current license
thereon.
      2.   No coin operated amusement device shall be operated based upon any
gambling game such as poker, black jack, craps and similar games.
      3.   The owner of the coin operated amusement device shall be licensed as
required in paragraph (c).
   (c)   The owner of any coin operated amusement device shall be licensed by
the City. The owner shall submit an application in such form as provided by the
City and shall undergo background checks similar to that of a liquor licensee.
No person may be licensed as the owner of any coin operated amusement device
who would not qualify for a liquor license. If the owner of a coin operated
amusement device is a holder of a liquor license, then no license fees shall be
required of the owner, otherwise a license fee of $250 per year shall be paid.
   (d)   A license fee of $100 per coin operated amusement device shall be paid
per year.
§ 34.18 HAPPY HOUR/REDUCED PRICE DRINKS.
   (a)   All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises
or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment
which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises more than one
establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel
or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate
schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
   (b)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
      1.   Serve 2 or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person
for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by the
bottle or carafe;
      2.   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
      3.   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in paragraph
(7) of subsection (c);
      4.   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
      5.   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
      6.   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under paragraphs (1) through (5).
   (c)   Nothing in subsection (b) shall be construed to prohibit a licensee
from:
      1.   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
      2.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      3.   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
      4.   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between
a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of any
function, meeting, convention or trade show;
      5.   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
      6.   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to
buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to 2 or more persons at one time; and
      7.   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole
or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled.
§ 34.19 TEEN DANCES.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct or allow a teen dance
on any part of a licensed premises at any time during the period for which a
liquor license is issued to those premises.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section a teen dance is any dance or party
which restricts admissions to persons under the age of 21 or under any other
age less than 21 years of age.
   (c)   This section shall not prohibit any teen dance operated by any unit of
government, any school located within the City of Hickory Hills, or any
religious organization whose church is located within the City of Hickory
Hills.
§ 34.20 ENTERTAINMENT.
   (a)   Contact sporting entertainment or events (such as boxing, kick boxing,
wrestling, mud wrestling, jello wrestling) between humans, between animals, or
between humans and animals are prohibited in any premises licensed for the sale
of alcoholic liquor.
   (b)   Non-contact sporting entertainment or events (such as, darts, bowling,
pinball machines and video games) are permitted in any premises licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquor provided that the machines are properly licensed.
   (c)   Entertainment such as live or recorded music, dancing, disc jockeys,
comedians, plays and theater are permitted in any premises licensed for the
sale of alcoholic liquor provided that a Class W license has been issued
therefor.
   (d)   Fashion shows and lingerie shows are prohibited in any premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor except where such shows are
restricted to viewing by patrons who have previously purchased a ticket off the
premises and the price of the ticket includes a charge for a meal which is
served to all the patrons.
§ 34.21 RESTRICTED HOURS FOR MINORS.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall be present on any premises which
holds a Class W Entertainment license between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. except as follows:
   (a)   When no entertainment is being provided in the room where the minor is
located provided that such room is separated by closed doors to the room where
the entertainment is being provided.
   (b)   When alcoholic liquor is not being served to any persons.
   (c)   When accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   (d)   When the premises are rented for a private party (such as a wedding),
no admission or charge is required to enter the premises, the premises are not
open to the public, and no advertising or publication of the private party is
made.
   (e)   In conjunction with a school or church sponsored event when chaperones
from the sponsoring organization are present.
   (f)   During the course of employment at the premises.
   (g)   When attending or participating in an amateur athletic event.
§ 34.22 VIDEO GAMING.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms, phrases and their
derivations, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed
herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      ACT means the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
      BOARD means the Illinois Gaming Board.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES means as defined in Section 18b-101 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-101.
      GAMBLING means: (i) the playing of a game of chance or skill for money or
other thing of value including but not limited to baccarat, twenty-one, poker,
craps, slot machines, a video game of chance, roulette, klondike, punchboard,
faro, keno, numbers ticket, push card, jar ticket, pull tab, bingo, lotteries,
and raffles; (ii) wagering on the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election; (iii) the playing or use of any gambling
device or the operation, keeping, owning, use, purchase, exhibition, rental,
sale, or bargain for the sale or lease of any gambling device; (iv) the
ownership or possession of any books, instruments or apparatus by means of
which bets or wagers have been recorded or registered; (v) sale of pools upon
the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nominations,
appointments or elections; (vi) the establishment or promotion of any lottery
or the sale, or offering for sale, or to knowingly possess or transfer any
policy ticket or similar device; and (vii) the knowing advertisement of any
lottery or policy game including the drafting, printing or publishing of any
lottery ticket, share, policy ticket or similar device, (viii) the knowing
transmittal of information as to wagers, betting odds or chances by telephone,
telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means, or the knowing installation of
equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information except that
nothing herein shall prohibit the transmission or receipt of such information
for the use of news reporting of sporting events or contests.
      GAMBLING DEVICE means any clock, tape machine, video machine, video
gaming terminal, slot machine, mechanism, table, furniture, fixture, equipment,
instrument or other thing used for the reception of money or other thing of
value on chance or skill or upon which the action of money or other thing of
value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, or which is primarily for use for
gambling. A “gambling device” shall not include: (i) a coin operated mechanical
device played for amusement which awards the player with the right to replay
such mechanical device and is so constructed or devised as to make the result
for the operation thereof depend, in part, upon the skill of the player and
which does not return to the player money, property or right to receive money
or property; or, (ii) vending machines by which full and adequate return is
made for the money invested and there is no element of chance or hazard.
      LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT means any licensed retail establishment where
alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption
on the premises, whether the establishment operates on a nonprofit or for-
profit basis. “Licensed establishment” includes any such establishment that has
a contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee
licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, provided any contractual
relationship shall not include any transfer or offer of revenue from the
operation of video gaming under this Act to any licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. Provided, however, that the licensed
establishment that has such a contractual relationship with an inter-track
wagering location licensee may not, itself, be (i) an inter-track wagering
location licensee, (ii) the corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee
licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, or (iii) the corporate
subsidiary of a corporation that is also the corporate parent or subsidiary of
any licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. “Licensed
establishment” does not include a facility operated by an organization
licensee, an inter-track wagering licensee, or an inter-track wagering location
licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 or a riverboat
licensed under the Illinois Gambling Act, 230 ILCS 10/1, except as provided in
this paragraph.
      LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT means the location where a qualified
fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal
organization regularly meets.
      LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT means the location where a qualified
veterans organization that derives its charter from a national veterans
organization regularly meets.
      LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT means a facility (i) that is at least a
3-acre facility with a convenience store, (ii) with separate diesel islands for
fueling commercial motor vehicles, (iii) that sells at retail more than 10,000
gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month, and (iv) with parking spaces for
commercial motor vehicles. “Commercial motor vehicles” has the same meaning as
defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of
item (iii) of this paragraph may be met by showing that estimated future sales
or past sales average at least 10,000 gallons per month.
      LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT means a facility located within 3
road miles from a freeway interchange, as measured in accordance with the
Department of Transportation’s rules regarding the criteria for the
installation of business signs: (i) that is at least a 3-acre facility with a
convenience store, (ii) with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial
motor vehicles, (iii) that sells at retail more than 50,000 gallons of diesel
or biodiesel fuel per month, and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor
vehicles. “Commercial motor vehicles” has the same meaning as defined in
Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. The requirement of item (iii) of
this paragraph may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales
average at least 50,000 gallons per month.
      LOTTERY means any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for
a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale, or some other name.
      POLICY GAME means any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by an instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device
that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in the
event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser or
holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
      TERMINAL OPERATOR means an individual, partnership, corporation, or
limited liability company that is licensed under this Act and this section and
that owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in
licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed large
truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed
veterans establishments.
      VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL means any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Board
utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive
free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include
a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement
purposes only,
   (b)   Gambling Prohibited. Except as otherwise excepted in this section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to gamble within the corporate limits of the
city, or for any person or entity which owns, occupies or controls an
establishment within the city, to knowingly permit others to gamble on the
premises.
   (c)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or
make unlawful the following activities or forms of gambling: (i) the keeping,
possession, ownership, use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a licensed
establishment. licensed truck stop establishment, licensed large truck stop
establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans
establishment, which is licensed by the Board and the City of Hickory Hills to
conduct or allow such specific activities under the Act and this section; (ii)
a licensee, licensed by the city, to conduct a raffle in accordance with the
Raffles Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.; (iii) a licensee, licensed by the
Illinois Department of Revenue, to conduct or allow bingo play in accordance
with the Bingo License and Tax Act, 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.; or a licensee,
licensed by the Illinois Department of Revenue, to conduct or allow gambling in
accordance with the Charitable Games Act, 230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
   (d)   Business Licenses and Video Gaming Terminal Fees. Video gaming
licenses shall be valid on a fiscal year basis. No video gaming license shall
be issued to an applicant that does not meet the provisions of this section or
who has not been issued an applicable license by the Board. The annual business
license fee for any person operating one or more licensed establishments,
licensed fraternal establishments, licensed veteran’s establishments, licensed
truck stop establishments, or licensed large truck stop establishments having
one or more video gaming terminal in the city shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per establishment. The annual license fee for each video gaming
terminal shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The cost of the video
gaming terminal fee shall be shared equally between the licensed terminal
operator and the video gaming establishment which owns or operates the video
gaming terminal. No refunds or partial refunds shall be given by the city in
the event either the licensed terminal operator or video gaming establishment
ceases operations. No license fee shall be prorated.
   (e)   Licensed Establishments. Any business, liquor or food licensee within
the corporate limits of the city that allows gambling to occur on premises in
violation of this section shall be subject to having his/her/its license
immediately revoked for a period of sixty (60) days. Any business, liquor or
food licensee within the corporate limits of the city that allows gambling to
occur on premises in violation of this section a second time shall have his/
her/its license permanently revoked and, thereafter, barred from obtaining any
business, liquor or food license within the city.
   (f)   Seizure of Unauthorized Gambling Devices and Gambling Funds. Any
gambling device which is not authorized by this section shall be subject to
immediate seizure and confiscation by the city. Any money or other thing of
value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this section
shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such gambling
devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance with the
law.
   (g)   Penalty. In addition to any other remedy authorized herein or under
the law, any person found in violation of the provisions of this section shall
be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 22-03, passed 1-27-2022)
CHAPTER 35: SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND PEDDLERS
Section
   
35.01   Definitions
   
35.02   Prohibition
   
35.03   No Solicitation Notice
   
35.04   Hours of Solicitation
   
35.05   Registration Permit
   
35.06   Registration Application
   
35.07   Application Processing
   
35.08   Revocation of Permit
   
35.09   Appeal
§ 35.01 DEFINITIONS.
   When any of the following words or terms are used in this Chapter, whether
or not capitalized, they shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   “Charitable” means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary purpose.
   (b)   “Peddle” means selling or offering for sale any goods, service, or
merchandise from any location on the public right-of-way or from residence to
residence.
   (c)   “Residence” or “residential” means any premises used primarily as a
dwelling unit such as a house, condominium or apartment.
   (d)   “Solicit” means selling or offering for sale any goods, service, or
merchandise from any location on the public right-of-way or from residence to
residence; requesting donations for; or distributing literature on behalf of
any charitable, civic, religious, labor or political organization or purpose.
§ 35.02 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit within the City
except:
   (a)   Peddling is permissible on private property at all nonresidential
premises.
   (b)   Soliciting is permissible at all premises at which a “No Solicitors”
warning is not posted provided that:
      (1)   The solicitation is for a newspaper, magazine or other literature.
      (2)   The solicitation concerns a candidate, political party, issue or
referendum to be voted upon by the residents of the City or to be voted upon by
any board of any unit of government whose boundaries include the City.
      (3)   The solicitation is by a charitable, civic or religious
organization registered with the Attorney General of the State of Illinois or
exempt from such registration under the provisions of 225 ILCS 460/3.
      (4)   Peddling and soliciting is permissible by prior written consent of
a person at the premises.
   (c)   Soliciting is permissible on the public right-of-way provided that the
only activity consists of the distribution of literature or signing of
petitions on a sidewalk to persons on a sidewalk and not to vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Soliciting for donations is permissible at a highway intersection
where all traffic is required to come to a full stop in compliance with the
provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-1006.
§ 35.03 NO SOLICITATION NOTICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit at any premises at
which a notice, sign, sticker or warning furnished by the City is displayed at
or near the entrance to the premises containing the words “No Solicitors”.
§ 35.04 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of
4:00 p.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday; before the
hour of 11:00 a.m. or after the hour of 6:00 p.m. on Saturday; or anytime on
Sunday and state holidays.
§ 35.05 REGISTRATION PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit without prior
registration at and issuance of a registration permit by the City Clerk.
§ 35.06 REGISTRATION APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to obtain a registration permit must complete and sign
an application provided by the City Clerk.
§ 35.07 APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   The City Clerk shall process every completed application within 14 days and
shall notify the applicant of its decision. The City Clerk shall grant all
applications that comply with the provisions of this Chapter. The City Clerk
may limit the number of permits granted for each specific time period with the
first applicant having the priority to the time period requested. No applicant
shall be granted a time period of more than 15 consecutive days in any calendar
year. All permits shall grant consecutive days to solicit.
§ 35.08 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The City Clerk may revoke any permit granted when the holder thereof, or any
person soliciting or peddling thereunder, violates any City ordinance, or state
or federal law, while soliciting or peddling.
§ 35.09 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Clerk concerning the
issuance or revocation of a permit may appeal that decision by filing a written
appeal with the Mayor. The appeal shall be decided by the Mayor within 5 days
of the receipt of the appeal. The decision of the Mayor shall be final.
CHAPTER 36: TAXICABS
Section
   
36.01   Jurisdiction
   
36.02   License for Vehicles
   
36.03   Insurance or Bond
   
36.04   License Card or Plate
   
36.05   Fees for Licensing Vehicles
   
36.06   Inspection of Taxicabs
   
36.07   Suspension and Revocation of Licenses
   
36.08   Taxi Stands
§ 36.01 JURISDICTION.
   The licensing and inspecting of taxicabs, the examining of applicants for
licenses to drive such taxicabs, and the licensing of drivers shall be under
the control of the Chief of Police.
§ 36.02 LICENSE FOR VEHICLES.
   No taxicab shall pick up passengers from any place within the city without a
taxi license. Such license shall be issued as of the calendar year and shall be
effective for such period of time unless sooner suspended or revoked.
Applications for licenses for the taxicabs shall be made to the City Clerk by
the owner or operator thereof upon blank forms to be furnished by the City
Clerk, and such application shall contain the full name and address of the
owner or operator, the class of the vehicle for which the license is desired,
the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is
capable of carrying, and the motor power thereof. Such application shall there
upon be referred by the City Clerk to the Chief of Police.
§ 36.03 INSURANCE OR BOND.
   No person shall be licensed to operate a taxicab until the owner or operator
thereof has complied with this chapter, and with the state law pertaining to a
surety bond or the insurance policy issued for the benefit of any person or
persons who might suffer damage by reason of the operation of such vehicle or
vehicles.
§ 36.04 LICENSE CARD OR PLATE.
   The license to be issued by the City Clerk as hereinabove provided shall be
in the form of a card or plate which shall contain the official license number
of the taxicab, together with the date of the inspection. Such card shall be
signed by the City Clerk and shall contain blank space upon which an entry
shall be made of the date of inspection of the taxicab by the Chief of Police
or any Inspector appointed by him. License cards shall be of a distinctly
different color each year, and in the case of taxicabs the license number
assigned thereto shall in each case be the same as that issued to the vehicle
for that year pursuant to law. Such cards shall be affixed to a conspicuous and
indispensable part of each taxicab. The design of such plates should be changed
annually.
§ 36.05 FEES FOR LICENSING VEHICLES.
   The annual license fee shall be paid for all taxicabs which shall operate
upon the streets of the city and shall be $25 for each taxicab.
§ 36.06 INSPECTION OF TAXICABS.
   The Chief of Police shall maintain constant vigilance over all taxicabs, see
that they are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use and to
this end the Chief of Police or his inspectors shall inspect all taxicabs from
time to time, or on the complaint of any person, or as often as may be
necessary.
§ 36.07 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Licenses granted under this chapter are subject to revocation at any time by
the Mayor for good cause shown or if it shall have been determined that the
taxicab is not in good condition for operation. Licenses when so revoked or
suspended shall not be reissued until the cause for such revocation shall have
been removed to the satisfaction of the Mayor.
§ 36.08 TAXI STANDS.
   No person shall make use of any public Street for a taxi stand without first
obtaining permission so to do from the City Council, covering the location or
locations, the manner of using such space and the time. Such permission shall
be revocable at any time.
CHAPTER 37: VEHICLE LICENSES
Section
   
37.01   Vehicle-Definition
   
37.02   License Required; Exemptions
   
37.03   Application
   
37.04   Fees
   
37.05   Term of License; Display
   
37.06   License Tags
   
37.07   Sale or Transfer
   
37.08   Late Application for Vehicle Licenses
§ 37.01 VEHICLE-DEFINITION.
   Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power,
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles as
defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 ILCS 40/9.
§ 37.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle to use or permit
the use of, or for any person to use, a motor vehicle without a current City of
Hickory Hills motor vehicle license displayed upon the windshield if:
      1.   The owner of the motor vehicle resides within the City of Hickory
Hills; or if
      2.   The motor vehicle has its base or situs within the City of Hickory
Hills.
   Any person or corporation desiring a license for any such motor vehicle
shall file an application therefor, with the City Clerk, upon a form provided
by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the description of
the motor vehicle, and such information as may be prescribed. Such license
shall issue upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee to the City
Clerk, and shall authorize the use of such motor vehicle within the city until
the expiration of such license.
   (b)   No license shall be required for any motor vehicle of the first
division, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, motorized pedal cycle, recreational
vehicle, including camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home, travel
trailer, truck camper, van camper, government owned vehicle and a motor vehicle
of the second division displaying a Class B or lower license plate; provided
that any of the above vehicles are not being used for commercial purposes. A
vehicle shall be considered to be used for commercial purposes if the vehicle
is registered to a corporation or other business entity, or if the vehicle is
driven in the City displaying a business name or information on the vehicle.
§ 37.03 APPLICATION.
   Any person or corporation desiring a license for any such motor vehicle
shall file an application therefor, with the City Clerk, upon a form provided
by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the description of
the motor vehicle, and such information as may be prescribed. Such license
shall issue upon the payment by the applicant of the license fee to the City
Clerk, and shall authorize the use of such motor vehicle within the city until
the expiration of such license.
§ 37.04 FEES.
    The annual license fee for each motor vehicle shall be as follows:
 FEE
                                                                        FEE
Motor vehicles of the first division, motorcycle, motor driven cycle,
motorized pedal cycle, recreational vehicle, including camping trailer,
motor home, mini motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, van camper,  75.00
government owned vehicle and a motor vehicle of the second division
displaying a Class B or lower license plate but only if used for
commercial purposes
Taxicab, livery, limousine, or ambulance                                100.00
Motor vehicles of the second division:
   Class D, MD                                                       131.00
   Class F, MF                                                       144.50
   Class H, MH                                                       168.50
   Class J, MJ                                                       176.00
   Class L, ML                                                       200.00
   Class P, Q, R, MP, MQ, MR                                         250.00
   Class X, Z, MX, MZ,                                               350.00
 
§ 37.05 TERM OF LICENSE; DISPLAY.
   (a)   Vehicle licenses shall be issued for a term of one year commencing on
January 1.
   (b)   A current vehicle license shall be displayed unless a vehicle license
for the subsequent term is purchased and displayed.
§ 37.06 LICENSE TAGS.
   Upon the issuance of a vehicle license the City Clerk shall deliver to the
licensee a gummed tag or sticker upon which shall appear the words “Hickory
Hills,” and a number identical with the number of such license and; the term
for which such license is issued, and it shall be the duty of the licensee to
affix such gummed tag or sticker upon the windshield of the motor vehicle, or
if there is no windshield, then in a conspicuous place upon the motor vehicle
where it can readily be seen. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle
although duly licensed, to be used upon the streets of the city unless such tag
or sticker is attached thereto.
   Immediately upon the sale or transfer of any motor vehicle which has been
therefor licensed as above prior to its date of such sale or transfer, the
vendor or transferor shall remove the license tag or sticker from the motor
vehicle so sold or transferred, and the license so issued for such motor
vehicle shall cease to apply to the motor vehicle from said date. Upon a
showing to the City Clerk that the tag or sticker has been so removed from such
sold or transferred vehicle, the City Clerk may issue for a fee of $1.00 a new
tag bearing a new number, which shall apply to and be assigned to any other
vehicle of the same class owned by the vendor or transferrer. Except as above
provided, no tag or sticker issued for or assigned to any motor vehicle shall
be used for or attached to or upon another and different motor vehicle.
§ 37.07 SALE OR TRANSFER.
   Immediately upon the sale or transfer of any motor vehicle which has been
therefor licensed as above prior to its date of such sale or transfer, the
vendor or transferrer shall remove the license tag or sticker from the motor
vehicle so sold or transferred, and the license so issued for such motor
vehicle shall cease to apply to the motor vehicle from said date. Upon showing
to the City Clerk that the tag or sticker has been so removed from such sold or
transferred vehicle, the City Clerk may issue for a fee of $1.00 a new tag
bearing a new number, which shall apply to and be assigned to any other vehicle
of the same class owned by the vendor or transferor. Except as above provided,
no tag or sticker issued for or assigned to any motor vehicle shall be used for
or attached to or upon another and different motor vehicle.
§ 37.08 LATE APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE LICENSES.
   For any motor vehicle an additional fee of 50 percent of the enumerated fee
shall be charged in addition for all licenses purchased on or after January 1
of the license term; provided, however, that such additional fee shall not be
charged to applicants who have purchased vehicles on or after January 1 of said
license term and who have made application for vehicle license within 30 days
after such purchase.
CHAPTER 38: OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES
Section
   
38.01   Definitions
   
38.02   Outdoor Pay Telephones-License Required
   
38.03   Public Outdoor Pay Telephones-Permit Required
   
38.04   Private Outdoor Pay Telephones-Permitted Locations
   
38.05   Determination of Nuisance
   
38.06   Removal of Private or Public Outdoor Pay Telephones
   
38.07   Restrictions on Service Provided
§ 38.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   Outdoor pay telephone is any publicly accessible self-service, coin,
or credit card operated telephone.
   (b)   Private outdoor pay telephone is any outdoor pay telephone located
outside of a building which is not a public outdoor pay telephone.
   (c)   Public outdoor pay telephone is any outdoor pay telephone any portion
of which, or its enclosure, is situated on, projects over, or hangs over a
portion of the public right-of-way; or is situated such that it can be used by
a person standing on the public right-of-way.
   (d)   Public right-of-way is the full width of any dedicated street, alley
or highway, including any parkway and public sidewalk.
§ 38.02 OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES-LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain an outdoor pay
telephone without having obtained a license issued for that specific location.
A license application shall list all locations by street address and shall list
the telephone number for each outdoor pay telephone. No outdoor pay telephone
shall be located on any private property without the permission of the property
owner. The address listed in the application shall be used by the City for
sending any required notices. The annual license fee shall be $100 per year
plus an additional $10 for each outdoor pay telephone. Licenses shall be issued
on an annual basis for the period of January 1 through December 31. The City
Clerk shall issue a license within 10 days provided that there are no
violations of this chapter.
§ 38.03 PUBLIC OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES-PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct or maintain a
public outdoor pay telephone without obtaining a permit from the City. The
Mayor is hereby authorized to grant permits for a period not exceeding 3 years
for the privilege of installing and maintaining a public outdoor pay telephone
upon such terms and conditions as deemed necessary in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare. A permit may provide for the payment of
consideration to the City.
§ 38.04 PRIVATE OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES-PERMITTED LOCATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, own or maintain a private
outdoor pay telephone under any of the following conditions:
   (a)   On any vacant property.
   (b)   On any property where there is an abandoned building.
   (c)   On any property which has a premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic liquor.
   (d)   On any property used for residential purposes.
   (e)   At a location within 100 feet of and where the users of the telephone
can be heard from a residential dwelling unit.
   (f)   At a location where use from a vehicle is allowed (i.e. posts are not
installed to prohibit use from a vehicle) which would cause the vehicle to
stand in a driveway or aisle in a parking lot.
   (g)   On any property or at any location which has been determined by the
Mayor to create a nuisance based upon prior actual use.
§ 38.05 DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to make the determination that the
maintenance and operation of an outdoor pay telephone at a specific location
constitutes a nuisance such that it has a deleterious impact upon the
surrounding neighborhood or upon the public health, safety and welfare. Prior
to such determination the City shall send a notice to the licensee stating that
the licensee has the right to file a written request within 7 days asking for a
public hearing with regard to the issue of nuisance declaration. The public
hearing shall be held within 10 days after receipt of the licensee’s request
and shall be conducted with fundamental fairness. Formal or technical rules of
evidence shall not apply. The Mayor shall make a decision within 7 days after
the adjournment of the public hearing. If there is no request for a public
hearing by the licensee, the Mayor may summarily determine that a nuisance
exists based upon available information. Upon determination of a nuisance, the
outdoor pay telephone shall be removed by the licensee within 7 days. Any
outdoor pay telephone not so removed may be abated or removed by the City and
may be reclaimed by the owner within 30 days after removal upon reimbursement
to the City for removal and storage costs. Any outdoor pay telephone not so
reclaimed may be disposed of as unclaimed property.
§ 38.06 REMOVAL OF PRIVATE OR PUBLIC OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES.
   The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove any private or public
outdoor pay telephone which does not have a current permit or license, such
being declared a public nuisance. The City shall send written notice to the
owner or operator at least 7 days prior to removal stating that the outdoor pay
telephone is subject to removal unless the permittee or licensee provides
evidence that a permit or licensee has been granted by the City for such
location. Any outdoor pay telephone removed by the City may be reclaimed by the
owner within 30 days after removal upon reimbursement to the City for removal
and storage costs. Any outdoor pay telephone not so reclaimed may be disposed
of as unclaimed property.
§ 38.07 RESTRICTIONS ON SERVICE PROVIDED.
   In order to combat loitering, street gangs, illegal activities, unsightly
graffiti, or conduct detrimental to the tranquility of the neighborhood, the
City may require that an outdoor pay telephone:
   (a)   Provide only one-way service such that incoming calls cannot be
received.
   (b)   Prohibit the transmittal of messages to pagers or other devices by
disabling the ability to input data other than the phone number called.
   (c)   Prohibit the acceptance of coin authorized calls from 7:30 p.m. to 4:
00 a.m. (or other limited hours), during which hours only credit card, third
number, collect, 9-1-1, repair, and information calls can be placed.
   Such decision shall be made by the Chief of Police based upon reported or
documented incidents of loitering, street gangs, illegal activities, unsightly
graffiti, or conduct detrimental to the tranquility of the neighborhood. The
City Clerk shall condition any license or permit upon compliance with such
restrictions.
CHAPTER 39: TREES
Section
   
39.01   Tree Preservation
   
39.02   Definitions
   
39.03   Preservation
   
39.04   Planting
   
39.05   Tree Care
   
39.06   Tree Protection
   
39.07   Tree Removal
   
39.08   Tree Replacement
   
39.09   Tree Preservation and Removal Plan for Significant Removals,
Construction and Development
   
39.10   Nuisance Trees
   
39.11   Invasive Species Control
   
39.12   Tree Board
   
39.13   Tree Permit Application Procedure
   
39.14   Tree Permit Issuance
   
39.15   Cash Bonds
   
39.16   Final Inspection
   
39.17   Compliance
   
39.18   Exceptions
   
39.19   Appeals for Variance
   
39.20   Civil Remedies
   
39.21   Penalty
   
39.22   Invalidity
   
39.23   Repealer and Passage
§ 39.01 TREE PRESERVATION.
   The purpose of this section is to set standards to preserve, protect and
enhance a diminishing natural resource, the portion of the urban forest that is
located on public land and to set standards for our urban forestry during the
development, construction and redevelopment processes. The complete urban
forest is comprised of trees across all land uses and ownership on public and
private land.
   The intent of this Section is to recognize the services and function that
trees provide as a collective asset to the entire community and to state the
goals of the City with respect to the protection, preservation, care and
planting of trees on public lands and tree preservation standards for
development, construction and re-development.
   Specific goals of this section are to:
   A.   Protect, preserve and enhance the quality of life and general welfare
of the City, its residents and its property owners; and conserve and enhance
the City’s natural, physical and aesthetic environment.
   B.   Preserve, protect and enhance the urban forest to ensure that trees are
properly planted and maintained within the City so that trees can protect,
enhance and preserve the quality of life for people within the City.
   C.   Recognize that trees are an integral part of the infrastructure of the
City and as such should be preserved, protected and cared for as other critical
City infrastructure.
      (1)   Trees absorb pollution from the air;
      (2)   Trees absorb and sequester carbon dioxide;
      (3)   Trees absorb and filter pollution from stormwater run-off;
      (4)   Trees produce oxygen;
      (5)   Trees reduce flooding;
      (6)   Trees stabilize soils and reduce erosion;
      (7)   Trees cool the surrounding area helping to reduce impacts due to
heat islands;
      (8)   Trees reduce energy consumption by shielding structures from harsh
winds and sun;
      (9)   Trees provide a buffer and screen against noise, light and
pollution;
      (10)   Trees improve property values;
      (11)   Trees improve commercial district buyer traffic and purchasing;
      (12)   Areas with trees have lower crime rates;
      (13)   Areas with trees have higher levels of community interaction;
      (14)   Trees provide important habitat for birds and other wildlife; and
      (15)   Trees protect and enhance our quality of life.
      D.   Trees provide the City collective benefits that extend beyond
property boundaries throughout the entire City.
      E.   Recognize that larger trees provide larger benefits. When a large
tree is removed and replaced with a smaller tree the benefits and services are
reduced.
      F.   Recognize that some trees may have a condition that constitutes a
threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property within the City or may be
dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in the City.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.02 DEFINITIONS.
   APPLICANT: An owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an
application has been filed for a permit. subdivision, or any activity requiring
the issuance of a permit. A contractor is an agent, acting on behalf of the
Applicant - the landowner.
   ARBORIST: Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a
related field and is licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited
forestry industry body, e.g. International Society of Arboriculture.
   BUCKTHORN: An undesirable exotic invasive ornamental shrub introduced to
North America. This species inhabits woodlands and savannas where it dominates
the landscape prohibiting the development of native trees and plants. There are
6 species of buckthorn listed in the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, 525 ILCS 10/1,
which prohibits the sale, distribution or planting of this species, Rhamnus
cathartica, davurica, frangula, arugula, utilis, and japonica.
   BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA: The portion of a property within which development
activity. including grading, excavation, storage of materials, construction
access and construction of both main buildings and unattached structures.
   CANOPY: The upper portion of a tree sometimes called the crown. This section
of the tree usually contains branches and leaves.
   CONSERVANCY OR PRESERVATION AREA (EASEMENT): An area under legal restriction
within which the following requirements are enforced: (i) all existing
vegetation shall be preserved for the purpose of retaining the natural
character or special environmental state or control; (ii) any area with a
special designation providing screening from adjacent uses or a public or
private street; (iii) no plant material shall be removed from or planted in a
Conservancy or preservation area without a permit from the City authorizing
removal or planting; (iv) Conservancy or Preservation Areas may be established
as part of the subdivision process or through the issuance of a special use
permit; (v) no undesignated structures, including fencing shall be located in a
Conservancy or Preservation Area; (vi) other restrictions as defined on the
plat; and (vii) in all instances the approved language on the plat shall
prevail.
   CUTTING: (i) Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in
the death or substantial destruction of a tree; and (ii) Cutting that does not
include normal pruning or trimming of trees consistent with good forestry
practices.
   DAMAGE: Impact or loss of function to any tree including but not limited to:
removal, root compaction, root removal, girdling, soil contamination, topping,
pruning more than 20% of the trees, canopy removal, bark removal, poisoning and
or/actions resulting in the decline or death of a tree.
   DECIDUOUS TREE: A deciduous tree is one that loses most or all of its leaves
for part of the year.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any proposed change in the use or character of land, including,
but not limited to the replacement of any structure or site improvements, e.g.
irrigation installation, driveway replacement, installation of a retaining wall
among others. When appropriate to the context, development may refer to the
receipt or necessity of any building, tree or site work permit.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): The diameter of the trunk of the tree
measured in inches at a point 4.5 feet above ground line. This forestry
standard measurement is used for established and mature trees and is referred
to as “DBH”.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROFESSIONAL: A degreed environmental scientist, biologist,
botanist, forester, other similarly degreed and/or licensed plant professional
with at least 5 years’ experience in planting and maintaining native plants and
their associated natural ecosystems.
   EVERGREEN TREE: A tree that retains most of its leaves for most of the year.
   FORESTER: An individual trained and experienced in the profession of
forestry who has a forestry degree from an institution of advanced education.
   INFRASTRUCTURE: The basic underlying framework or features that provide
collective services, including but not limited to roads, waterlines, storm
sewers, bioswales, and trees.
   INVASIVE SPECIES: An introduced or exotic species that significantly
modifies or disrupts the ecosystem in which it colonizes, e.g. buckthorn.
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A company or individual contracted to perform
landscape services.
   LANDSCAPING PROFESSIONAL: A registered landscape architect, horticulturalist
or other similarly degreed, experienced and/or licensed plant professional.
   LEGACY TREE: A Legacy Tree is a tree identified on the Legacy Tree list and
which has been recorded as such by the City. Legacy Trees are provided special
protection as outlined in the Legacy Tree Program.
   NATURAL AMENITY EXCEPTION: A landscape and preservation plan intended as a
substitute for the replacement requirements of this Section.
   NUISANCE TREES: Nuisance trees are trees that may provide potential impacts
to other trees, people or structures. This would include, but not be limited
to, diseased, infested, structurally unsound trees or known invasive species.
   PARCEL: A single parcel shall mean any lot of record, zoning lot or any
grouping of adjacent lots under single ownership, serving a principal structure
or use.
   PREFERRED TREE LIST: A listing of tree species, identified in the Urban
Forestry Management Plan.
   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: The main structure on a lot or parcel in which the
primary permitted use by right occurs.
   PROPERTY OWNER: An individual or organization who owns property located
within the corporate limits of the City.
   REGULATED ARTICLES: Any insects at any living stage of development, any
quarantined materials such as wood products including, but not limited to
chips, limbs, lumber, firewood, contaminated soils, or any other product or
means of conveyance which may be determined by Federal or State departments of
agriculture to pose a risk of spread of any infestation or infection.
   SIGNIFICANT TREE REMOVAL: Removal of a Legacy Tree or grouping/stand of
trees.
   SIMPLE TREE REMOVAL: Removal of a tree without other associated site impacts
or other site improvements.
   SITE: That parcel of land for which a permit for landscaping or tree removal
is sought.
   STREET TREE: Any tree located on or within the public right-of-way or right-
of-way easement.
   TRANSPLANTING: The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
   TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk
and canopy; growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed
trunk system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
   TREE BANK: A bank account established to receive and hold deposits for trees
which were damaged and/or removed. These funds, if not returned to the
Applicant, may be used to purchase and care for trees throughout the City.
   TREE CARE ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 22-09 of the City.
   TREE PERMIT: A written authorization from the City authorizing the applicant
to conduct work which may or may not impact a tree.
   TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A document required by a permit which identifies, by
common name and/or scientific name, certain species of trees of a specified DBH
within a particular area. The plan shall list all existing and proposed trees
and shall specifically state how each tree is proposed to be destroyed,
relocated, replaced, preserved at its present location, introduced into the
site from an off-site source, and whether the tree is to receive remediated
actions due to construction impacts, e.g. root pruning. The City may provide
that the Tree Preservation Plan excludes those portions of the site which it
determines will not be affected by the activity. Any Tree Preservation Plan
required by this Section must be dated within 36 months of the start date of
the proposed activity.
   TREE REMOVAL: The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any
tree, including damaging by poison or other direct or indirect action.
   TREE TOPPING: A misunderstood practice to limit the height of trees by
cutting back tree branches especially at the crown’s top causing a stubby
appearance, limited proper growth and promoting excessive shoots around the cut
areas which will ultimately weaken the tree branches, cause an abnormal shape
to the tree and possible death of the tree.
   URBAN FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN: A detailed plan developed and approved by
the City under the direction of a certified arborist or forester which protects
this valuable infrastructure and outlines thoughtful strategies for tree
planting, selection, care and preservation for the City and complies with
recognized national standards.
   VIABLE: A tree, which in the judgment of the City, is capable of sustaining
its own life processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable period of time.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.03 PRESERVATION.
   A.   The City shall retain at least one certified arborist. Any urban
forestry work completed by a contractor within the City shall be under the
direction of a certified arborist. This individual is responsible for
enforcement and compliance of the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   B.   The City shall complete a public urban forest inventory. The inventory
shall be maintained in a current state. The inventory is updated with routine
maintenance annually.
   C.   The City shall have an approved Urban Forestry Management Plan. This
plan shall be the framework for the protection, management and planting of
trees within the City and shall support and clearly define regulations
identified in the Tree Care Ordinance. This plan may include the following:
      (1)   A defined ten-year urban forestry strategy with clearly identified
one, five, and ten years goals;
      (2)   Community canopy mapping identifying existing tree canopy and
priority locations for planting;
      (3)   A strategy for completion and maintenance of a tree inventory on
public property;
      (4)   Clear guidelines on tree species and age diversity;
      (5)   Clear identification of replacement value and requirements for tree
removal or damage;
      (6)   A preferred tree list.
      (7)   Clearly defined specifications for tree planting, pruning, and
impact reduction;
      (8)   A risk assessment and management program;
      (9)   A legacy tree preservation and protection program including a
legacy tree list;
      (10)   A strategy for management, preservation and protection of
naturalized areas;
      (11)   A strategy for administration and implementation of a volunteer
program;
      (12)   Clear identification of staff qualifications, training, support
and needs;
      (13)   Specifications for contracted labor and consulting;
      (14)   Clear identification of forestry equipment and resource needs; and
      (15)   A forestry budget with one, five and ten year commitments.
   D.   The City shall require that any Contractor, working for the City who
may interact or have impact on the City public property urban forest utilize a
certified arborist for all work pertaining to trees, including but not limited
to removal, pruning and planting activities. The contractor must have a current
certificate of insurance on file with the City. This certificate should
evidence workers compensation, automobile and general liability insurance
coverage. Limits will be set by the City and the City should be listed as a
certificate holder. The certificate should also state that the City shall
receive at least 30-days notice of cancellation or non-renewal of an insurance.
   E.   Legacy Trees are provided special protection by the City and listed in
the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   F.   All tree planting, selection and management shall be in compliance with
the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   G.   It is recognized that diverse species and age structure of urban trees
throughout the City are critical to the health of the forest structure and
protects the City from catastrophic loss and improved longevity. Specifications
for species and age diversity, planting and management are contained in the
Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.04 PLANTING.
   A.   As outlined in the Urban Forestry Management Plan, the City shall
plant, and recommend to private landowners, diverse species with the ratio of
not more than 20% of any one family, 10% of any one genus or 5% of any one
species, with the exception of naturalized areas where species selections are
based on the natural species assemblages as defined in the Urban Forestry
Management Plan. Diverse species composition protects the City from
catastrophic loss.
   B.   Acceptable and unacceptable species, along with small tree species
approved for underneath power lines, are listed in the Urban Forestry
Management Plan.
   C.   All trees planted by the City or their agent shall be planted in
accordance with the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   D.   Trees purchased by the City shall meet the specifications required in
the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   E.   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in the public right-of-
way, or on other publicly owned property, without prior approval from the City.
   F.   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree under utility wires that is
anticipated to grow to a height that will interfere with the wires.
   G.   The City shall provide education and outreach to private landowners on
the need for species and age diversity, proper selection and planting
practices, and how to select species for particular sites.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.05 TREE CARE.
   A.   Tree care within the City, on public lands, shall comply with
requirements identified in the Urban Forestry Management Plan. It is
recommended that tree care on private property meet these same requirements.
   B.   Best management practices recommend trees should be pruned on a
cyclical basis as preventive maintenance. Cyclical pruning ensures dead
branches, storm damaged limbs or unsightly growth are removed before becoming
hazardous or bad for the health of the tree. Proper pruning tree care should be
completed within every 7 years for each public tree.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or employee to perform
topping of any street tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be
exempted at the determination of the City Arborist.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.06 TREE PROTECTION.
   A.   Unless otherwise authorized by this Section, it shall be unlawful for
any person to remove, injure or undertake any procedure which will cause death,
substantial damage, or create a hazard, to any public property tree without
first obtaining a Tree Permit from the City. In the case of tree management
practices, these practices shall comply with the requirements identified in the
Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   B.   Approved tree preservation plans are required prior to permits issued
for demolition and/or construction involving a principal structure. On sites
where demolition and construction projects are permitted, all trees not
approved for removal must be protected on site and in the parkway by protection
fencing prior to the start of any work or delivery of any materials to the
Building Activity Area. The approved Tree Preservation Plan shall be available
on the site throughout the entire construction period until final approvals for
all site work shall be received in writing.
   C.   In instances where the activity requires the use of heavy equipment and
where that activity may impact trees on public or private property, all
appropriate tree protection measures must be taken and identified in the Tree
Preservation Plan. In addition, all tree protection measures shall be in
compliance with the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.07 TREE REMOVAL.
   Tree removals are considered an impact to the entire City, whether on public
or private land. It is clearly documented that larger trees provide larger
benefits and as such, tree removal fines are based on diameter. It is
recognized that the planting of smaller trees does not replace the value of
larger trees that are lost. It will take tens of years for that value to be
replaced and for that reason efforts should be made to preserve and protect
trees where they are growing.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any individual to remove or cause damage to
any tree located on public property without first receiving a Tree Permit from
the City, except provided for in this ordinance. Failure to obtain a permit as
required in this section will result in a fine of $100 per inch of the tree’s
diameter at breast height and shall be levied against that person or entity
primarily responsible for the tree removed or destroyed. This is in addition to
the required tree replacement as set forth in Section 39.08 of this Tree Care
Ordinance.
   B.   No live, dead or dying tree, or grouping of trees, equal to 6 inches or
greater on public property may be removed without first obtaining a permit from
the City.
   C.   A nuisance tree is a tree that has already died, is in a state of
irrevocable decline, has the capacity to damage a person or thing or is an
invasive species. In the event of an emergency, and access to the City is not
possible, a nuisance tree may be removed without a permit, however, the
individual removing the tree shall take photographs and memorialize the
nuisance situation prior to removal and shall follow up with a request for a
tree permit from the City on the next business day.
   D.   Any tree, taller than 20 feet or larger than 6 inches in diameter,
measured 12 inches above the ground, removed from a parcel or transplanted
offsite must be replaced according to the regulations outlined in Section
39.08.C.
   E.   All stump removals shall require underground utility locations prior to
any action.
   F.   If a tree is removed or damaged which is not on the Tree Permit it must
be replaced as set forth in this Section.
   G.   Removal of invasive woody plants such as buckthorn does not require a
permit and is encouraged. These invasive plants can quickly colonize an area
reducing the health and vitality of non-invasive plants. A list of unacceptable
woody plants is provided in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.08 TREE REPLACEMENT.
   A.   It is required that tree replacement species come from the Approved
Species List as provided in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   B.   Any tree which is required to be removed or which has been damaged
shall require a bond to be posted until adequate replacements or remediation
can be made. Determination of extent of damage is at the sole discretion of the
City.
   C.   Any tree species removed, 6 inch DBH or 6 inch group of trees, which is
not identified on the invasive species list, but is identified on the Preferred
Species List, is required for replacement by this Section. All replacements
shall be located appropriately as confirmed by a certified arborist and as
approved by the City.
      (1)   Commercial, multi-family and planned unit developments.
 
Diameter of Removed Tree Number of Replacement Trees
6" to 12"                2 trees at 2" or 1 tree at 4" diameter
13" to 25"               4 trees at 2" or 2 trees at 4" diameter
26" or greater           6 trees at 2" or 3 trees at 4" diameter
 
      (2)   Single Family Construction. Single family construction must be done
to avoid destruction or removal of trees taller than 20 feet or larger than 6
inches in diameter, measured 12 inches above the ground. Any such tree removed
or damaged should be replaced by a species compatible with the existing tree on
a one-for-one basis. The number of replacement trees will be limited to what
can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area.
   D.   When a tree removal is required as a result of any project, tree
replacement shall occur within the landscape season. In the event of weather
conditions or species-specific needs, which prohibit proper replacement of a
tree, the City may issue written notice of an extension of up to 180 days upon
written request by the Applicant. If an extension is awarded to the Applicant,
the Applicant shall notify the City when replacement is complete. If, after the
30-day or awarded 180-day extension, the tree is not replaced or the Applicant
has not notified the City that installation is complete, all bonds shall be
forfeited and the bond money shall be placed in the Tree Bank.
   E.   All tree replacement plantings shall require an underground utility
location prior to planting.
   F.   If the property where a removal has taken place does not have adequate
space to plant a replacement tree, then the Applicant shall be required to pay
the City a dollar amount of $100 per inch of the tree’s diameter at breast
height per tree. Funds shall be placed in the Tree Bank for tree replacement or
tree care in the City.
   G.   It shall be encouraged that any species identified on the invasive
species list be removed. There is no replacement requirement for these
removals.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.09 TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL PLAN FOR SIGNIFICANT REMOVALS,
CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT.
   An applicant seeking a permit for significant tree removals or tree removal
and/or planting related to construction and/or development of the principal
structure shall comply with all requirements of this Section and the Urban
Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.10 NUISANCE TREES.
   A.   The following are hereby declared public nuisances:
      (1)   Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on
City-owned property or on private property.
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located
on City-owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree; shrub, or
other plant.
      (3)   Any tree, shrub, or other plant, or portion thereof, whether
located on City-owned property or on private property, which by reason of
location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public.
      (4)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on City-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light.
      (5)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on City-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the
view in the “visibility triangle” as such may be established by the City
Arborist or Director of Public Works.
   B.   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with
the City Arborist, the Director of Public Works or his agents. The officers,
agents, servants and employees of the City have the authority to enter onto
private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part
that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   C.   The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances:
      (1)   Any public nuisance which is located on City-owned property shall
be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the City Arborist or the Director
of Public Works in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the
nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
      (2)   Any public nuisance which is located on private-owned property
shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the property owner or his/her
agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance.
No property owner may be found guilty of violating this provision unless and
until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
         a.   The Director of Public Works shall cause a written notice to be
personally served or sent by first class mail to the person to whom was sent
the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         b.   Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other plant
or plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance; its location on
the property; the reason for declaring it a nuisance.
         c.   Such notice shall describe the premises by legal description,
permanent index number, or by address.
         d.   Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance.
         e.   Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less
than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         f.   Such notice may include a copy of this ordinance and a copy of 65
ILCS 5/11-20-11 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12.
         In the event that the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in
the notice, the Director of Public Works is authorized to cause the abatement
of said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a
lien against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the
property owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be
subject to prosecution under this Tree Care Ordinance. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of
obtaining permits under this Tree Care Ordinance.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works is empowered to cause the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by
the City Arborist or Director of Public Works to be an immediate threat to any
person, or property.
      (4)   The Director of Public Works is hereby empowered to seek from any
court of competent jurisdiction an order directing immediate abatement of any
public nuisance.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.11 INVASIVE SPECIES CONTROL.
   A.   Invasive Woody Plants. Invasive plants cause ecological disruption to
natural ecosystems. The type of impact varies based on the species and the
traits of that species. The Woody Invasive Species List is included in the
Urban Forestry Management Plan. These species shall not be planted and should
be removed and controlled to reduce impacts to other vegetation.
      (1)   Typical impacts include:
         a.   Chemical disturbance to the soil limiting development of other
species;
         b.   Dense plant growth limiting light to soil surface resulting in
exposed soil allowing erosion;
         c.   Displacement of naturally occurring species resulting in a
monoculture of invasive species and aggressive tendencies.
      (2)   The City shall have implementation and outreach plan to educate
property owners of the potential impacts and remediation strategies, including
a suggested planting list of alternative species to assist property owners in
dealing with the problem. This plan is located in the Urban Forestry Management
Plan.
   B.   Invasive Disease and Insects.
      (1)   Impacts to Trees. Invasive diseases and insects can create
significant stress to trees and in some instances kill trees. The City has
developed a list of Invasive Diseases and Insects that pose significant threats
to trees from information identified by State and Federal Departments of
Agriculture. This list is included in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
      (2)   Private Property Owner Outreach. The City shall have an
implementation and outreach plan to educate property owners of the potential
impacts and remediation strategies to help property tree owners in dealing with
pests or pathogens. This plan is located in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.12 TREE BOARD.
   A.   The City hereby establishes a Tree Board which shall be a recommending
body to provide assistance, direction and expertise to the City regarding the
preservation; planting, management and protection of trees. The Tree Board
shall develop and recommend implementation of an Urban Forestry Management Plan
for guidance on urban forestry issues.
   B.   The Tree Board shall consist of 5 members of the Community Affairs
Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the City
Council. It is recommended that individuals within the community who have
expertise in horticulture, forestry, planning or related fields be sought as
members of the Tree Board. A member of the City Council shall be assigned to be
an ex officio member of said Tree Board, without the power to vote. All members
of the Tree Board shall be property owners in the City. If a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed by City
Council. The appointed members shall serve for a period of 3 years. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. The Tree Board
members shall serve without compensation.
   C.   Community Affairs Commission. The Community Affairs Commission shall
perform the following expanded duties:
      (1)   The Community Affairs Commission, with the assistance of the
Director of Public Works and City Arborist, shall update the Urban Forestry
Management Plan. The Plan shall outline urban forestry program activities for a
minimum of the next 5 years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry
activities to be undertaken by the City, the reason for those activities, the
possible funding sources, the means of accomplishing the activities, the
alternatives available to the city to fund or accomplish the activity, the
projected date of completion, and the consequences if the activity is not
completed.
      (2)   The Community Affairs Commission, with the assistance of the
Director of Public Works and City Arborist, shall develop and annually review
and revise, as necessary, the Urban Forestry Management Plan. This manual shall
contain regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, and removal of
trees, shrubs and other plants upon City-owned property.
      (3)   The Community Affairs Commission shall make available to any
interested person information about the activities of the Community Affairs
Commission, copies of the Urban Forestry Management Plan upon payment of usual
copying charges.
   D.   City Arborist. The City Arborist shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   The City Arborist along with the Director of Public Works shall
administer the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
      (2)   The City Arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary,
including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable
trees, shrubs, and other plants located on City-owned property, to ensure that
all trees, shrubs and other plants located on City-owned property conform with
the Urban Forestry Management Plan and this Ordinance. Pursuant to this duty,
the Director of Public Works, in accordance with normal City procedures
regarding contracts, may arrange contractual agreements.
      (3)   With approval of the City Arborist, the Building Department shall
issue permits and shall obtain as condition precedent to the issuance of such
permits the written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that
he or she will comply with the requirements of this Chapter and the Urban
Forestry Management Plan. The City Arborist and Director of Public Works shall
have the right to inspect all work performed pursuant to such permits. If the
City Arborist or the Director of Public Works finds that the work performed is
not in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and the Urban Forestry
Management Plan, the Director of Public Works shall provide written notice of
this finding to the permit applicant.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.13 TREE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   An applicant for a simple tree removal or planting on public property shall
request in person or by phone and the City arborist shall make an inspection
and render a determination. If a removal or planting is significant or in
conjunction with any type of development of the principal structure, then a
full tree preservation plan and inventory for the area to be impacted may be
required. The City shall review the application. This review shall include an
inspection of the site and referral of the application for recommendation to
other appropriate administrative departments or agencies. The City shall render
a decision on the application within fifteen working days of its receipt of a
properly completed application.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.14 TREE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   A.   Issuance. The City shall issue a Tree Permit upon approval of an
application and payment of a $50 fee.
   B.   Time Limitation.
      (1)   A Tree Permit shall expire and become null and void if work
authorized is not commenced within one year from the date of the permit or if
such work when commenced is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of
one year.
      (2)   If work has commenced and the Tree Permit becomes null and void or
expires because of a lack of progress or abandonment, a new Tree Permit for the
proposed tree removal, planting activity shall be obtained before proceeding
with further work.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.15 CASH BONDS.
   A.   If tree replacement is required by this Section, then as a condition of
the Tree Permit, the Applicant shall submit a cash bond in the amount
determined by the Director of Public Works. The bond shall be held for the
purpose of assuring that the replacement trees are purchased and planted.
   B.   If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the
Hickory Hills Municipal Code have resulted in tree damage, then the City may
require that a cash bond, as determined in accordance with this chapter, shall
be submitted at the time the violation occurs. The bond shall be held for the
purpose of assuring that all remedial actions to minimize tree damage are
taken, and/or for the purpose of assuring tree replacement should any damaged
tree die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by a certified
arborist.
   C.   If the bond is posted for a tree and the property owner wishes to
transfer the property, then the bond shall be required to be paid before
transfer of the property or shall be refunded to the original property owner
once the bond requirements have been met.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.16 FINAL INSPECTION.
   Final approval shall be issued when all relocation, replacement or
remediation of trees is completed and a final inspection has been conducted by
the City. Should the City determine that the season is inappropriate for
planting then relocation or replacement shall be deferred until the next
planting season. All bonds and fees will remain in the custody of the City
until final inspection and approval has been provided in writing.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.17 COMPLIANCE.
   The City shall retain jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this Section
and shall have the right to issue a stop work order for non-compliance. No stop
work order issued pursuant to this Section shall be removed by the City unless
the applicant has paid a reinspection fee of $50.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.18 EXCEPTIONS.
   If because of emergency weather or other casualty conditions a tree is
endangering health, safety or property and requires immediate removal, verbal
authorization may be given by the City for the tree removal without obtaining a
written permit. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed in writing
by the City.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.19 APPEALS FOR VARIANCE.
   A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City representative in the
enforcement of any terms or provisions of this Section may, within 10 working
days after the date of the decision, appeal to the City Council by filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The notice of appeal shall set
forth concisely the decision and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. The
City Council shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision by majority vote.
The decision of the City Council shall be final and no petition for rehearing
or reconsideration shall be available. Reasonable notice of the hearing by the
City Council shall be provided by the City Clerk to all affected parties.
   B.   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this Section or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Section do not fully apply, or
an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The City Council shall grant
variations from the strict application of any of the requirements of this
Section in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict application
would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that would deprive
the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In granting any
variation the City Council shall prescribe any conditions that it deems to be
necessary or desirable. The City Council shall affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the City representative by a majority vote.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.20 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other remedies provided by this Section the City shall
have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this Section
or any permit condition promulgated under this Section.
   A.   The City may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any injury
caused by the removal or damage of trees in contravention of the terms of this
Section.
   B.   The City may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this Section
to enjoin any violation, and to seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable
injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the terms of this Section.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.21 PENALTY.
   The penalty clause contained in Section
1.06 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code is adopted herein by reference.
Violations of this ordinance may be prosecuted by citations through the
administrative review hearing officer.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.22 INVALIDITY.
   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be
held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other
provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
§ 39.23 REPEALER AND PASSAGE.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict herewith. This
ordinance shall be in full force and effect after passage, approval, and
publication. This ordinance is authorized to be published in pamphlet form.
(Ord. 22-09, passed 6-9-2022)
CHAPTER 41: TRAFFIC
Section
   
41.01   Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted by Reference
   
41.02   Reckless, Negligent or Careless Driving
   
41.021   Authority to Erect Traffic Control Devices and Signs
   
41.03   Speed Restrictions
   
41.04   Bicycles and Motorcycles
   
41.05   Clinging to Moving Vehicles
   
41.06   Use of Coasters, Roller Skates, Skateboards and Similar Devices
   
41.07   Spilling Loads
   
41.08   Parking Vehicles for Sale
   
41.09   Parking Heavy Trucks
   
41.10   Parking in Parkways
   
41.11   No Parking Places
   
41.12   Snow Route - Parking Prohibited
   
41.13   Street Cleaning
   
41.14   Towing
   
41.15   Presumption of Liability
   
41.16   Loading Zone
   
41.17   Parking at Night
   
41.18   Alleys
   
41.19   Cab Stands, Bus Stands
   
41.20   Parking Motor Vehicle on Private Property
   
41.21   Handicapped Parking
   
41.22   Weight Limits
   
41.23   Procedure Governing Issuance of Citations (“P” Tickets) In Certain
Traffic Violation Cases
   
41.24   Administrative Adjudication of Vehicular Standing, Parking and
Compliance Violations
   
41.30   Contracts for the Enforcement of Parking and Traffic Regulations
   
41.31   Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
   
41.32   Minors Crossing Highways
   
41.33   Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles
   
41.34   Electric Motorized Devices
§ 41.01 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (a)   In lieu of using any section of or in addition to the regulations of
this chapter, the officer issuing a citation may issue a citation under any of
the sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., from time
to time, which sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and all amendments made
from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this
chapter, and every numbered section in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be
referred to by the letters “HH” prefixing said section number. All citations so
issued shall be issued in the name of the City of Hickory Hills and referred to
in the uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance violation. The
Illinois Vehicle Code penalties for traffic violations shall apply to such
ordinance violations, unless modified or changed by this chapter.
   (b)   Any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code for which a violation is
deemed a Class A misdemeanor shall be treated as a petty offense where such
offense has been designated as an ordinance violation under this chapter, and
any reference in the Illinois Vehicle Code to a “Class A Misdemeanor” shall be
deemed replaced by the words “petty offense” when written as an ordinance
violation under this chapter. Such violations shall be punishable by fine only
in an amount not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 18-1, passed 2-22-2018)
§ 41.02 RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city in a careless,
reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or
property.
§ 41.021 AUTHORITY TO ERECT TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND SIGNS.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey any traffic control
device or sign, whether erected under the provisions of this Section or
otherwise. Every traffic control device and sign shall be deemed valid whether
or not erected in compliance with the provisions of this Section, any other
provision of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code or the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
   (b)   The authority to erect traffic control devices and signs on streets
and alleys under the jurisdiction of the City is hereby delegated to the
Traffic Control Board. The Traffic Control Board shall consist of the Chief of
Police, Director of Department of Public Works, and Chairman of the Public
Safety Committee. Any member of the Traffic Control Board may authorize a
delegate with full authority to act on all matters. The Traffic Control Board
shall make a determination, based upon objective criteria, including the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as to the erection of any traffic control
device or sign. The Traffic Control Board shall have the authority to establish
the objective criteria upon which it shall act, but the ultimate decision to
erect any traffic control device or sign shall be made by the majority vote of
the Traffic Control Board.
   (c)   The City Council retains the right to authorize the erection of any
traffic control device or sign.
§ 41.03 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise posted, the maximum speed limit is 20 miles per hour
on a street and 15 miles per hour in an alley.
   (b)   No vehicle may be driven at a speed which is greater than is
reasonable and with proper regard to traffic conditions and the use of the
street, or endangers the safety of any person or property.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in violation of any traffic
control device or sign.
§ 41.04 BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   No person shall operate or ride on a bicycle or motorcycle on any street
unless all persons thereon are riding on a seat permanently attached to the
vehicle.
§ 41.05 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving
vehicle upon any roadway. No person shall ride on the running board, fender or
outside step of any vehicle.
§ 41.06 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any skateboard,
coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street in a crosswalk.
§ 41.07 SPILLING LOADS.
   No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on
any street or alley.
§ 41.08 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled, or to park any vehicle upon any street
without state license plates upon it issued for such vehicle to the owner of
the vehicle in accordance with the Illinois Revised Statutes.
§ 41.09 PARKING HEAVY TRUCKS.
   The parking of heavy trucks with an empty weight of over 8,000 pounds gross
weight, commercial vehicles, tractors, trailers, any other heavy operating
equipment or any motor vehicle having a state license plate in excess of the
“B” category is hereby prohibited on all of the R1, R2, R3, R4 and R5
residential zones in the City of Hickory Hills at any time.
§ 41.10 PARKING IN PARKWAYS.
   It shall be lawful to park automobiles only on the following parkways within
the City of Hickory Hills provided that those parkways are paved and that all
necessary bumpers and markings are made, as required by the Chief of Police, to
safeguard any adjacent sidewalk, walkway, and any pedestrians using the same:
   (a)   From the north line of 95th Street to the south line of the alleys
immediately north of 95th Street upon 80th Court, 81st Avenue, 81st Court, 82nd
Court, 82nd Avenue, 82nd Court, 83rd Avenue, and 83rd Court.
   (b)   From the north line of 95th Street to a point 300 feet north thereof
on 86th Court.
   (c)   From the south line of 89th Place to the north line of 90th Street on
the west side of 79th Avenue.
   (d)   From the west Tollway line west for a distance of 195 feet on the
south side of 89th Place.
   (e)   From the north line of 95th Street north for a distance of 125 feet on
the west side of 78th Court.
   (f)   From 125 feet east of the east line of Roberts Road east for a
distance of 120 feet on the south side of 94th Street.
   (g)   From the east line of Roberts Road east for a distance of 58 feet on
the north side of 93rd Street.
   (h)   From 42 feet east of the east line of Roberts Road east for a distance
of 50 feet on the south side of 88th Street.
   (i)   From the west line of Roberts Road west for a distance of 190 feet on
the south side of 91st Street.
§ 41.11 NO PARKING PLACES.
   (a)   At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any
of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control
device:
      1.   In any intersection.
      2.   In a crosswalk.
      3.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the
approach thereto.
      4.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a
point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
      5.   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon, or sign on the
approaching side.
      6.   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk.
      7.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than 18 feet.
      8.   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant on any unimproved street or within
8 feet of an improved street.
      9.   At any place where a vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
      10.   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
      11.   Within 20 feet of the nearest driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within 75 feet of such entrance when properly sign-posted.
      12.   On any sidewalk or parkway except as provided in Section
41.17.
      13.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      14.   Within 15 feet of a mailbox in a manner to prevent delivery of mail
to that mailbox from a U.S. Postal Service vehicle during the hours of 8:00
a.m. through 5:00 p.m.
§ 41.12 SNOW ROUTE - PARKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to stand or park a motor vehicle on any street after 2-
1/2 inches or more of snow have accumulated thereon. Motor vehicles may park
after snow has been cleared from the street, but if more snow continues to fall
resulting in an accumulation of 2-1/2 inches or more, then standing or parking
is prohibited.
§ 41.13 STREET CLEANING.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the city at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs
indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted
immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be removed after the
cleaning of the street is finished.
§ 41.14 TOWING.
   The Police Department is authorized to tow vehicles in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code and the Municipal Code of the City of
Hickory Hills.
§ 41.15 PRESUMPTION OF LIABILITY.
   The fact that a vehicle which is illegally parked is registered in the name
of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the vehicle at the time of such parking.
§ 41.16 LOADING ZONE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any place designated as a
loading zone.
§ 41.17 PARKING AT NIGHT.
   No person shall park any vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on any street in the city.
§ 41.18 ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
§ 41.19 CAB STANDS, BUS STANDS.
   No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall
be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
§ 41.20 PARKING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
§ 41.21 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   No vehicle shall be parked or shall stand in any area which has been
designated by the City of Hickory Hills or any property owner therein as a
handicapped parking zone or area, except if said vehicle bears license plates
issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to Section 3-616 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code or issued to a disabled veteran pursuant to Section 3-609
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or if said vehicle has exhibited in its
windshield a handicapped identification card issued by any unit of local
government or township in the State of Illinois and said vehicle is being used
by a handicapped person at that time and place.
§ 41.22 WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (a)   A weight limit of 8,000 pounds is established on all streets within
the City of Hickory Hills except for 95th Street, 87th Street, Roberts Road,
88th Avenue, and Kean Avenue.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of the legal weight limit.
   (c)   It shall be a defense to a charge under this section that a vehicle
was taking the shortest route to make a pick up or delivery at a premises
located on a street with a weight limit. The shortest route means a path which
causes a vehicle to travel the least amount of distance on streets with an
8,000 pound load limit to reach the premises of pick up or delivery.
§ 41.23 PROCEDURE GOVERNING ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS (“P” TICKETS) IN CERTAIN
TRAFFIC VIOLATION CASES.
   (a)   Applicable Sections. Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest
a person without a warrant because of a violation of any section or provision
of this Municipal Code in respect to any of the following sections:
Sections Settlement Amount
Sections                      Settlement Amount
PARKING - Violation of all    $ See Schedule set forth in Sec.
Sections:                     1.07
Chapter 41
NO VEHICLE STICKER - IMPROPER
VEHICLE STICKER OR FAILURE TO
PURCHASE OR DISPLAY VEHICLE   $ See Schedule set forth in Sec.
STICKER - Violation of all    1.07
Sections:
Chapter 37
BICYCLE - Violation of all
Sections:                     $ 20.00
Chapter 41
TRAFFIC - Violations not
otherwise provided for -      $ 50.00
Violation of
Chapter 41
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE (IVC) - Violation of the following sections:
IVC Section                   Description                     Settlement Amount
                              Display of Registration plates,
3-413                         registration stickers and       $ 50.00
                              driveway decal permits.
11-305                        Disobeying a Traffic Control    $ 50.00
                              Device
11-801                        Improper turning                $ 50.00
11-901                        Failure to yield at             $ 50.00
                              intersection
11-1406                       Obstruction to driver’s view  $ 50.00
11-1407                       Improper opening of door        $ 50.00
11-1410                       Coasting on downgrade           $ 50.00
11-1411                       Following fire apparatus        $ 50.00
12-101                        Unsafe motor vehicle            $ 50.00
12-201(a)                     Driving without lighted lamp    $ 50.00
                              (motorcycle)
12-201(b)                     Driving without lights when     $ 50.00
                              required
12-201(b)                     No taillights                   $ 50.00
12-201(b)                     No red taillight                $ 50.00
12-201(b)                     Only one red taillight          $ 50.00
12-201(c)                     No rear registration light      $ 50.00
12-205.1                      No lights when required         $ 50.00
                              (specific vehicle)
12-208                        No signal lamp or device        $ 50.00
12-211                        Improper lighting               $ 50.00
12-212                        Illegal lights (red or          $ 50.00
                              flashing)
12-215                        Illegal use of oscillating,     $ 50.00
                              rotating, or flashing lights
12-301                        Defective or no brakes          $ 50.00
12-401                        Use of illegal tires (studs)    $ 50.00
12-405(c)                     Use of unsafe tire              $ 50.00
12-501                        No safety glass                 $ 50.00
12-502                        Mirrors                         $ 50.00
12-503(a,c,e)                 Obstruction of driver’s view  $ 50.00
12-503(d)                     No windshield wiper or cleaning $ 50.00
                              device
12-601                        Defective horn                  $ 50.00
12-602                        Muffler (loud; excessive noise; $ 50.00
                              no muffler)
12-603 & 603.1                No seat belts or restraint      $ 50.00
                              belts
12-606                        Tow trucks (identification)     $ 50.00
12-607                        Vehicle suspension system       $ 50.00
12-608                        Vehicle bumpers                 $ 50.00
12-610                        Wearing headset receiver while  $ 50.00
                              driving
12-702(a)                     No flags, flares, warning       $ 50.00
                              devices carried
12-703                        Dripping oil on roadway         $ 50.00
12-704                        Improper or no equipment        $ 50.00
                              markings (explosive carrier)
12-704.1                      Improper or no equipment        $ 50.00
                              markings (radioactive carrier)
12-705                        Flammable carrier               $ 50.00
12-710                        Inadequate or no splash-guards  $ 50.00
 
   Said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in
the first instance issue to such alleged violator, a CITATION,
      1.   Advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
      2.   Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said
alleged violation as set forth above as settlement of said violation claim; and
      3.   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be
filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County charging him with such violation.
   (b)   Final Notice--Penalty. In the event that the person to whom said
CITATION is issued fails to settle and pay said violation within the time
specified in the CITATION, a Final Notice shall be mailed to him. When, in
fact, the Final Notice has been mailed the violation may then be settled and
compromised by paying one and one-half times the amount set forth in (a)
(above) within the time specified in the Final Notice.
   (c)   Issuance of Complaint. In the event that the person to whom the
CITATION is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the time
specified in the Final Notice (if one is served or mailed to him), then the
police officer is authorized to cause the CITATION (Notice to Appear - “P”
Ticket) to be served upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file the
same as a Complaint in the Circuit Court of Cook County and prosecute the same.
The officer, as an alternative, may file a formal Complaint in the Circuit
Court of Cook County in lieu of the CITATION.
   (d)   Court Penalty--Settlement Before Court Date. In the event that payment
is not made within the time prescribed in the Final Notice and the CITATION or
a complaint filed in the Circuit Court, payment of any fine and costs shall be
in such amounts as may be determined and established by the Circuit Court, but
not to exceed the sum of $500 for any one violation; provided that the offenses
may be settled and compromised for the amount specified in the Notice to Appear
at least three (3) working days before the court date. Such amount shall be one
and one-half times the amount set forth in Schedule (a) (above).
   (e)   Correction of Violation. The payment of an amount as settlement herein
will not excuse securing of and the payment of a license fee provided for in
this Code or correction of the violation. Proof of correction must be furnished
before settlement is accepted.
   (f)   Parking Violation. The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which
is illegally operated or parked is registered with the Secretary of State in
the name of said alleged violator; or, in the alternative, in the event that a
vehicle sticker issued by a municipality has been issued in the name of and to
said alleged violator, shall be proof that said alleged violator was in control
of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such
alleged violation.
   The commercial lessor of any vehicle, whether or not the registered owner,
shall be responsible for such parking violation and subject to the penalty
therefor.
§ 41.24 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING AND
COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-208 and 5/11-208.3, the
City of Hickory Hills (“Municipality”) hereby enacts a system of administrative
adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and condition of vehicle regulation
violations of its City Code. For purposes of this section, “compliance
violation” means a violation of a municipal regulation governing the condition
or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel
tax.
   (b)   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance, regulation violation(s) shall provide for a Traffic
Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer Operator/System Coordinator
and Hearing Room Personnel (Deputy), with the power, authority and limitations
as are hereinafter set forth:
      1.   Traffic Compliance Administrator - shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
         A.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violation(s).
         B.   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this Ordinance or
as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance.
         C.   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
         D.   Conduct Hearings, as a Hearing Officer with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed
Hearing Officer.
         E.   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s)
verifying that the final determination of standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this Ordinance
and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
         F.   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation
of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
         G.   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment or validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension, in
an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance, hereinafter set forth.
         H.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate
and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
         I.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing Complaints in the
Circuit Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of this Municipality in filing Complaints seeking Judgments for unpaid
fines or penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by
current law.
         J.   To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and
impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
hereinafter set forth.
      2.   Hearing Officer - shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and
directed to:
         A.   Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as
the adjudicator.
         B.   Administer oaths.
         C.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documentation.
         D.   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) as are established in
Section I hereof.
         E.   Make final determination of:
            (1)   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability.
            (2)   Validity of Notice of impending impoundment.
            (3)   Validity of notice of impending drivers license suspension in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, hereinafter set forth.
         F.   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearing(s).
      3.   System Coordinator/Computer Operator - are hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative
adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including but not
limited to:
         A.   Input of violation notice information.
         B.   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.
         C.   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
         D.   Issue payment receipts.
         E.   Issue succeeding notices of Hearing dates, final determination of
liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of impending drivers
license suspension, as directed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
         F.   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
      4.   Hearing Room Personnel - are hereby authorized and directed to:
         A.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
         B.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court.
         C.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required
and as directed by the Hearing Officer or Traffic Compliance Administrator.
         D.   This position is limited to off-duty, full-time, part-time or
auxiliary police officers.
      5.   Appointments - The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to
hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
      6.   Compensation to be paid for each of the above stated positions shall
be as determined by the Mayor and approved by the Aldermen.
   (c)   The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing,
parking, and compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with the
following procedures and final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking,
and compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of
impending impoundment, validity of notice of impending drivers license
suspension, impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in
accordance with the provisions set forth below:
      1.   Violation Notice - vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation violation(s) notice(s) (“violation notice”(s)) shall be issued by
the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be
served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set
forth.
      2.   Authorization - All full-time, part-time, auxiliary police and
community service officers, as well as, other specifically appointed
individuals shall have the authority to issue violation(s) notices.
      3.   Detection of Violations - Any individual authorized hereby to issue
violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any
applicable Municipal Ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and
shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
      4.   The vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation
“Violation Notice” shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following
information:
         A.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
         B.   The particular vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violated.
         C.   Vehicle make and state registration number.
         D.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
         E.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
         F.   A section entitled “Request for Hearing” which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
            (1)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, “Request for Hearing”.
            (2)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.
            (3)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
            (4)   Filing the violation notice with the “Request for Hearing”
portion fully completed; with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked
within 10 days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed
filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
         G.   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which
the violation may be contested on its merits.
         H.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
         I.   A section entitled, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing- Non-
Appearance”, which clearly sets forth that a non-resident registered owner or
lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
            (1)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, “Non-Resident Request for Hearing - Non-appearance”.
            (2)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.
            (3)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
            (4)   Filing the violation notice with the “Non-Resident Request
for Hearing” portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall
be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
            (5)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds
for challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed, if post marked by the due dates
herein specified.
            (6)   A clearly marked statement that execution of the Non-Resident
Request for Hearing is a waiver of the non-resident’s right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the non-resident and the facts contained in the
violation(s) notice(s).
      5.   Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person
issuing such notice by:
         A.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, or
         B.   handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
      6.   The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) shall be certified by
the person issuing said notice by:
         A.   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service, or
         B.   in the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing
a single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
      7.   The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be
retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
      8.   Prima Facia Evidence of Correctness - Any violation(s) notice(s)
issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice,
shall be prima facia correct and shall be prima facia evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
      9.   Admissibility - The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
   (d)   An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits;
      1.   Shall Be Granted To - the registered owner or operator of the “cited
vehicle”, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the “cited vehicle”,
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference.
      2.   Hearing Dates - shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth
in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in
accordance with this Ordinance. Violators shall be given no less than three (3)
opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third (3rd) scheduled
hearing date will result in a “Final Determination of Liability” as hereinafter
set forth.
      3.   Shall be tape recorded.
      4.   Shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-liability,
made by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence
without the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The
Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and
penalties in accordance with Section 9 hereof.
      5.   Representation By Attorney - Persons appearing to contest the
alleged standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merits may be
represented by counsel at their own expense.
      6.   Review - The final determination of any matter which may be decided
by the Hearing Officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.
   (e)   Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the “cited vehicle”
to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final
determination of violation liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:
      1.   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the “cited
vehicle” at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.
      2.   Shall be sent to the lessee of the ‘cited vehicle’ at the address
last known to the lessor of the “cited vehicle” at the time of the lease.
      3.   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
      4.   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
      5.   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         A.   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the “cited
vehicle” to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), additional notice(s) shall be
sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the
following information:
            (1)   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).
            (2)   Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violated.
            (3)   Vehicle make and state registration.
            (4)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
            (5)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current
status, other than paid in full.
            (6)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which
the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
            (7)   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any
applicable penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the
date and at the time and place specified will result in a final determination
of vehicle standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability
for the ‘cited’ violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
            (8)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination
of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability for the
failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due and owing the Municipality.
         B.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent following an
appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to
appear by the violator by the third (3rd) and final hearing date upon
conclusion of any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set
forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information and warnings:
            (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is
a debt due and owing the Municipality.
            (2)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due
and owing the Municipality within the time specified may result in the
Municipality’s filing a Complaint in the Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine
or penalty rendered a Judgment in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f),
incorporated herein by reference.
            (3)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located
within the Municipality may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties
for five (5) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violations.
            (4)   A warning that the person’s drivers license may be suspended
for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing
or parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by
reference.
         C.   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine
or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violation(s):
            (1)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the date of the notice will result
in the Municipality’s notifying the Secretary of State that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5
incorporated herein by reference.
            (2)   The notice shall state that the person may obtain a
photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a
self-addressed, stamped envelope to the City along with a request for the
photostatic copy.
            (3)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
Secretary of State.
   (f)   A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability shall:
      1.   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or
penalty after the Hearing Officer’s determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of
or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set
forth, or
      2.   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third
(3rd) and final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged
violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served
or mailed notice, the hearing officer’s determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall become final;
         A.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination,
or
         B.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made.
   (g)   A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a
person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the
restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
      1.   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not
later than, fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability is
made.
      2.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall act upon the petition(s)
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.
      3.   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
         A.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made
was not the owner or lessee of the “cited vehicle” on the date the vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) were issued.
         B.   The person’s having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
         C.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      4.   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall:
         A.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that
the determination of liability has been set aside.
         B.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
         C.   Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid to the
address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of liability.
         D.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s)
are deposited in the United States mail.
   (h)   Non-residents of this Municipality who have been served vehicular
standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in
accordance with this Ordinance, may contest the alleged violation on its
merits, as could a resident, or may contest the validity without personally
appearing at an administrative hearing by:
      1.   Completing, in full, the “Non-Resident Request for Hearing” section
of the Violation Notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this Ordinance.
      2.   Signing the Non-Resident Request for hearing in the space specified
in the Violation Notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is
waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him/her and the facts contained in the Violation Notice.
      3.   Filing the Violation Notice with the “Request for Hearing” section
fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked within 10
days of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
      4.   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice
issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator. The acceptance of a “Non-Resident Request For
Hearing” after the due date or with cause, at the discretion of the Traffic
Compliance Administrator, be accepted for Hearing consideration and decision.
      5.   The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the non-resident as is
contained in the violation notice.
      6.   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be served
upon the non-resident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
non-resident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
      7.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
      8.   All other provisions of this Ordinance shall apply equally to non-
residents of this Municipality.
   (i)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall be as
follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
FINE SCHEDULE GENERAL FINE AMOUNT HANDICAPPED FINE AMOUNT TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
FINE SCHEDULE                                                          GENERAL FINE   HANDICAPPED    TRAFFIC
                                                                       AMOUNT         FINE AMOUNT    COMPLIANCE
Step 1
                                                                       (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at
Upon service of “P” or “C” violation notice, the fine amount sh1st Hearing)   1st Hearing)   1st Hearing)
                                                                       $ 50.00        $250.00        $ 50.00
Step 2
Having failed to pay or appear at the 1st Hearing as specified in Step (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at
1, the fine amount shall be as follows:                                2nd Hearing)   2nd Hearing)   2nd Hearing)
                                                                       $100.00        $250.00        $100.00
Step 3
Having failed to pay or appear at the 2nd Hearing as specified in Step (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at   (Prior to/at
2, the fine amount shall be as follows:                                Final Hearing) Final Hearing) Final Hearing)
                                                                       $200.00        $250.00        $200.00
Step 4
If a party fails to pay or appear at the Final Hearing as specified in (Final         (Final         (Final
Step 3, a Final Determination Notice will be mailed with the fine      Determination) Determination) Determination)
amount as follows:                                                     $250.00        $250.00        $250.00
 
      1.   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied
for each violation of any applicable Municipal Ordinance.
      2.   The Municipality adopts by reference all current and future local
standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those provisions of
the Illinois Complied Statutes governing the standing, parking, or condition of
vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical
boundaries of the Municipality and in those areas subject to off-street parking
agreements.
   (j)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
City after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten
(10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall make a Certified Report to the Secretary of State stating
that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty
due and owing the City as a result of ten (10) or more violations of Municipal
vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the suspension of
that person’s driver’s license.
      1.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the City are paid or
upon determination that the inclusion of the person’s name on the Certified
Report was in error. At such time, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall
submit to the Secretary of State a notification which shall result in the
halting of a driver’s license suspension proceedings. The person named therein
shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no
charge.
      2.   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the Certified Report by
completing a form provided by the Office of the Traffic Compliance
Administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
         A.   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle so
receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices
were issued; or
         B.   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten (10) or
more violations indicated on the Certified Report.
      3.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall render a determination
within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall
notify the objector of the determination.
   (k)   1. Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be
liable for five (5) or more vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s), for which the fines or penalties assessed remain
unpaid, may be immobilized or towed and impounded if:
         A.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for five (5) or more vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines or penalties for
which remain unpaid.
         B.   The person determined to be liable for five (5) or more
violations is the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the
Municipality geographical boundaries.
         C.   Pre-Towing Notice has been sent to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the Municipality
which contains, but shall not be limited to the following:
            (1)   That a final determination has been made on five (5) or more
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s), the fines
and penalties for which remain unpaid.
            (2)   A listing of the violation(s) for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
               (i)   The vehicular standing, parking, or compliance regulation
violation notice number.
               (ii)   Date of issuance.
               (iii)   Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(s) assessed.
            (3)   That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located
within the Municipality is subject to immobilization and/or towing and
impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid within fourteen (14) days
of the date of the notice.
            (4)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice
by fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice
and by filing the request for hearing with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
within, but not later than fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice. The
request for hearing shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
         D.   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is
sent has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the
notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the Traffic
Compliance Administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
         E.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the
validity of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment,
the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing
to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for the unpaid
Final Determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violation liability
listed on the Notice, on the next available hearing date, but in no case shall
the hearing be schedule later than sixty (60) days after the request for
hearing is filed.
            (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of
the hearing date upon the registered owner.
            (2)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to
the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
            (3)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is
placed in the United States mail.
      2.   The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section, shall have the right to a prompt administrative
hearing without the requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties
for which final determination has been made.
         A.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a post-towing
notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section which notice shall contain, but not be limited to
the following information:
            (1)   Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
            (2)   Location of vehicle.
            (3)   That the vehicle was immobilized under this section of this
Ordinance for non-payment of fines or penalties assessed for the violation of
five (5) or more violation(s) of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation(s) for which the registered owner has been determined liable and
notified of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
            (4)   Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.
            (5)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and signing the request
for hearing portion of the notice and filing the request for hearing with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later than, fourteen (14) days
of the date of the notice which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.
         B.   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the
validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next
available hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be
scheduled later than sixty (60) days after the request for hearing is filed.
            (1)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of
the hearing date upon the registered owner.
            (2)   Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid to
the address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
            (3)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is
placed in the United States mail.
         C.   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative decision
within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., incorporated herein by
reference.
      3.   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to
the registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the fines and
penalties due and owing the Municipality as specified in the notice sent in
accordance with Section K(1)(iii) hereof and the payment of towing charges and
accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the hearing officer following
hearing contesting the validity of the impoundment.
      4.   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain the
services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance herewith, provided:
         A.   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local and state law.
         B.   The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
         C.   The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound
area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this Section a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink or
otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or
prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
   (l)   Judicial Review of final determinations of vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative
decisions issued after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing
and impoundment made under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
the Administrative Review Law as is set forth in 735 ILCS 5/301 et seq.,
incorporated herein by reference.
   (m)   Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under
this Ordinance and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures shall be a
debt due and owing the Municipality and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty
resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a
final disposition of that violation.
   (n)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the expiration
of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for
a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all
required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a Judgment against and collect moneys from the person(s)
who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a
debt due and owing the Municipality in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 by:
      1.   Filing a Complaint in the Circuit Court praying for the entry of a
Judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.
      2.   The Complaint filed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the Municipality seeking entry of a Judgment
against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final
determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation(s) shall
have appended:
         A.   A certified copy of the final determination of the standing,
parking, or compliance regulation violation(s).
         B.   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
was issued in accordance with this Ordinance and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
      3.   Nothing shall prevent the Municipality from consolidating multiple
final determinations of standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation
(s) liability in an action in the Circuit Court against an individual.
      4.   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
Judgments.
      5.   Service of Summons and a copy of the Complaint may be served upon
the person against whom a Judgment is sought under the provisions of this
Ordinance by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/2-203, incorporated by
reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided the total
amount of fines and penalties for final determination of standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed $2,500.00.
§ 41.30 CONTRACTS FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   Pursuant to the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-209, the Mayor and City Clerk
are hereby authorized to enter into contracts with the owners of any parking
area located within the City for the enforcement of parking and traffic
regulations.
§ 41.31 AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM.
   As used in this section, words or terms shall have the following meaning
unless the context or usage clearly indicates another meaning was intended:
   Administrator means the Traffic Compliance Administrator appointed as such
through Section 41.24 of the Municipal Code of the City of Hickory Hills, and
who shall be authorized and empowered to: adopt, distribute and process
violation notices and other notices required by this section; collect money
paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law violations; administer
the administrative adjudication system for automated traffic law violations;
draft and issue any certified reports to the Illinois Secretary of State as
required by this section; and make the recorded images of a violation
accessible to an alleged violator by providing the alleged violator with a
website address, accessible through the Internet.
   Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device within the City of
Hickory Hills with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction
with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering
an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation
of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (“Code”), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or
similar violation of the Municipal Code of the City of Hickory Hills.
   Automatic traffic law violation means a “disregarding a traffic control
device” violation, as that phrase is defined in this section.
   Certified report means a report to the Illinois Secretary of State
concerning five (5) or more unsatisfied automated traffic law violations.
   Code means Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   Disregarding a traffic control device means: (i) a failure to stop and
remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as
provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code; or (ii) a failure to stop and
remain stopped, and not proceeding to turn right at, an intersection controlled
by both a sign indicating “No turn on red,” or other similar language, and a
red signal as provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code. Disregarding a
traffic control device, for purposes of the automated traffic law enforcement
system, shall not include: (1) those instances when a motor vehicle comes to a
complete stop and does not enter the intersection, as defined by Section 1-132
of the Code, during the cycle of the red signal unless one or more pedestrians
or bicyclists are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a
stop line or crosswalk where the driver is required to stop, as specified in
Section 11-306(c) of the Code, or similar violation of the Municipal Code of
the City of Hickory Hills; or (2) those instances where a motorcyclist enters
an intersection against a red signal indication when the red signal fails to
change to green within a reasonable period of time because of a signal
malfunction or because the signal has failed to detect the arrival of the
motorcycle due to the motorcycle’s size or weight.
   Recorded images means images produced by the automated traffic law
enforcement system, which consist of either: two or more photographs; two or
more microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or a video recording
showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.
   (a)   System Established. There is established within the City an automated
traffic law enforcement system program.
      1.   The City shall have the discretion to locate individual automated
traffic law enforcement systems at such intersections as may be deemed
appropriate.
      2.   An intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system shall be posted with a sign visible to approaching traffic indicating
that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law
enforcement system.
      3.   The City shall provide notice to drivers on its website of the
location of all intersections equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system.
      4.   Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system shall have a yellow change interval that conforms to the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (IMUTCD) published by the Illinois
Department of Transportation.
   (b)   Violation. It shall be unlawful to “disregard a traffic control
device” as that phrase is defined in this section.
   (c)   Notice of Violation. When the automated traffic law enforcement system
records a motor vehicle violating subsection (b) of this section, the
Administrator shall issue a written violation notice to the registered owner of
the vehicle, which shall be mailed within thirty (30) days after the Illinois
Secretary of State notifies the City of the identity of the registered owner of
the vehicle, and in no event later than ninety (90) days following the
violation. If any notice to an addressee is returned as undeliverable, a second
notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post
Office approved database of the owner of the cited vehicle. The second notice
shall be made via first class mail postage prepaid. Service shall be complete
on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail.
   No person who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a written lease
agreement shall be liable for an automated traffic law enforcement system
violation involving such motor vehicle during the period of the lease; provided
that upon the request of the Administrator received within 120 days after the
violation occurred, the lessor provides within sixty (60) days after such
receipt the name and address of the lessee. The driver’s license number of a
lessee may be subsequently individually requested by the Administrator if
needed for enforcement purposes. Upon the provision of information by the
lessor, the Administrator shall issue the violation notice to the lessee of the
vehicle in the same manner as it would issue a violation notice to a registered
owner, and the lessee may be held liable for the violation, and all other
provisions applicable to owners in this section shall apply to the lessee.
   Before a violation notice is issued, a determination must be made by a
technician employed or contracted by the City that, based on the inspection of
recorded images generated by the system, the motor vehicle was being operated
in violation of subsection (b) of this section. Upon determination that the
recorded image captures a violation, a violation notice shall be issued and
served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. If
the technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of
a funeral procession or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle, a citation shall not be issued. The Administrator, or his/her
designee, shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and
other correspondence mailed to the registered owner of the motor vehicle. Such
documents shall be kept in the ordinary course of business. Each violation
notice and the recorded images shall constitute evidence of the facts contained
in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding relative to the violation,
and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation.
   The violation notice shall include the following information:
      1.   the name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database;
      2.   the make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
      3.   the violation charged;
      4.   the location where the violation occurred;
      5.   the date and time of the violation;
      6.   a copy of the recorded images;
      7.   the amount of the civil fine imposed, and the date on which the
civil fine should be paid;
      8.   a statement that recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of
a violation;
      9.   a statement that a failure to pay the civil fine, or to contest
liability in a timely fashion, is an admission of liability and may result in
the suspension of driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle, as
well as the imposition of additional penalty of $100 for failure to pay the
original fine in a timely manner, and any costs of collection;
      10.   a statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the fine
or challenging the charge at the administrative hearing;
      11.   a statement that the payment of any fine, and the payment of any
applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation;
      12.   a statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested; and
      13.   a website address, accessible through the Internet, where the
person may view the recorded images of the violation.
   (d)   Hearing. The registered owner or lessee of a motor vehicle being
operated in violation of subsection (b) of this section may request a hearing
in persona to challenge the evidence or contest the citation by mail. The
violation notice shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to
rebuttal on the basis of applicable defenses. Formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing. Hearings shall be recorded, and the hearing officer shall
be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant book and papers.
Persons appearing at the hearing may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. A registered owner or lessee that fails to appear at a hearing which
he/she has requested will be found in default and a final determination will be
entered.
   The following defenses are the only defenses that may be considered by the
Hearing Officer for a violation of subsection (b) of this section:
      1.   the operator of the vehicle was issued a Uniform Traffic Control
Citation by a police officer for the same incident;
      2.   the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation. Provided, however, to
demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen
before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner;
      3.   the vehicle was leased to another, and within sixty (60) days after
the citation was mailed to the lessor, lessor submitted to the City, together
with a copy of the lease agreement, the lessee’s driver’s license number, and
any additional information as may be required;
      4.   the vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle;
      5.   the operator of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the
light was red in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or as
part of a funeral procession; or,
      6.   the respondent was not the registered vehicle owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle at the time of the violation.
   Individuals who have been served with a violation notice may contest the
validity of the violation, using the same available defenses as stated above,
without personally appearing at the administrative hearing. To do so, the
individual must complete and return the remittance portion of the violation
notice. Additionally, the individual shall submit a notarized statement of the
facts that he is relying upon to establish any one of the defenses referenced
in this section. The individual may also submit documentary evidence to be
considered by the Hearing Officer. By returning the remittance, the individual
acknowledges that he is waiving the right to appear personally before the
Hearing Officer.
   Any individual wishing to avail himself of this section must submit the
remittance and any other documentation to be considered by the Hearing Officer,
to the City, by the respond-by date listed on the violation notice. The
Administrator shall forward all timely-submitted materials to the Hearing
Officer for review and determination. The Hearing Officer shall make an
adjudication based upon the facts set forth in the notarized statement of facts
filed, any additional documentary evidence, and the facts contained in the
violation notice. Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be
served via first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the addressed to the
registered owner at the address listed on the Illinois Secretary of State
database. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail. Any individual may seek review of the Hearing
Officer’s determination through the mechanisms provided in this section.
   No additional fee shall be charged to an alleged violator for exercising the
right to an administrative hearing.
   (e)   Final Determination. A final determination of an automated traffic law
violation liability shall occur under the following circumstances:
      1.   upon the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the Hearing
Officer’s determination of liability and the exhaustion of or failure to
exhaust administrative review; or
      2.   where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified, the Hearing Officer’s determination
shall become final upon the denial of a timely petition to set aside a
determination, or upon the expiration of the period for filing the petition
without a filing having been made.
   (f)   Notice of Final Determination. A final determination of an automated
traffic law violation notice shall be sent following the final determination of
automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial
review. The notice shall include the following information:
      1.   a statement that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing
the City of Hickory Hills; and
      2.   a warning that a failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
the City of Hickory Hills may result in the filing of a petition in the Circuit
Court of Cook County to have unpaid fine or penalty rendered as a judgment or
may result in the suspension of the person’s driver’s license for failure to
pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more automated traffic law violations.
   (g)   Petition to Set Aside Determination. A petition to set aside
determination of an automated traffic law violation must be filed with or
mailed to the Administrator within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of
the final determination of liability notice. The grounds for the petition are
limited to:
      1.   the person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date of the violation occurred;
      2.   the person has paid the fine or penalty for the violation in
question; or
      3.   excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the Administrator, or his designee, shall review the petition to
determine if sufficient cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If
cause has been shown, the Administrator shall forward to the petitioner a new
hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case on the
underlying violation. The Administrator shall notify the petitioner of his
decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14) days of
his decision.
   (h)   Notice of Impending Driver’s License Suspension. A notice of impending
driver’s license suspension shall be sent to the person liable for failing to
pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five (5) or more
automated traffic law violations. The notice shall state the following
information:
      1.   the failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45)
days of the notice’s date will result in the Administrator notifying the
Illinois Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under Section 6-306.5 of the Code; and
      2.   a statement that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of the
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the Administrator along with a request for the copy.
   The notice shall be sent via first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database.
   (i)   Driver’s License Suspension. The Administrator, by certified report,
shall request that the Illinois Secretary of State suspend the driving
privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle or lessee who has failed to pay
any fine or penalty due and owing the City of Hickory Hills as a result of five
(5) automated traffic law violations. The report shall be certified and contain
the following information:
      1.   the name, last known address as recorded with the Illinois Secretary
of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease,
or as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice
sent under this section is returned as undeliverable, and driver’s license
number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty, or who has
defaulted in a payment plan, and the registration number of any vehicle known
to be registered to such person in the State of Illinois;
      2.   the name of the municipality making the report;
      3.   a statement that a suspension notice has been sent to the person
named in the report at the address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of
State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of the lease or, if any notice is returned as undeliverable, at the last
known address recorded at a United States Post office approved database; the
date on which such notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent;
and,
      4.   an unique identifying reference number for each request of
suspension.
   The Administrator shall notify the Illinois Secretary of State whenever a
person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded fine or
penalty, whenever the person has entered into a payment plan pursuant to which
the City has agreed to terminate the suspension, or whenever the City
determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such
notification shall also be given to the person named therein upon request and
at no additional charge.
   (j)   Challenging the Accuracy of a Certified Report. If the Administrator
provides a suspension notice and subsequently makes a certified report to the
Illinois Secretary of State, the vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of
the certified report in writing.
   The vehicle owner shall submit to the Administrator a written statement
under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the
following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report:
      1.   that the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle
or vehicles receiving five (5) or more automated traffic law violations on the
date or dates such violation(s) occurred; or
      2.   that the person already paid the fine or penalty owing indicated on
the certified report.
   A statement challenging the accuracy of a certified report shall be sent to
the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand-
delivered to the Administrator within five (5) days after the person receives
notice from the Illinois Secretary of State that the person’s driver’s license
will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the secretary
is presented with notice from the City certifying that the fines or penalties
due and owing have been satisfied or that the inclusion of the person’s name on
the certified report was in error.
   (k)   Penalty. Any person violating section 6-109 of this section shall be
fined $100 for each offense. If a person fails pay the applicable fine within
fourteen (14) days following a Final Determination of Liability, an additional
penalty of $100 will be automatically assessed against the violator. Any costs
incurred by the City to collect penalties (including attorney’s fees and
collection agency fees) not paid in a timely manner shall be assessed against a
violator.
(Ord. 18-4, passed 5-10-2018)
§ 41.32 MINORS CROSSING HIGHWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 to cross Roberts
Road or 95th Street, except as follows:
   (a)   At a traffic control signal with a green light.
   (b)   At a designated crosswalk.
   (c)   As directed by a school crossing guard or police officer.
   (d)   As directed by an adult in the company of the minors.
§ 41.33 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   “Aggravated speeding” means any violation as defined in § 11-601.5(a) of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-601.5), as amended from time to time.
   “Controlled substance” means any substance as defined and included in the
schedules contained in Article II of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (720
ILCS 570/101 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and cannabis (more than
thirty (30) grams) as defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1 et seq.).
   “Curfew violation” means a violation of § 12C-60 of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 2012, as amended from time to time, and/or a violation of §
42.17 of the Hickory Hills Municipal Code.
   “Drag racing” means a violation of § 11-506(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/11-506), as amended from time to time.
   “Driving under the influence” means any violation as defined in § 11-501 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501), as amended from time to time.
   “Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked” means any violation as defined in § 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time, excepting those
instances where a license has been suspended or revoked as a result of vehicle
emissions.
   “Drug paraphernalia” means any equipment, product, and/or materials as
defined in § 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act (720 ILCS 600/2), as amended from
time to time.
   “During or after the commission of a felony” means during or returning from
the commission of a felony as defined by Illinois and federal statute.
   “Fleeing and eluding a peace officer” means any violation as defined in §
11-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-204), as amended from time
to time.
   “Hearing officer” means a licensed attorney who is not an officer or
employee of the city.
   “Illegal transportation of open alcohol” means any violation as defined in §
11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-502), as amended from time
to time.
   “Leaving the scene of an accident” means a violation of § 11-401 (625 ILCS
5/11-401) or § 11-402 (625 ILCS 5/11-402) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
amended from time to time.
   “Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid drivers license” means a
violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-101), as
amended from time to time, where the driver’s license or driving privileges
canceled or never obtained.
   “Outstanding criminal warrant” shall mean any valid and active criminal
warrant.
   “Owner of record” means the record title holder to a motor vehicle.
   “Reckless driving” means a violation of § 11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/11-503), as amended from time to time.
   “Screeching tires” means a violation of § 11-505 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/11-505), as amended from time to time.
   “Solicitation of prostitution” means a violation of one or more of the
following statutes of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, as amended:
“Prostitution” (720 ILCS 5/11-14); “Solicitation of a Sexual Act” (720 ILCS 5/
11-14.1); or “Patronizing a Minor Engaged in Prostitution” (720 ILCS 5/11-18.1.
   “Street sideshow” means a violation of § 11-506(a-5) of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/11-506), as amended from time to time.
   “Stolen goods or property” means any goods or property illegally obtained or
not paid for with full consideration.
   “Traffic interference” means a violation of § 11-506(b-5) of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-506), as amended from time to time.
   “Underage possession of alcohol” means the possession of any alcoholic
beverage(s) without an individual of legal age being present and in possession
of said alcohol or without any exemptions under the law being applicable.
   “Unlawful use of weapons” means a violation of one or more of the following
statutes of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, as amended: “Unlawful Use of
Weapons” (720 ILCS 5/24-1); “Unlawful Possession of Firearms and Firearm
Ammunition” (720 ILCS 5/24-3.1); or, “Unlawful Sale or Delivery of Firearms on
the Premises of any School” (720 ILCS 5/24-3.3).
   (b)   Violations. An owner of record shall be in violation of this section
if his/her vehicle is used in conjunction with the following offenses/
activities:
      1.   Aggravated speeding;
      2.   Unless otherwise authorized by state law, the possession or delivery
of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia;
      3.   Curfew violation;
      4.   Drag racing;
      5.   Driving during or after the commission of a felony;
      6.   Driving under the influence;
      7.   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is suspended or revoked;
      8.   Operating a vehicle with an outstanding criminal warrant;
      9.   Fleeing and eluding a peace officer;
      10.   Illegal transportation of open alcohol;
      11.   Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid driver’s license;
      12.   Reckless driving;
      13.   Solicitation of prostitution;
      14.   Transportation or possession of stolen goods or property;
      15.   Underage possession of alcohol;
      16.   Unlawful use of weapons;
      17.   Leaving the scene of an accident;
      18.   Street sideshow;
      19.   Traffic interference; and
      20.   Screeching tires.
   (c)   Seizures and Impoundment of Vehicles. A motor vehicle used in the
manner described in subsection (b) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment.
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer
shall cause the motor vehicle to be towed to a facility controlled by the City
or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any
person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any person
who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the
vehicle owners right to request a preliminary hearing as provided in subsection
(e). Any police officer who has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment under this section shall first ascertain
whether the impoundment is necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If
the vehicle is capable of being removed from the scene by an individual who is
present on the scene, and who has permission from the owner of the vehicle to
drive the vehicle, and the individual is otherwise capable of lawfully
operating a motor vehicle in the State of Illinois, the police officer shall
allow that individual to remove the vehicle without being subject to seizure
and impoundment. Similarly, if the vehicle is parked legally, and/or will not
present a hazard to the public safety or otherwise jeopardize the efficient
movement of vehicular traffic at its location, the officer shall permit the
vehicle to remain at its location without being seized or impounded pursuant to
this subsection. This determination shall not apply when the vehicle is
required to be seized or impounded due to investigative measures or when a
vehicle is seized or impounded pursuant to another lawful purpose. When a
vehicle is not seized or impounded pursuant to this section, the owner shall
not be required to post the requisite a $500.00 bond as referenced in
subsection (d).
   (d)   Posting a Bond. Any vehicle seized and impounded under subsection (c)
shall be held as bond to secure the personal appearance of the owner at the
administrative hearing. If a cash bond in the amount of $500.00 is posted with
the City, the impounded vehicle will be released to the owner of record, upon
the payment by the owner of record of the towing and storage costs. If a
penalty is imposed for a violation of subsection (b), the cash bond will be
forfeited to the City; provided, however, in the event that a violation of
subsection (b) is not proven, the cash bond will be returned to the person
posting the bond. All cash bond money posted pursuant to this subsection will
be held by the City until the hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there
is a judicial review, until a reviewing court issues a final decision.
   (e)   Preliminary Hearing. Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under
the provisions of this section requests a preliminary hearing within twelve
(12) hours after the seizure of the motor vehicle, the Watch Commander or any
supervising officer must conduct a preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24)
hours after the request for preliminary hearing is received by the City;
provided, however, that if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary hearing will be held on the next
business day following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. No preliminary
hearing shall be required or granted to an owner whose vehicle was not seized
or impounded pursuant to this section. For purposes of this subsection, the
following shall apply:
      1.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
      2.   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      3.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Watch Commander or
supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in subsection (b), he/she shall order
the continued impoundment of the vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts
a cash bond with the City in the amount of $500.00, plus the towing and storage
costs.
      4.   If the Watch Commander or supervising officer determines that there
is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove
provided in subsection (b), the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of
record of the vehicle without any penalty or other costs.
   (f)   Final Hearing. The following procedures shall govern the final hearing
with respect to the underlying violation and subsequent seizure:
      1.   Notice of Hearing. Within forty-five (45) days after a vehicle is
seized and impounded pursuant to this article, the City shall notify the owner
of record of the motor vehicle, the date, time and location of a hearing. Such
notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner of record, as shown on the records of the Illinois Secretary of State.
      2.   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
the owner’s hearing:
         A.   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing
shall be held within forty-five (45) days after the motor vehicle was seized.
         B.   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the final hearing.
         C.   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in
violation of subsection (b), and otherwise determines that the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle was proper pursuant to subsection (c), the hearing
officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the owner of
the vehicle pays to the City a penalty in the amount of $500.00, plus the
towing and storage costs. In the event the vehicle was not impounded, an order
shall be entered wherein the owner of record shall be liable to the City in the
amount of $500.00. The penalty and costs shall be a debt due and owing to the
City.
         D.   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the
hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the City, which
order shall require the payment to the City of an administrative penalty of
$500.00.
         E.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used
as hereinabove provided in violation of subsection (b), the motor vehicle will
be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty or other
costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the cash bond shall be
returned.
         F.   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was used in
violation of subsection (b), but determines that the vehicle was not properly
subject to seizure or impoundment under subsection (c), the hearing officer
shall enter a judgment against the owner in the amount of $500.00 and release
the seized vehicle without towing and storage costs and/or order the
reimbursement of towing and storage costs if the vehicle was previously
released. The penalty shall be a debt due and owing to the City.
         G.   The ticket issued shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
offense stated was committed.
   (g)   Unclaimed Vehicles.
      1.   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the action of the City under this section, or the time at which a
final judgment is rendered in favor of the City, or the time at which a final
administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in
default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise
provided by law.
      2.   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within
eighty (80) days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this section, the
vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless
a petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction.
Where a petition for judicial review of the hearing officer’s determination is
filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be
deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If the petition for judicial
review is resolved in favor of the City, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned
and may be disposed of by the City if the penalty and towing and storage costs
are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the Court’s order.
   (h)   Liability for Penalties and Costs.
      1.   The owner of record of a motor vehicle, who is found to be in
violation of subsection (b) shall be liable to the City for a penalty of
$500.00 in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the motor
vehicle, if applicable.
      2.   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company,
not by the City.
      3.   A vehicle impounded pursuant to subsection (c) shall remain
impounded until the earlier of the following occurs:
         A.   The penalty is paid to the City and all towing and storage costs
are paid to the towing company;
         B.   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as herein
provided in subparagraph 2. is posted with the City and all applicable towing
and storage costs are paid to the towing company;
         C.   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall
be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
or unclaimed vehicles; and
         D.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien
holder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this section until the penalty and all towing and
storage costs applicable under this section have been paid in full.
Notwithstanding the above, in the event a lienholder has commenced foreclosure
proceedings, pays the applicable towing and storage costs, and executes an
agreement with the City to refund to the City the net proceeds of any
foreclosure sale of $500.00, less any amounts necessary to pay any lienholders
of record having priority over the City’s claim. The lienholder shall submit
the following documents to the City as evidence that it has commenced
foreclosure proceedings: (1) a certificate of title showing the lienholder as
having first priority; (2) the motor vehicle installment agreement; (3) a
notarized affidavit detailing the default of the owner/purchaser and any steps
taken by the lienholder to give notice or an opportunity to owner/purchaser in
accordance with its contract; and (4) identification of any contract provisions
granting the lienholder right of possession.
(Ord. 25-04, passed 5-22-2025)
§ 41.34 ELECTRIC MOTORIZED DEVICES.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
      “High-speed electric bicycle” means a bicycle equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor that provides assistance when the rider
is pedaling and that is capable of reaching speeds in excess of 28 miles per
hour. A high-speed electric bicycle shall not include a moped or a motor driven
cycle operated on a public street that is duly registered, complies with all
equipment regulations of the Illinois Vehicle Code (the "IVC") and is operated
by a duly licensed operator.
      “High-speed electric scooter” means a device weighing more or less than
100 pounds, with two or three wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be
stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an electric motor and human
power, and whose maximum speed, with or without human propulsion, is greater
than ten miles per hour. A high-speed electric scooter shall not include a
motor driven cycle operated on a public street that is duly registered,
complies with all equipment regulations of the IVC, and is operated by a duly
licensed operator.
      “Low-speed electric bicycle” means a bicycle equipped with fully operable
pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements
of one of the following classes:
         (i)   Class I: An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour;
         (ii)   Class II: An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that may be
used exclusively to propel the bicycle and that is not capable of providing
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour; or
         (iii)   Class III: A bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 28 miles per hour.
         A low-speed electric bicycle does not include a moped or a motor
driven cycle.
      “Low-speed electric scooter” means a device weighing less than 100
pounds, with two or three wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be
stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an electric motor and human
power, and whose maximum speed, with or without human propulsion, is no more
than ten miles per hour. A low-speed electric scooter does not include a moped
or motor driven cycle.
      “Other personal use vehicle” means any other vehicle or device that is
powered in whole or part electrically or by internal combustion, or both, that
is not an electric bicycle or electric scooter, as defined in this section, and
is not otherwise required to be registered by the State of Illinois under the
IVC including, but not limited to, motorized unicycles, motorized skateboards,
motorized hoverboards, dirt bikes, pocket bikes, all-terrain vehicles,
recreational off-highway vehicles, and golf carts.
   (b)   Locational Prohibitions.
      (i)   No low-speed electric bicycle may be operated on any sidewalk,
trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, parkway, or public park
in the City.
      (ii)   No low-speed electric scooter may be operated on any sidewalk,
trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, parkway, or public park
in the City.
      (iii)   No low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed electric scooter may
be operated on or across any public street having a posted speed limit of 25
miles per hour or greater.
      (iv)   No high-speed electric bicycle or high-speed electric scooter may
be operated on any public street, sidewalk, trail, walking path, bicycle path,
public parking lot, public park, parkway, or other public property in the City.
      (v)   No other personal use vehicle may be operated on any public street,
sidewalk, trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, public park,
parkway, or other public property in the City.
   (c)   Low-Speed Electric Bicycles; Operating Requirements. Where not
otherwise prohibited on public property, the operation of all low-speed
electric bicycles shall be a permitted use (but not an intended use) subject to
the following:
      (i)   No person that does not possess a valid driver's license shall
operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public street.
      (ii)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street that:
         (A)   Does not comply with equipment and manufacturing requirements
adopted by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR
1512; and
         (B)   Does not have permanently affixed to the bicycle in a prominent
location a label containing, in Arial font in at least 9-point type, the
following information:
            (1)   A classification number for the bicycle that corresponds with
a class under this section;
            (2)   The bicycle's top assisted speed; and
            (3)   The bicycle's motor wattage.
      (iii)   No person shall operate a Class I low-speed electric bicycle on
any public street that does not, when pedaling stops or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (iv)   No person shall operate a Class II low-speed electric bicycle on
any public street that does not, when brakes are applied or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (v)   No person shall operate a Class III low-speed electric bicycle on
any public street that does not, when pedaling stops or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 28 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (vi)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street the speed capability or engagement of which has been tampered or
modified without replacing the label required under this subsection (c)(ii)(B).
      (vii)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any
public street at nighttime (30 minutes following sunset) that is not equipped
with and have operational a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on
the rear that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead
of the red reflector.
      (viii)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle that is not
otherwise well-maintained and in good operating condition.
      (ix)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street while carrying any package, bundle or article that prevents the operator
from safely maintaining control of the bicycle nor shall the person operate the
low-speed electric bicycle while distracted in any way, including while using a
cell phone.
      (x)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street while carrying another person or animal thereupon.
      (xi)   No person operating a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street shall fail to yield to all other persons, animals, and devices on or
using said street.
      (xii)   No person operating a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street shall fail to adhere to any other local, state, or federal law, rule,
regulation, or order governing the condition or movement of the same.
   (d)   Low-Speed Electric Scooters; Operating Requirements. Where not
otherwise prohibited on public property, the operation of all low-speed
electric scooters shall be a permitted use (but not an intended use) subject to
the following:
      (i)   No person under the age of 18 shall operate a low-speed electric
scooter on any public street.
      (ii)   No person that does not possess a valid driver's license shall
operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public street.
      (iii)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any
public street that is not equipped with a brake that will adequately control
movement of and stop and hold the low-speed electric scooter.
      (iv)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street at nighttime (30 minutes following sunset) that is not equipped with a
lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear that is visible from
all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting
a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      (v)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street that is not otherwise well-maintained and in good operating condition.
      (vi)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street while carrying any package, bundle or article that prevents the operator
from safely maintaining control of the scooter nor shall the person operate the
low-speed electric scooter while distracted in any way, including while using a
cell phone.
      (vii)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any
public street while carrying another person or an animal thereupon.
      (viii)   No person operating a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street shall fail to yield to all other persons, animals, and devices on or
using said street.
      (ix)   No person operating a low-speed electric scooter shall fail to
adhere to any other local, state, or federal law, rule, regulation, or order
governing the condition or movement of the same.
   (e)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined in an amount of not less than $50 and not more than $1,000 for each
violation. Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a new and separate offense.
   (f)   Administration. Violations of this section may be administered through
§ 41.24, Administrative Adjudication of the Vehicular Standing, Parking and
Compliance Violations. If a citation is issued, the penalty amount shall be
that for traffic compliance which is $50 prior to or at the first hearing, $100
prior to or at the second hearing, $200 prior to or at the final hearing and
$250 at final determination. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to
limit the remedies or penalties available to City of Hickory Hills.
   (g)   Exemption. Nothing in this section shall apply to, regulate, or
prevent the operation of any electric bicycle, electric scooter, or other
personal use vehicle by an officer or employee of a unit of government.
(Ord. 25-23, passed 11-13-2025)
CHAPTER 42: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE,
SAFETY AND MORALS
Section
   
42.01   Disorderly Conduct
   
42.02   Firearms
   
42.03   Weapons
   
42.04   Fireworks
   
42.05   Open Burning and Fires
   
42.06   Barbed Wire Fences
   
42.07   Noise
   
42.08   Damaging Property
   
42.09   Littering
   
42.10   Pollution
   
42.11   Disorderly Houses
   
42.12   Obscene Material
   
42.13   Trespasses
   
42.14   Parades and Open Air Meetings
   
42.15   Mini-Bikes and Snowmobiles
   
42.16   Retail Tobacco Stores Prohibited
   
42.17   Curfew
   
42.18   Parental Responsibility
   
42.19   Paraphernalia Associated with Controlled Substances or Cannabis
   
42.20   Trespassing upon Public Property
   
42.21   Dangerous and Deadly Weapons
   
42.22   Dumping Water Prohibited
   
42.23   Outdoor Sales of Merchandise Prohibited
   
42.24   Possession of Cannabis
   
42.25   Carnivals Prohibited
   
42.26   Martial Art Weapons
   
42.27   Burning of Leaves
   
42.28   Skateboarding/Roller Skating on Private Property
   
42.29   Spray Paint
   
42.30   False Alarms
   
42.31   Laser Pointers
   
42.32   Motor Vehicle For Sale Signs
   
42.33   Blocking Public Street
   
42.34   Plowing Snow Into Public Street
   
42.35   Chronic Nuisance Property
§ 42.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (a)   No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the city. Any of the
following acts constitute disorderly conduct:
      1.   Making, aiding or assisting in making any improper noise, riot,
disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace.
      2.   Assaulting, striking or deliberately injuring another person.
      3.   Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other
disturbance.
      4.   Disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or private
meeting, place of amusement, or assembly of persons.
      5.   Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to
the annoyance or disturbance of other persons.
      6.   Loitering continuously in public places or being idle or dissolute
and going about begging.
      7.   Drinking alcoholic beverages or being intoxicated in public places,
or in any place to the annoyance and disturbance of other persons.
      8.   Resisting or obstructing the performance of one known to be a police
officer or any authorized act within the police officer’s official capacity, or
impersonating a police officer.
      9.   Assisting any person in custody of police to escape or furnishing
any weapon, drugs, or liquor to any such person.
      10.   Assembling with two or more other persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace.
      11.   Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be
a peace officer where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly
conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial
harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
      12.   Lodging in or being in out-houses, sheds, barns stables, or
unoccupied buildings, or being a vagrant.
      13.   Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money
or other valuable thing, or the practice of fortune telling, palmistry, card
reading, astrology, clairvoyance or other scheme to obtain money or other
value.
      14.   Giving any false alarm of fire, danger, or disturbance to any
person, or false information to any peace officer or fireman or any city
officer.
      15.   Making a telephone call with intent to annoy another, whether or
not conversation ensues.
      16.   Engaging in obscene or indecent activities or entertainment, or any
lewd or lascivious behavior, or appearing in public in a state of nudity.
      17.   Maintaining or being in houses of ill fame or gaming houses (except
businesses licensed to sell state lottery tickets and organizations licensed by
state to operate bingo games), or engaging in or soliciting unlawful sexual
actions.
      18.   Using any obscene, profane, threatening or inciting language in any
public place.
      19.   Throwing stones or missiles in public places or at any person or
property, or using, brandishing or threatening to use any missile or dangerous
weapon or object.
      20.   Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows,
signs, buildings, monuments, or vehicles or engaging in any acts of vandalism.
      21.   Abusing, beating or cruelly injuring any animal or bird.
§ 42.02 FIREARMS.
   No person shall discharge any firearms or do any hunting in the city. This
shall not apply to peace officers in line of duty, or any person acting in self
defense.
§ 42.03 WEAPONS.
   (a)   A person who is not a city officer shall not carry about his person
any concealed pistol, switchblade, knife, razor, slingshot, metal knuckles or
any other weapon or thing of deadly character.
   (b)   No person shall sell, give or transfer any such weapon to any minor
person.
§ 42.04 FIREWORKS.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or explode any fireworks in the
city except the City Council may grant a permit for a public display of
fireworks.
§ 42.05 OPEN BURNING AND FIRES.
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow open burning except as permitted in
this section. “Open burning” is defined as the combustion of any matter with a
flame in excess of 4 inches outside of any enclosed structure in such a way
that the products of the combustion are emitted to the open air.
   (b)   The following types of open burning are permitted on privately owned
property:
      1.   Burning of charcoal, propane, or natural gas is permitted in a
barbecue for the purpose of cooking.
      2.   Burning of commercially purchased candles and torches is permitted
not less than 30 feet from any structure or tree.
      3.   Small open flames for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches,
and highway safety flares.
      4.   Burning of firewood only for a campfire in a container which does
not exceed 6 square feet.
      5.   Burning of firewood only for a campfire in a container or contained
area with a permit issued from the Fire Department.
      6.   Burning pursuant to a permit issued by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
      7.   Burning pursuant to a permit issued by the City of Hickory Hills.
   (c)   Open burning of leaves, garbage, construction wood, building by-
products and waste is prohibited.
   (d)   Open burning on publicly owned property is prohibited except by the
governmental agency owning such property.
§ 42.06 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed wire along or near any
public sidewalk.
§ 42.07 NOISE.
   No person shall disturb peace and quiet of any other person by creating
excessive noise on his or any property. Excessive noise shall include but not
by way of limitation any of the following.
      1.   Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets, or music
machines, or musical instruments.
      2.   Barking or howling dogs or cats.
      3.   Vehicles without mufflers, or the unnecessary use of horns on
vehicles.
§ 42.08 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface, injure or destroy any
property within the City of Hickory Hills, whether such property is owned by
the state, county, city or any other governmental body, or owned by any private
person.
§ 42.09 LITTERING.
   No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or other
debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported materials susceptible to
blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected to prevent
littering.
§ 42.10 POLLUTION.
   No person shall pollute the air or any watercourse by excessive discharge of
waste products of foreign matter.
§ 42.11 DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   No person shall, within the city or within three miles of the outer limits
of the city, keep, maintain, frequent, or be an inmate of or connected
therewith, or contribute to the support of any disorderly house or house of ill
fame or assignation, or any place used for the practice of fornication or
adultery; or knowingly suffer or permit any house or other premises owned or
occupied by him or under his control to be used for any such purposes.
§ 42.12 OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   No person shall exhibit, sell or offer to sell any obscene or immoral
publication, print, pictures or illustrations.
§ 42.13 TRESPASSES.
   (a)   Trespasses Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a
trespass within the city upon either public or private property.
   (b)   Specifically Enumerated Trespasses. Without constituting any
limitation upon the provisions of subsection (a), any of the following acts by
any person shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in
violation of the provisions of this section, and appropriate action may be
taken hereunder at any time, or from time to time, to prevent or suppress any
violation or violations of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so
included, being as follows, to-wit:
      1.   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any
owner or occupant thereof, or
      2.   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof; or
      3.   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; or
      4.   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
§ 42.14 PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS.
   No parade shall be allowed on any public way, nor shall any open air meeting
shall be held in or upon any public way or upon any ground abutting upon any
public way, without a permit in writing therefor from the Council. Application
to conduct such parade or procession or open air meeting shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk at least 14 days prior to the event, by the person or
persons in charge or control thereof or responsible therefor, and such
application shall set forth the desired route along which such parade or
procession is to proceed, the desired time of starting, the duration, and the
name of the person or society in control thereof, or responsible thereof, and
the purpose of such parade or procession; and in the case of an open air
meeting, such application shall specify the place at which it is desired to
hold such meeting, the purpose thereof, and the name of the person desired to
hold such meeting, the purpose thereof, and the name of the person or society
in control thereof, or responsible therefor, the time at which such meeting is
to be held and the probable duration thereof. Upon such application being made,
the Chief of Police, when necessary, shall investigate or cause to be
investigated the person or society making such application and the truth of the
statements made in such application regarding the purpose or object of such
parade, procession or open air meeting, and shall file a written report thereof
with the Council.
§ 42.15 MINI-BIKES AND SNOWMOBILES.
   It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any mini-bike or snowmobile
on any public right-of-way, sidewalk or street within the corporate limits of
the city or to operate or use any mini-bike or snowmobile in any location
within the corporate limits from 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
§ 42.16 RETAIL TOBACCO STORES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to own, operate or maintain a retail tobacco store (as
defined in the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 and the Smoke Free
Illinois Code) which permits smoking within a commercial premise where tobacco
products are sold.
§ 42.17 CURFEW.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given therein. When
not inconsistent within the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
   Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious injury to persons or property.
   Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
   Juvenile means any person sixteen (16) years of age or younger (under
seventeen (17)).
   Operator is any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   Parent is any person having legal custody of a juvenile (i) as a natural or
adoptive parent, (ii) as a legal guardian, (iii) as a person who stands in loco
parentis, or (iv) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court
order.
   Public Place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common
areas, shopping centers, private businesses, streets, and similar areas that
are open to the use of the public.
   (b)   Curfew for Juveniles. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be or
remain in or upon a public place within the City of Hickory Hills during the
following times:
      Between 11:30 p.m. Friday and 5:00 a.m. Saturday.
      Between 11:30 p.m. Saturday and 5:00 a.m. Sunday.
      Between 10:30 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.
   (c)   Exceptions and Affirmative Defense. It shall not be a violation of
this article, and it shall otherwise be an affirmative defense if a juvenile
is:
      1.   Accompanied by the juvenile’s parent, custodian or guardian.
      2.   Accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such juvenile to
take said parent’s place in accompanying said juvenile for a designated period
of time and for purposes within a specified area.
      3.   When a juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the juvenile
resides, or on either side of or across the street from the place where the
juvenile resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given
permission for the juvenile to be there.
      4.   When the juvenile is married or has been married pursuant to state
law.
      5.   In the case of an operator of an establishment, when the operator
has notified the police that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
      6.   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         A.   Lawful employment;
         B.   A school sanctioned activity;
         C.   An emergency situation, or errand of urgent necessity involving
the protection of a person or property;
         D.   An activity involving the exercise of the juvenile’s rights
protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and
Article 1, Section 3, 4, and 5 of the Illinois Constitution, or both, such as
freedom of speech, religion and the right of assembly; or
         E.   Engaged in the interstate or international travel originating
outside the State of Illinois or originating in the State of Illinois.
   (d)   Operator Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any operator of an
establishment to knowingly permit a juvenile to remain at the establishment
under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the
scope of, this Section. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that an
operator should reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of the
establishment. The standard for “knowingly” shall be applied through an
objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator’s position would
have known that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this Section.
   (e)   Parental Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent having
legal custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to
allow the juvenile to remain in any City public place under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this Section.
The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a parent should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent’s
legal custody. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent
to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
   (f)   Duties of Police Officers. It shall be the duties of the police
officer upon discovering any juvenile, unattended by an adult, to:
      1.   Inquire of such juvenile their age, place of residence and telephone
number.
      2.   Inquire as to why the juvenile is out past curfew.
      3.   Assess whether the activity the juvenile is engaged in is/was
protected under this Section.
      4.   Assess whether such an exception or defense is reasonable given the
surrounding circumstances, such as time elapsed from beginning or end of said
activity, allowing the juvenile a reasonable amount of time to go to or return
from such activity without violating this Section.
   After the above inquiries are made by the officer, and no exceptions or
defenses are applicable, it shall be the duties of the police officers to
promptly notify the parent, guardian, or custodian of such juvenile has been
detained for violations of the provisions of this Section and to report to the
police station for the return of said juvenile to their custody. Whenever it is
impractical to do so, the said juvenile may be returned forthwith to his home
or to the person entitled to his custody.
§ 42.18 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (a)   Control of Minor. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal
guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian
to fail to exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting
said minor to commit any violation of a city ordinance or state statute
concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene
conduct, indecent exposure, trespass or possession of alcoholic liquor,
cannabis, or controlled substances or any other offense of willful or malicious
acts to person or property.
   (b)   Presumption. A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have
allowed or permitted said minor to have committed a violation of a city
ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions:
      1.   Said minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of any
ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) above; or has been
charged with the violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in
subsection (a) above (except if found to be not guilty); or has incurred non-
judicial sanctions from any peace officer, or conservator of the peace
resulting from an admission of guilt to an offense of an ordinance or state
statute as described in subsection (a) above; and
      2.   Said parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in
substantially the following form:
 
   LEGAL NOTICE
 
TO:                 (Parents’ Names)
 
FROM: City of Hickory Hills
 
You are hereby notified that                                          (minor’s name) has been involved with a violation
of an ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct,
indecent exposure, trespass, or possession of alcoholic liquor, or any other offense of willful or malicious acts to
person or property.
 
If said minor is again involved with a violation of one of the above type ordinances or state statutes you may be found
guilty of the offense of Parental Irresponsibility. Conviction for said offense can result in a fine of not less than
$25 nor more then $500. You are hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility over said minor by
controlling his unlawful conduct.
 
      3.   Said minor, within two year of receipt of said notice by the parent
or legal guardian has been either adjudicated to have committed, has been
charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty), or has admitted
to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state statute as described
in paragraph 1 above.
   (c)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to
them for the purposes of this section:
   Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a court, but it does not include a person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor under the “Juvenile Court Act,” as amended, 705 ILCS 405/1,
in the State of Illinois.
   Minor means any person who has not yet attained the age of 19.
   (d)   Supervision. It is the policy of the City of Hickory Hills to permit
the City Prosecutor to use provisions of the “Unified Code of Corrections,” as
amended, of the State of Illinois, pertaining to supervision in order to
further the ends of justice, restitution, and purposes of this section.
   (e)   Court Appearance of Parents. It is the policy of the City of Hickory
Hills that a parent or legal guardian of a minor be notified and required to
appear in court whenever that minor is charged with a violation of an ordinance
or state statute which requires the minor’s appearance in court. To this end,
it is hereby directed that a notice is substantially the following form to be
sent to the parents or legal guardians of the minor:
 
   LEGAL NOTICE
 
TO:                 (Parents’ Names)
 
FROM: City of Hickory Hills
 
You are hereby notified that                                          (minor’s name), has been charged with an offense
which is a violation of a city ordinance or state statute and which requires the appearance of said minor or court. You
are further notified that one of the parents of said minor must appear in court before the case will be tried or be
disposed.
 
If you fail to appear, the City Prosecutor has been directed to have issued a subpoena to bring you into court. Failure
to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of court, with a fine or imprisonment as the penalty.
 
The City Prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not
appear in court after the first two times said case been before the court.
 
   (f)   Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this Section 42.18
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation
occurs.
   (g)   Effect on State Law. This section shall not affect or be affected by
any proceedings brought under the State Parental Responsibility Law, P.A. 76-
1679, 740 ILCS 115/1-7.
§ 42.19 PARAPHERNALIA ASSOCIATED WITH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES OR CANNABIS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise authorized by or licensed through the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, it shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell, display for
sale, offer to sell, give away or have in his or her possession, with the
intent to give away, any paraphernalia, articles or equipment, as further
defined in subsection (b), commonly used in aiding the consumption or ingestion
of a controlled substance or cannabis as defined by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, as amended, except if such articles or equipment are prescribed
for strictly medical purposes and are used as such.
   (b)   The terms paraphernalia, articles or equipment commonly used in aiding
the consumption or ingestion of controlled substances or cannabis shall
include, but are not limited to, the following enumerated articles: cocaine
spoons, pot pipes, water pipes, hypodermic needles, syringes and miscellaneous
literature describing the consumption or ingestion of a controlled substance or
cannabis which tends to promote the use of a controlled substances or cannabis.
(Ord. 25-07, passed 6-12-2025)
§ 42.20 TRESPASSING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon property of the City of
Hickory Hills where such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the property of
the City of Hickory Hills after receiving notice from an officer or employee of
the city or depart. All detention and retention basins of the city shall be
posted “No Trespassing” and any person violating said notice shall be deemed to
absolve the city of any liability for damages arising out of his trespass upon
the city property.
§ 42.21 DANGEROUS AND DEADLY WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, except within his own
domicile, or carry or use a revolver or pistol of any description, shotgun, or
rifle which may be used for the explosion of cartridges, or any air gun, “B-
B gun,” pellet gun, gas operated gun, slingshot, spring gun, or any like
instrument, toy or weapon, which is made for the purpose of shooting or
projecting missiles of any kind by any means whatsoever. The above prohibition
shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers, or to licensed
shooting galleries or on private grounds or premises under circumstances when
such instruments can be fired, discharged, or operated in such a manner as not
to endanger persons or property, and also in such a manner as to prevent the
projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such
gallery, grounds, or residence; and further provided, that nothing herein shall
be construed to prevent the concealed carrying of any type of gun whatsoever
when unloaded and properly case, to or from any range or gallery or to or from
an area where hunting is allowed by law in conformity with all of these state
statutes governing the possession and carrying of firearms.
§ 42.22 DUMPING WATER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, pump, or flow any water from
his property onto the property of another, including but not limited to water
from swimming pools and sump pumps. All water being emptied from a swimming
pool shall flow onto the public street.
§ 42.23 OUTDOOR SALES OF MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED.
   (a)   Sales of goods, wares, items or merchandise shall not be permitted
outside of structures located on the premises, except in the following cases:
      1.   Goods, wares, items or merchandise which are customarily sold
outside of structures and which are customarily sold in conjunction with the
main business located on the premises. (Examples being tires, nursery stock,
gasoline, automobiles, etc.)
      2.   Special sales limited to one week per year of goods, wares, items or
merchandise which are customarily sold inside the structure located on the
property by the business located on the property.
      3.   One garage sale per residence per calendar year.
   A permit shall be granted by the City Clerk for any person wishing to use
one of the exceptions for the purpose of conducting outdoor sales.
§ 42.24 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise authorized in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly possess less than 30 grams of any substance
containing cannabis as defined by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   (b)   Any person found to have violated this section shall be fined no less
than the amounts set forth below, which shall be graduated based upon the
amount of cannabis found to be in that person's possession:
 
2 grams or less                               $100.00
More than 2 grams and not more than 10 grams  $150.00
More than 10 grams and not more than 20 grams $225.00
More than 20 grams                            $300.00
 
   (c)   Violations of this section may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of §
3.38.
   (d)   Any person issued the citation for a violation of this section shall
appear at the scheduled administrative hearing written on the citation;
provided, however, no appearance is necessary at the administrative hearing if
the person cited delivers to the City payment in the minimum fine amount no
later than 10 days prior to the scheduled administrative hearing date. In the
event the person cited contests the violation and is found liable, or fails to
appear at the administrative hearing, the violator shall pay the fine amount
assessed by the hearing officer no later than the date the finding of liability
is entered. Failure to pay the fine amount in the time prescribed in the
preceding sentence shall result in the fine being doubled.
(Ord. 25-07, passed 6-12-2025)
§ 42.25 CARNIVALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any carnival or similar
amusement.
§ 42.26 MARTIAL ART WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, carry, or possess any martial
art weapon, except within his own domicile.
   “Martial Art Weapon” means any throwing star, shuriken, nunchukas, batons on
chains, collapsible batons, throwing knives, butterfly knives, sai, swords,
weighted chains, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like
character.
§ 42.27 BURNING OF LEAVES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves or landscape waste.
§ 42.28 SKATEBOARDING/ROLLER SKATING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to skateboard or roller skate on private
property where signs are posted at the entrances to the property prohibiting
skateboarding or roller skating.
§ 42.29 SPRAY PAINT.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver any container
of spray paint to a person of age 18 years or less within the City.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person of age 18 years or less to possess
any container of spray paint within the City. It shall be an affirmative
defense that the person possessing the same is on private property that is his
usual place of residence.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any container of spray
paint on any public property, including but not limited to parks, streets,
alleys, parkways and sidewalks, within the City. It shall be an affirmative
defense that the person possessing the same is either working on an authorized
project by the City or the container has been purchased, is in its original
condition, and is in the trunk of an automobile.
§ 42.30 FALSE ALARMS.
   (a)   A fee of $50.00 per false alarm shall be charged to the owner or
occupant of any premises for each false alarm transmitted to the City in excess
of 4 per 12-month period. A fee of $100.00 shall be charged to the owner or
occupant for each false alarm in excess of 8 per 12-month period. For the
purposes of this section, “false alarm” shall mean any emergency alarm signal,
either audible outside the premises or transmitted to the City by any method,
including telephone, hardwire or radio communications (including 9-1-1 calls),
that requires a response of emergency police personnel where no such emergency
exists due to the improper installation, maintenance or operation of any alarm
system or the result of human error in transmitting the alarm signal. False
alarms shall not include those situations where the signal was caused by an act
of god, a power outage, a malfunction attributable to the telephone company, or
similar unanticipated extraordinary circumstances outside of the control of the
owner or occupant. The burden of proving the non-chargeability of the false
transmission shall be on the owner or occupant of the premises.
   (b)   The failure to pay a fee assessed for excessive false alarms under
paragraph (a) shall be deemed just cause to disconnect the alarm service to the
premises and disconnect any audible outside sound transmitter. A written notice
of the City’s intent to disconnect the service shall be sent certified mail to
the business licensee or occupant of the premises as well as the alarm company
monitoring the premises. The notice shall inform the recipient of the reason
for disconnection and shall allow the recipient a pre-disconnection opportunity
to be heard before the Chief of Police. If a party fails to request a hearing,
or if a hearing is held and the party fails to demonstrate the non-
chargeability of the false transmissions to the Chief of Police, the service
shall be disconnected.
   (c)   The Chief of Police may order the disconnection of an alarm service or
any audible outside sound transmitter for any premises where 8 or more false
alarms have been transmitted in a 12-month period. A written notice of the
City’s intent to disconnect the service shall be sent certified mail to the
business licensee or occupant of the premises as well as the alarm company
monitoring the premises. The notice shall inform the recipient of the reason
for disconnection and shall allow the recipient a pre-disconnection opportunity
to be heard before the Chief of Police. If a party fails to request a hearing,
or if a hearing is held and the party fails to demonstrate the non-
chargeability of the false transmissions to the Chief of Police, the service
shall be disconnected.
   (d)   If any alarm service or audible outside sound transmitter has been
ordered to be disconnected under paragraph (b) or (c) and a false alarm is
transmitted from the same premises, a fee of $250 for each such false alarm
shall be assessed. In addition, the City should have the power to cause the
abatement of such nuisance by any legal means.
   (e)   The Chief of Police shall have the right to authorize the
reinstatement of an alarm service to any premises which has been ordered to
disconnect upon occupancy by a new party, upon the passage of 12 months, or
upon other good cause shown.
§ 42.31 LASER POINTERS.
   (a)   Possession by Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to possess a laser pointer except in the residence of that
person.
   (b)   Sale to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell
a laser pointer to any person under the age of 18.
   (c)   Use Outside of Buildings Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on any person, animal, object or place located outside of the building where
the person using the laser pointer is located.
   (d)   Illumination of Persons Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on any person.
   (e)   Illumination of Vehicle Operators Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle.
   (f)   Illumination of Law Enforcement Personnel Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser
beam illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer.
   (g)   Use in Public Places Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
located on the public right-of-way, street, alley, public park, or private
parking lot accessible to the public to use a laser pointer.
   For purposes of this section, a “laser pointer” is any device which contains
a small diode laser that emits an intense beam of light, including but not
limited to Class 2 lasers, Class 3a lasers, Class 3b lasers, and Class 4
lasers.
§ 42.32 MOTOR VEHICLE FOR SALE SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle displaying a
“for sale” sign (or any sign indicating that the vehicle is available for
purchase) on any street, alley, or on any private property except under the
following conditions:
   (a)   The vehicle is parked on private property with the permission of the
property owner.
   (b)   The vehicle bears current Illinois license plates and registration.
   (c)   The vehicle is parked on a paved surface.
   (d)   The vehicle is not parked during the hours of 12:00 midnight through
6:00 a.m., except in the owner’s residential driveway.
   This section shall not apply to motor vehicles located on property licensed
and zoned for motor vehicle sales.
§ 42.33 BLOCKING PUBLIC STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, place, or maintain any type of
object, other than a licensed motor vehicle, within the paved public right-of-
way, such objects including but not limited to refuse dumpsters, garbage
containers, storage containers, trailers, stone, dirt, wood, and construction
equipment.
§ 42.34 PLOWING SNOW INTO PUBLIC STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plow snow from private property or
from a driveway onto a public street.
§ 42.35 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the City of Hickory Hills or
his/her designee.
   Chronic nuisance property means any real property upon, or in which, at
least three separate nuisance activities have occurred within a 18-month
period.
   Conspicuous place means the front window of a single-family residential
structure or, in a multi-family residential structure, in a common area visible
to all occupants and visitors. In the event that no structure exists on any
real property, a conspicuous place shall mean an area visible to a passerby of
said real property.
   Control means the actual or constructive ability to exercise restraint,
possession or direction over the whole or a portion of any real property.
   Nuisance activities means any of the following activities, behaviors, or
conduct as defined by federal, state or City law:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1.
      (2)   Unlawful use of a weapon as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.
      (3)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1.
      (4)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 1.5.
      (5)   Gambling as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1.
      (6)   Possession, manufacture, or deliver of controlled substances as
defined in 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.
      (7)   Public indecency as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-9.
      (8)   Assault, battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
12-1 et seq.
      (9)   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.
      (10)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.
      (11)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.
      (12)   Except as otherwise authorized by or licensed through the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, the possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of any
product containing cannabis, as defined in Cannabis Control Act 720 ILCS 55/1,
et seq.
      (13)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
ILCS 5/1 et seq.
      (14)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1.
      (15)   Interference with public officers as defined in 720 ILCS 5/31-1 et
seq.
      (16)   Pandering as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-16.
      (17)   Obscenity as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20.
      (18)   Child Pornography as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20.1.
      (19)   Harmful materials to minors as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-21.
      (20)   Kidnapping and related offenses as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-1 et
seq.
      (21)   Possession of explosives or incendiary devices as defined by 720
ILCS 5/20-2 et seq.
      (22)   Any activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or Class A
misdemeanor pursuant to any federal or Illinois statute.
      (23)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
10, Health.
      (24)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
12, Nuisances.
      (25)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
13, Garbage and Refuse.
      (26)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
14, Dogs and other Animals
      (27)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
24, Building Code.
      (28)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
25, Electrical Code.
      (29)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
26, Plumbing Code.
      (30)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
29, Fire Prevention.
      (31)   Violations of the City of Hickory Hills Municipal Code, Chapter
30, Housing and Property Maintenance.
   Occupant means a person that resides in or occupies any real property.
   Owner shall mean the person that holds legal title to real property, except:
(1) if legal title is held by a land trust, owner shall also include the
beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and (2) if there is a purchaser
or purchasers under a real estate installment sales contract, owner shall also
include the purchaser or purchasers.
   Person means any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or
other entity.
   Property manager means a person that manages or operates any real property
on behalf of an owner or who exercises control over any common area of real
property including, but not limited to, a management company, condominium
association, townhome association, homeowner association, or similar entity.
   Real property means any land and anything affixed, incidental, or pertinent
thereto, including but not limited to, any premises, house, building, or
structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, including but not limited
to any room, unit, apartment, condominium, and/or common area.
   (b)   Violation. It shall be unlawful for any real property to become a
chronic nuisance property or, once established as a chronic nuisance property,
be the site of, or the subject of, any further nuisance activities for a period
of 18 months.
   (c)   Classification Extension. Each nuisance activity occurring on any real
property within 18 months after said real property has been established as a
chronic nuisance property shall extend the expiration of said classification to
18 months from the date of the most recent finding that a nuisance activity has
occurred on the chronic nuisance property.
   (d)   Liability; Defenses. Owners, property managers, and occupants of real
property shall be jointly and severally responsible for violations occurring on
any real property under their control. It shall not be a defense that an owner,
property manager, or occupant: 1) did not personally commit the nuisance
activity(ies); 2) were not present when the nuisance activity(ies) took place;
or 3) lack(s)(ed) knowledge that the nuisance activity(ies) was/were about to
take or took place upon any real property.
   (e)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
fined no less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00 for each violation. Each day
on which a violation of this section exists or continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
   (f)   Procedure. The following shall constitute the process governing
determinations of chronic nuisance properties under this section:
       (1)   When the Chief of Police receives one or more police or other
reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within any real
property, he shall independently review such reports to determine whether or
not they constitute nuisance activities as defined in this section.
      (2)   Upon a finding of at least two nuisance activities have occurred on
any real property within a 18-month period, the Chief of Police shall issue a
written notice to the owner, property manager, and/or occupant, as the case may
be, notifying them that the real property is in danger of becoming a chronic
nuisance property. The notification shall identify the address of the real
property, any relevant portion thereof, a concise description of the nuisance
activities and the date they occurred, a warning that the real property shall
be declared a chronic nuisance property if any other nuisance activities take
place on the real property within a specified period of time, and that fines
and/or injunctive relief will be sought if the property is declared a chronic
nuisance property.
      (3)   Upon a finding of at least three nuisance activities within a 18-
month period, the Chief of Police may issue a written citation to the owner,
property manager and/or occupant, as the case may be, which shall include the
following information: (i) the street address of the real property and any
relevant portion thereof; (ii) a declaration that the identified real property
has been declared a chronic nuisance property; and (iii) a concise description
of the nuisance activities that exist or have occurred which have caused the
real property to be declared a chronic nuisance property and the date said
nuisance activities occurred. Citations issued under this section shall be
administered through Hickory Hills Municipal Code, § 3.38, Code Hearing
Department (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.).
      (4)   In the event any real property is found to be a chronic nuisance
property, the owner, property manager and/or occupant shall be required to post
in a conspicuous place a notice that the real property has been declared a
chronic nuisance property by the City of Hickory Hills on a form to be provided
by the Chief of Police which shall identify the specific nuisance activities
that caused said classification to be found, and a warning that any further
nuisance activities taking place on the real property by a specified date shall
be cause for further fines and/or injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for:
(i) any owner, property manager, or occupant to suffer or permit any such
posted notice to be removed, altered or defaced before or while the real
property constitutes a chronic nuisance property; or (ii) any person to remove,
alter or deface a posted notice before or while the real property constitutes a
chronic nuisance property. In the event an owner and/or property manager has
control over real property declared a chronic nuisance property in which
occupants, other than themselves reside, copies of said notice shall also be
sent to each occupant by certified mail return/receipt requested, within
fifteen (15) days after the real property has been declared a chronic nuisance
property. A copy of the letter and return receipts shall be filed with the City
of Hickory Hills Police Department no later than thirty (30) days after the
real property has been declared a chronic nuisance property. It shall be
unlawful to fail to post and/or deliver and file the notices required by this
subsection.
      (5)   Nothing herein shall constitute a waiver or prevent the City of
Hickory Hills from instituting a civil action to: (i) seek an order to classify
any real property a chronic nuisance property; (ii) seek an order imposing
fines for violations of this section; (iii) seek injunctive relief requiring
any owner, property manager and/or occupant to take action to abate any
nuisance activity ongoing or existing on any chronic nuisance property; or,
(iv) seek injunctive relief requiring an owner, property manager, and/or
occupant to take certain action (or refrain from taking certain action) so as
to prevent a chronic nuisance property from being the site of, or the subject
of, any further nuisance activities for a period of 18 months.
(Ord. 25-07, passed 6-12-2025)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                Code Section
5 ILCS 120/1                3.36
5 ILCS 120/1.01             3.35
5 ILCS 315/3                3.41
10 ILCS 5/1-1               3.01
10 ILCS 5/1-3               3.41
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4             3.41
10 ILCS 5/9-3               3.41
24 ILCS 9-2                 3.27
24 ILCS 11-13-1.1           Zoning Ordinance
24 ILCS 11-20-11            30.08
24 ILCS 11-20-12            30.08
30 ILCS 1005/6z-20.2        33.18
35 ILCS 120/2-22            33.18
35 ILCS 120/3               33.18
35 ILCS 130                 31.12
35 ILCS 143                 31.12
35 ILCS 630/1               33.10
35 ILCS 645                 5.37
50 ILCS 750/0.01            3.35
50 ILCS 45/5                33.14
50 ILCS 840/1               5.37
65 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.     1.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.   3.38;
                            42.35
65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20          3.38
                            33.01;
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1            33.17;
                            33.18
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3          33.17
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4          33.17
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2            33.08—
                            33.11
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3          33.16
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5            33.02
65 ILCS 5/8-11-6            33.03
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7            33.10;
                            33.12
65 ILCS 5/8-11-8            33.13
65 ILCS 5/8-11-17           33.07;
                            33.10
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24           42.18
65 ILCS 5/11-20-11          39.10 
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12          39.10
65 ILCS 5/11-29.3-1         3.36
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. 3.37
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1(d)      3.37
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1      3.37
70 ILCS 51-57               42.18
210 ILCS 45/1               17.03;
                            17.06
210 ILCS 45/1 et seq.       17.07
210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.   17.01
220 ILCS 5/1-101            33.10
220 ILCS 5/21-401 et seq.   5.37
220 ILCS 5/70-501           32.12
220 ILCS 5/70-501(s)        32.12
220 ILCS 21-201(v)          5.37
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.       5.37
220 ILCS 65/4               5.37
225 ILCS 440/1 et seq.      28.12
225 ILCS 460/3              35.02
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.    31.11;
                            34.22
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.       34.22
230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.       34.22
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.       34.22
235 ILCS 5/1 et seq.        42.35
235 ILCS 5/6-21             34.03
410 ILCS 82/1               42.16
410 ILCS 130/1              31.12
410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.    41.33
415 ILCS 5/1                30.26
415 ILCS 15                 3.34
510 ILCS 70/3.04            14.07
525 ILCS 10/1               39.02
525 ILCS 10/2               12.02
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.    41.01;
                            41.31
625 ILCS 5/6-101            41.33
625 ILCS 5/6-303            41.33
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5          41.24
625 ILCS 5/11-204           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-208           41.24
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3         41.24
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f)      41.24
625 ILCS 5/11-209           41.30
625 ILCS 5/11-306           41.31
625 ILCS 5/11-401           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-402           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-501           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-502           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-503           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-505           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-506           41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-601.5         41.33
625 ILCS 5/11-1006          35.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1306          41.24
625 ILCS 5/18b-101          34.22
625 ILCS 40/9               37.01
705 ILCS 405/1              42.28
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.      16.20
720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-9             42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-14            41.33
720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.    42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-14.1          41.33
720 ILCS 5/11-16            42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-18.1          41.33
720 ILCS 5/11-20            42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-20.1          42.35
720 ILCS 5/11-21            42.35
720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 5/12-5.1           42.35
720 ILCS 5/12-15 et seq.    42.35
720 ILCS 5/20-2 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 5/24-1             41.33
720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2           42.35
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5           42.35
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1           41.33
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3           41.33
720 ILCS 5/25-1             42.35
720 ILCS 5/26-1             42.35
720 ILCS 5/28-1             42.35
720 ILCS 5/31-1 et seq.     42.35
720 ILCS 55/1 et seq.       42.35
720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.    41.33
720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.    42.35
720 ILCS 600/2              41.33
730 ILCS 150/1 et seq.      17.05
735 ILCS 5/2-203            41.24
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.    41.24
735 ILCS 5/301 et seq.      41.24
735 ILCS 5/15-1213          16.20
765 ILCS 605/18             23.17
765 ILCS 1085/1 et seq.     24.40
820 ILCS 305/1              5.37
                            
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
24-07    - -         33.18
18-1     2-22-2018   41.01
18-4     5-10-2018   41.31
18-8     6-14-2018   7.09
18-9     6-14-2018   Zoning Ordinance
18-13    8-23-2018   5.37
18-15    10-25-2018  24.07
19-2     5-23-2019   31.11
19-5     7-11-2019   31.12
19-6     7-25-2019   24.38
19-8     7-25-2019   24.06
19-9     7-25-2019   24.13
19-11    8-22-2019   24.16
19-16    9-26-2019   5.27
19-19    9-26-2019   33.17
19-20    9-26-2019   24.12
19-26    11-14-2019  28.13
19-24    12-12-2019  Zoning Ordinance
19-30    12-12-2019  Zoning Ordinance
20-1     2-13-2020   33.16
20-5     3-12-2020   33.16
20-6     3-12-2020   15.01—
                     15.09
20-8     6-11-2020   3.04
20-10    6-11-2020   31.02;
                     31.12
21-2     6-10-2021   4.021
21-3     6-10-2021   6.10
21-4     6-10-2021   23.07;
                     23.08
21-6     6-24-2021   24.40
21-7     7-8-2021    30.01
21-8     7-8-2021    31.12
21-9     7-8-2021    24.41
21-10    8-12-2021   24.15
21-11    9-23-2021   5.27
22-03    1-27-2022   34.22
22-04    1-28-2022   7.01
22-09    6-9-2022    39.01—
                     39.23
                     24.01;
                     24.28;
22-12    7-14-2022   24.30.1;
                     25.01;
                     26.01;
                     29.01
22-13    9-22-2022   5.27
22-16    12-8-2022   4.04
23-04    4-13-2023   31.12
24-02    3-28-2024   24.40.1
24-08    9-26-2024   4.04
24-09    10-11-2024  34.06;
                     34.07
25-01    1-9-2025    32.13
25-02    4-10-2025   24.07
25-03    8-28-2025   33.19
25-04    5-22-2025   41.33
                     42.19;
25-07    6-12-2025   42.24;
                     42.35
25-08    6-12-2025   14.05
25-10    6-26-2025   Adopting Ordinance
25-11    7-10-2025   5.38
25-12    8-14-2025   6.10
25-13    8-14-2025   7.09
25-14    9-11-2025   Zoning Ordinance
25-21    10-23-2025  24.01
25-23    11-13-2025  41.34
                    
 
