KANE COUNTY CODE
GENERAL ENACTMENTS OF THE COUNTY
Code current through:
Ord. 25-217, passed 7-8-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the County of Kane County, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 25-217, passed July 8, 2025. Ordinances of the
County adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
County office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
   SS.
COUNTY OF KANE )
ORDINANCE NO. 25-389
 
AMENDING CHAPTER 2 OF THE KANE COUNTY CODE TO ESTABLISH THE POSITION OF LOCAL
HISTORIAN IN KANE COUNTY
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to the Local Historian Act (50 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.), each
county may appoint a local historian to prepare and publish local histories,
preserve historic records, artifacts, and edifices, and document current
events, with appointment by county’s chief elected governing body; and
 
WHEREAS, the Kane County Board recognizes the importance of preserving,
interpreting, and promoting the history of Kane County for the benefit of
current and future generations; and
 
WHEREAS, the Local Historian shall serve as an appointed officer responsible
for the duties set forth the Local Historian Act, including researching,
collecting, preserving, and interpreting county history and records:
 
•Research & Collection - Gathering historical records, documents, and
materials.
•Preservation & Interpretation -Ensuring historical records and events are
preserved and understood.
•Coordination - Collaborating with municipal historians and historical
organizations within Kane County.
•Public Education - Educating the public through publications, lectures, tours,
exhibits, and responses to inquiries.
 
WHEREAS, the Local Historian shall possess knowledge of county history,
research expertise, strong communication skills, and organizational ability to
produce accurate historical materials; and
 
WHEREAS, the position is intended as an honorary volunteer role to formalize
the office to minimize financial impact on the County.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Kane County Board that the Kane County
Code is hereby amended to add a new section, codified in Chapter 2
(Administration), Article III (Officers and Employees In General), Division 1
(Generally, which new section shall be titled “Position of Local Historian” and
read as follows:
 
1.   Establishment. The position of Local Historian is hereby established in
Kane County in accordance with the Local Historian Act (50 ILCS 130/0.01 et
seq.).
 
2.   Appointment, term, and compensation. The Local Historian shall be
appointed by the Kane County Board Chairman, subject to the advice and consent
of the Kane County Board. The Local Historian shall serve at the pleasure of
the Kane County Board. The Local Historian shall receive no compensation beyond
reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course of his or her duties
as Local Historian, subject to state law, county ordinances, and county
policies and procedures.
3.   Duties. The Local Historian shall be responsible for the duties and
responsibilities set forth in the Local Historian Act (50 ILCS 130/0.01 et
seq.).
 
Passed by the Kane County Board on November 10, 2025.
 
 
____________________________ ____________________________
John A. Cunningham, MBA, JD, JD Corinne M. Pierog MA, MBA
Clerk, County Board Chairman, County Board
Kane County, Illinois Kane County, Illinois
 
Vote: PASSED
 
 
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS      )  COUNTY OF  KANE   )
 
SS.
 
ORDINANCE   NO.   25-420
 
 
APPROVING AN ALTERATION OF SPEED LIMIT WITHIN ELGIN TOWNSHIP
 
WHEREAS, the Kane County Division of Transportation has caused an engineering  
and traffic investigation to be made on the below named streets or highways not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation; and
 
WHEREAS, the Transportation Committee has reviewed the results of said  
investigation and has recommended the alteration of maximum speed limits as set out in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625ILCS5/
11-604, so to be reasonable, safe and proper.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Kane County Board, that pursuant to  
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-
604, the maximum speed limit on the section of the below named streets or highways shall be as indicated in the following schedule; and that this ordinance shall be effective upon its approval by the Kane County Board as provided for by statute, and the posting of signs giving notice of the altered maximum speed limits
 .
 
Streets  Affected:
Bittersweet Lane Gingerwood   Lane
Hopps Road - Nolan Road west to dead end Kristin   Drive  -  Stevens   Road  
to   Gingerwood   Lane Pacer Place
Taos  Place
 
Existing Speed Limit:  30  MPH
Proposed Speed Limit:  25  MPH
 
Passed   by   the   Kane   County   Board   on   November   10,  2025.
 
 
 
John A. Cunningham, MBA, JD, JD   Corinne   M. Pierog   MA,  
MBA Clerk, County Board     Chairman, County Board
Kane   County,  Illinois   Kane   County,  Illinois
 
Vote:
PASSED
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 82-163
An ordinance adopting and enacting a Kane County code: establishing the same:
providing for the repeal of certain materials not included therein: providing
for the manner of amending and supplementing such code: and providing when such
code and this ordinance shall become effective.
Be it ordained by the county board of Kane County, Illinois:
   Section 1. That the code of ordinances, consisting of chapters 1 to 22, each
inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Kane County code," which code
shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances and resolutions of the
county adopted on or before March 9, 1982, to the extent provided in section 2
hereof.
   Section 2. That all provisions of such code shall be in full force and
effect from and after December 1, 1982, and all ordinances and resolutions of a
general and permanent nature of the Kane County code, adopted on final passage
on or before March 9, 1982, and not included in such code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the
effective date of such code.
   Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been
repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this
ordinance.
   Section 4. That any person convicted of a violation of such code shall be
punished as prescribed in section 1-11 thereof, or as provided in any other
applicable section of such code.
   Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the county board to make
the same a part of such code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such code,
so that reference to such code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments.
   Section 6. That in the case of the amendment of any section of such code for
which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 1-
11 of such code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such
amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the
aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same
chapter the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held in relate
to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed
therein.
   Section 7. Any ordinance or resolutions adopted after March 9, 1982, which
amends or refers to ordinances or resolutions which have been codified in such
code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such
code.
   Section 8. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 9. This ordinance and the code adopted hereby shall become effective
December 1, 1982.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-1: How Code Designated And Cited
1-2: Rules Of Construction And Definitions
1-3: Certain Legislation Not Affected By Code
1-4: Jurisdiction Of Code
1-5: Catchlines Of Sections
1-6: Amendments To Code
1-7: Effect Of Repeal Of Ordinance, Resolution, Etc.
1-8: Severability Of Parts Of Code
1-9: Unauthorized Alteration Or Tampering With Code
1-10: Publication Of Code
1-11: General Penalty For Violation Of Code; Separate Offenses
1-12: Officers, Employees Not Liable To Fine For Failure To Perform Duties
1-13: Acts Punishable Under Different Sections
1-14: Enforcement
1-1: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
The ordinances and resolutions embraced in the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the KANE COUNTY CODE, and may be so cited.
(Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions, the
rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county
board. The rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be
applied to any section of this code which shall contain any express provision
excluding such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such
section may be repugnant thereto.
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code
shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
county board may be fully carried out.
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of the code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than
the general provision imposed by the code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
CODE OR THIS CODE: The Kane County code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be
done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on
which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall be
counted.
COUNTY: The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the county of Kane
in the state of Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD OR BOARD: The county board of Kane County, Illinois.
COURT OR CIRCUIT COURT: The circuit court of the sixteenth judicial circuit.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a
department or some other county officer to do some act or perform some duty, it
is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or
perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify
otherwise.
ELECTORS: Persons who are registered to vote in accordance with state law.
GENDER: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied
to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
OATH: Shall be construed to include, an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY: Whenever any officer or employee is referred
to by title, such as "county clerk", "county treasurer", or "sheriff", such
reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Kane County".
ORDINANCES: Ordinances of Kane County and all amendments thereto.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property except real property, as
herein described.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RESOLUTION: All resolutions of Kane County and all amendments thereto.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE: The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the
state of Illinois.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such
buildings or lands, either alone or with others.
TENSE: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER, ETC.: In all cases where the words "wholesale",
"wholesaler", or "wholesale dealer" are used in this code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to relate to the sale
of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase
for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in
smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: Shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-3: CERTAIN LEGISLATION NOT AFFECTED BY CODE:
Nothing in this code or in the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any of
the following:
   A.   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
   B.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or
obligation assumed by the county;
   C.   Any administrative ordinances, resolutions or motions of the county
board not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
   D.   Any right or franchise granted by the county;
   E.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or
public way in the county;
   F.   Any appropriation ordinance, resolution or motion;
   G.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion levying or imposing taxes;
   H.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion providing for local improvements
and making assessments therefor;
   I.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion dedicating or accepting any plat or
subdivision in the county;
   J.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion prescribing the number,
classification or compensation of any county officers or employees, not
inconsistent herewith;
   K.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion regulating traffic in specific
areas not in this code;
   L.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion creating specific funds;
   M.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion relating to traffic or obstructions
around road projects not in this code;
   N.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion dealing with salaries or pensions,
or with operational procedures not in this code;
   O.   The rules of the sheriff's merit commission;
   P.   Any power granted to the Kane County superintendent of highways or
transportation committee of the county board regarding the administration of
the highway system which is not inconsistent with this code;
   Q.   All designations of highways or parts of highways, as through streets;
   R.   All designations of "no parking areas";
and all such ordinances, resolutions and motions are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
in this code. Such ordinances are on file in the county clerk's office. (Ord.
82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-4: JURISDICTION OF CODE:
Unless otherwise provided this code shall apply to all acts performed within
the unincorporated areas of the county. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-5: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be the title of such sections, nor as any part
of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. (Ord.
82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-6: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
All ordinances, resolutions, or motions passed subsequent to this code which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with
the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the
case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and such subsequent provisions
as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of them until such time as this code and subsequent provisions
numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the county board.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending such
provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
substantially the following language: "That section         of the Kane County
Code, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then
be set out in full as desired.
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this code is to be added,
the following language may be used: "Kane County Code is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered         , which said section reads as follows:
..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. (Ord. 82-163,
12-1-1982)
1-7: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCE, RESOLUTION, ETC.:
When any ordinance, resolution or motion repealing a former ordinance,
resolution, motion, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal
shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, resolution, motion,
clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided.
The repeal of an ordinance, resolution or motion shall not affect any
punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit,
prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense
committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance, resolution or motion
repealed. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-8: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code.
(Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-9: UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATION OR TAMPERING WITH CODE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented
thereby. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-10: PUBLICATION OF CODE:
This code shall be and the same is hereby authorized to be printed and
published in book form by authority of the county board. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-
1982)
1-11: GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CODE; SEPARATE OFFENSES 1 :
Whenever in this code, or in any ordinance, resolution or motion of the county,
any act or omission is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in said code or ordinance, resolution or motion the doing
of any act or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense or is prohibited, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and
state law does not provide otherwise, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any ordinance, resolution or motion shall be an offense punishable
by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Unless specifically provided
otherwise, or the context thereof so dictates, each day any violation of any
provision of this code or any ordinance, resolution or motion shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-1113.
1-12: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES NOT LIABLE TO FINE FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM DUTIES:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any county officer or
employee shall be so construed so as to make such officer or employee liable
for any fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such
duty, unless the intention of the county board to impose such a fine or penalty
on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the
section creating the duty. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-13: ACTS PUNISHABLE UNDER DIFFERENT SECTIONS:
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may proceed
under both; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person
for the same offense, provided that the revocation of a license or permit shall
not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being
enforced. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982)
1-14: ENFORCEMENT:
The Kane County sheriff and his duly appointed deputies are authorized and
directed to enforce any and all county ordinances in effect and any such county
ordinances which are adopted in the future, whether or not said future
ordinances specifically designate the Kane County sheriff as enforcement
officer. (Ord. 99-175, 6-8-1999)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
2-1: Hours For County Offices
2-2: Public Works And Department Of Water Resources
2-3: Recorder Authorized To Microphotograph Records
2-3-1: Recorder's Document Storage Fund
2-4: Fee For Copies Of Property Record Cards
2-5: Mileage Allowance For Jurors
2-5-01: Fee For Jurors
2-5-1: Court Automation Fund (Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-5-2: Circuit Clerk Document Storage Fund (Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-5-3: County Security Fee (Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-6: Fees For Polling Places
2-7: Foster Care Support Rate
2-7-1: Youth Home Boarding Rate
2-8: Policy On Purchases Of County Vehicles
2-9: Bond Surcharge
2-10: Freedom Of Information Act
2-11: Procedures For Rental Or Lease Of Property For County Use
2-12: Sign Policy On County Property
2-13: Solicitation And Acceptance Of Gifts By County Officials And Employees
(Rep. by Ord. 04-222, 5-11-2004)
2-14: GIS Fund
2-15 - 2-25: Reserved
2-1: HOURS FOR COUNTY OFFICES 1 :
   A.   Except as otherwise provided county offices shall be open from eight
thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. until four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. each weekday.
This subsection shall not apply to the offices of state's attorney, the offices
of judges, and the office of the clerk of the circuit court. The county
collector may adjust office hours for tax collection purposes. This shall be
limited to the three (3) business days before a collection due date and the
collection due date. The county collector may also adjust office hours as
necessary on the day of tax sale.
   B.   The closing hour of the office of the county clerk on Wednesdays shall
be eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. unless it is necessary to close earlier because of
conditions beyond the control of the county clerk. (Res. 70-41, 5-12-1970; Res.
71-115, 12-14-1971; Res. 72-98, 9-12-1972; Res. 16, 1-14-1975; Ord. 95-125, 4-
11-1995; Ord. 07-256, 7-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/3-2007, 5/3-5010, 5/3-5016, 5/3-10008, 5/5-15001, 5/5-15003.
2-2: PUBLIC WORKS AND DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES:
   A.   The provisions of an act of the Illinois general assembly entitled "an
act in relation to water supply, drainage, sewage, pollution and flood control
in certain counties", approved July 22, 1959 1 , are hereby expressly accepted.
   B.   There is hereby created and established in and for the county, a public
works department to be known as the department of water resources. The
department of water resources shall have authority to exercise complete
supervision over any and all projects hereafter authorized by the county board
pursuant to the authority of the aforementioned act of the Illinois general
assembly.
   C.   The department of water resources shall consist of a superintendent of
water resources and such other employees for the administration of the
department as the county board may from time to time deem necessary. The
superintendent of water resources shall be appointed by the county board
chairman, with the advice and consent of the county board. The superintendent
of water resources shall be a registered professional engineer and he shall
have complete authority, subject to the order and direction of the county
board, to supervise and manage the department of water resources.
   D.   It is the intent of the county board that general property taxes not be
increased as a result of the operation of the department of water resources
except as may be authorized by referendum. It is, therefore, the stated policy
of the county board that the total amount of monies appropriated for the
operation of the department of water resources shall not exceed the total
amount of nonproperty tax revenue estimated to be received from all sources for
the operation of said department. (Res., §§ 1-4, 6-11-1973; Ord. 00-10, 2-8-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-15001 et seq.
2-3: RECORDER AUTHORIZED TO MICROPHOTOGRAPH RECORDS:
The county recorder is hereby authorized to microphotograph or otherwise
reproduce on film instruments received for recording by him. (Res. 74-122, 9-
10-1974)
2-3-1: RECORDER'S DOCUMENT STORAGE FUND:
   A.   The county recorder shall charge and collect the sum of two dollars
($2.00) for the filing of any instrument, paper, or notice for record, in
addition to other fees authorized by law and ordinances.
   B.   The charge provided for herein shall not apply to any person or entity
exempted by law or ordinance from paying a filing fee to the recorder.
   C.   The sum charged and collected pursuant to subsection A of this section
shall be remitted to the county treasurer to be retained by him in a special
fund designated as the "recorder's document storage fund", and said fund shall
be audited by the county auditor.
   D.   The recorder shall make expenditures from the fund with the approval of
the county board. The funds deposited in this fund shall be used solely for a
document storage system to provide the equipment, materials and necessary
expenses incurred to help defray the cost of implementing and maintaining said
document storage system.
   E.   Expenditures may be made from the fund only for systems consistent with
the "information systems policy" as adopted by the county board of November 13,
1984 (resolution 84-126).
   F.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the board or the recorder from
returning any authorized personnel paid from this fund to his/her regular
budget, if justified. (Ord. 84-127, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-1984; Ord. 85-65, §§ 1, 2,
5-14-1985; Ord. 87-19, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-1987; Ord. 88-175, 10-11-1988)
2-4: FEE FOR COPIES OF PROPERTY RECORD CARDS 1 :
There is established and there shall be collected a fee of one dollar ($1.00)
per side for the furnishing by the county supervisor of assessments of copies
of property record cards to the public; provided, however, that property owners
or their duly authorized agents may obtain a copy, without fee, of property
record cards pertaining to property owned by them. (Res. 72-61, 6-12-1972; Res.
72-85, 8-8-1972)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 205/2a.
2-5: MILEAGE ALLOWANCE FOR JURORS:
The mileage allowance for jurors shall be the same as is paid to county
officers and employees pursuant to section 2-72 of this chapter. (Res. 80-12,
1-8-1980)
2-5-01: FEE FOR JURORS:
The fee paid to grand and petit jurors shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per each
day of service in attending courts, effective December 1, 1988. (Ord. 88-202,
11-15-1988)
2-5-1: COURT AUTOMATION FUND:
(Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-5-2: CIRCUIT CLERK DOCUMENT STORAGE FUND:
(Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-5-3: COUNTY SECURITY FEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 11-272, 9-13-2011)
2-6: FEES FOR POLLING PLACES:
The amount paid to each polling place used within the jurisdiction of the
county clerk shall be forty dollars ($40.00). (Res. 79-167, 10-9-1979; Res. 81-
185, 12-8-1981)
2-7: FOSTER CARE SUPPORT RATE:
The support rate for county foster parent care shall be fifteen dollars
($15.00) per day. (Res. 79-120, 7-10-1979; Res. 83-132, § 1, 9-13-1983)
2-7-1: YOUTH HOME BOARDING RATE:
Unless otherwise provided in a separate intergovernmental agreement, the charge
made to counties located within the sixteenth judicial circuit for boarding
youths at the Kane County youth home is one hundred five dollars ($105.00) per
day. The charge made to counties located outside the sixteenth judicial circuit
for boarding youths at the Kane County youth home is one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) per day. (Res. 83-132, § 2, 9-13-1983; Ord. 95-214, 8-8-1995; Ord.
96-204, 8-13-1996)
2-8: POLICY ON PURCHASES OF COUNTY VEHICLES 1 :
Because of the inherent cost and energy savings in the use of small, gas
efficient cars, the county shall purchase cars which are the smallest suitable
for the job. (Res. 79-173, 10-9-1979; Ord. 85-66, 5-14-1985)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 2-80 of this chapter.
2-9: BOND SURCHARGE:
There is hereby established a fee of eleven dollars ($11.00) to be collected by
and on behalf of the county sheriff for taking bonds. (Ord. 98-05, 1-13-1998,
eff. 2-1-1998)
2-10: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT:
   A.   The county board does hereby delegate its full regulatory power under
the freedom of information act to the director of central services (director).
   B.   The administration committee may review, add, modify, or delete any
regulation promulgated by the director under this act, however, this subsection
shall not operate to require review of any regulation under this section prior
to said regulation taking effect.
   C.   This section is not intended to apply to elected officials. (Ord. 84-
64, 6-12-1984)
2-11: PROCEDURES FOR RENTAL OR LEASE OF PROPERTY FOR COUNTY USE:
All requests for rental or lease of property for county use, including amended
and extended rental/lease agreements, must be submitted to the central
services/general services director in the manner provided for in said
director's procedures in regard to the rental or lease of property. All rentals
or leases of property for county use are subject to said procedures. (Ord. 89-
21, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-1989)
2-12: SIGN POLICY ON COUNTY PROPERTY:
Members of the public shall be allowed to carry signs on county property and in
county buildings at any time any such property or building is open to the
public provided such signs do not pose a safety hazard; obstruct aisles, fire
lanes or other passages necessary for the safety and security of other persons
present; and are removed by such persons when they leave. (Ord. 96-87, 3-12-
1996)
2-13: SOLICITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS BY COUNTY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 1
:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-222, 5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See article III, division 3 of this chapter.
2-14: GIS FUND:
Effective October 1, 2003, a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the filing of
every instrument, paper or notice for record for all persons and entities other
than officers, agencies, departments, and other instrumentalities of the state;
and that such fees collected shall be deposited into the GIS automation fund
055-0000-311.16-65 to be disbursed according to law, for the advancement of the
countywide GIS system. (Ord. 03-100, 5-13-2003)
2-15 - 2-25: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. COUNTY BOARD 1
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
2-26: Size
2-27: Districts
2-28: Terms And Vacancies
2-29: Chairman
2-30: Additional Compensation For Chairman Of The County Board
2-31: Tax Deductions From Compensation Of County Board Members
2-32: Emergency Interim Successors To The Chairman
2-33: Vice Chairperson
2-34 - 2-45: Reserved
Division 2. Rules Of Order
2-46: Meeting Date, Time, Place, Etc.
2-47: Conduct Of Meetings
2-48: Standing Committees
2-49: Per Diem Payments
2-50: Committee Of The Whole
2-51: Duties Of Chairman
2-52: Amendments
2-53 - 2-70: Reserved
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/2-2001 et seq., 5/3-1001 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
2-26: SIZE 1 :
The county board shall be composed of twenty four (24) members elected from
single member county board districts. (Res. 71-56, § 1, 6-14-1971; Ord. 81-67,
5-12-1981; Ord. 81-101, § 1, 6-30-1981; Ord. 11-161, 5-10-2011)
 
Notes
1 2. 55 ILCS 5/2-3002.
2-27: DISTRICTS 1 :
   A.   The county shall be apportioned into twenty four (24) county board
districts and one county board member shall be elected from each of said county
board districts.
   B.   The boundaries of the county board districts shall be as follows:
(available at the county board office or county clerk's office: legal
descriptions of 24 county board districts). (Res. 71-56, § 2, 6-14-1971; Res.
71-76, § 1, 6-28-1971; Ord. 81-67, 5-12-1981; Ord. 81-101, § 1, 6-30-1981; Ord.
92-106, 5-12-1992; Ord. 11-161, 5-10-2011; Ord. 11-163, 5-23-2011)
 
Notes
1 3. 55 ILCS 5/2-3002.
2-28: TERMS AND VACANCIES 1 :
   A.   Every ten (10) years the county board members elected shall determine
by lot which members elected shall serve for two (2) years and which will serve
for four (4) years. Their successors shall be elected to four (4) year terms.
   B.   If a vacancy occurs on the board, the chairman of the county board with
the advice and consent of the board shall, within sixty (60) days of the date
of the vacancy, appoint some person possessing the qualifications of a board
member, to serve until the next election of county board members in the county,
at which time an election shall be held to fill the vacancy for the unexpired
term.
   C.   The term of office of the members of the county board shall commence on
such date as may be prescribed in section 9 of "an act relating to the
composition and election of county boards in certain counties", being PA 76-
1650, approved and effective October 2, 1969. (Res. 71-56, § 4, 6-14-1971)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/2-3002, 5/2-3009; 10 ILCS 5/25-11.
2-29: CHAIRMAN 1 :
The chairman of the county board shall be elected by voters of the county and
is not required to be a county board member. The chairman shall be elected to a
four (4) year term, commencing on the first Monday of the month following the
month in which members of the county board are elected. (Res. 71-56, §§ 3, 4,
6-14-1971; Ref. of 11-1990)
 
Notes
1 2. 55 ILCS 5/2-3007.
2-30: ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION FOR CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNTY BOARD 1 :
The chairman of the county board shall receive such additional compensation as
the county board shall, by resolution or ordinance, determine. (Res. 71-56, §
5, 6-14-1971)
 
Notes
1 3. 55 ILCS 5/4-10001.
2-31: TAX DEDUCTIONS FROM COMPENSATION OF COUNTY BOARD MEMBERS:
There shall be deducted and withheld in accordance with law from such
compensation of members of the county board as may from time to time be due and
payable to each of them, such amounts as may be required by law to be so
deducted and withheld for federal income tax and social security tax purposes.
Such other amounts as may from time to time in writing be requested by said
members on a voluntary basis shall also be deducted and withheld in accordance
with law. (Res. 72-56, 6-12-1972)
2-32: EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS TO THE CHAIRMAN:
   A.   Chain Of Command: The chain of command of emergency interim successors
to the chairman of the county board is as follows:
      1.   The vice chairman of the Kane County board.
      2.   The member of the executive committee with the highest number of
years of county board service who is also of the same political party as the
chairman.
      3.   The member of the public safety committee with the most number of
years of county board service who is also of the same political party as the
chairman.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The emergency interim successor shall exercise the
powers and discharge the duties of office of the chairman of the Kane County
board until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled as provided
by Illinois law or until such time as the chairman of the Kane County board or
the preceding emergency interim successor is available to exercise the powers
and discharge the duties of the office. (Res. 85-38, 4-9-1985; Ord. 97-132, 6-
10-1997)
2-33: VICE CHAIRPERSON:
The vice chairperson shall be elected by the members of the county board at the
first regular meeting of the county board after swearing in of new members on
the second Tuesday of December in even numbered years. Nominations shall be
made from the floor and seconded, in accordance with "Robert's Rules Of Order".
Nominees shall agree to devote the time necessary to perform all duties
assigned by the county board and by the chair of the county board. Each nominee
may speak to his or her candidacy, taking up to three (3) minutes. A simple
majority of those present and voting shall elect the vice chairperson.
Duties and responsibilities of the vice chairperson of the Kane County board
shall include, but not be limited to: assuming the duties of the county board
chairperson in his or her absence; acting as liaison between standing
committees, board members and the board chairperson; assisting the county board
chairperson in coordinating standing committees' review and implementation of
policies; and special projects as requested by the Kane County board or the
chairperson of the Kane County board. (Ord. 97-246, 9-9-1997; Ord. 06-441, 12-
12-2006)
2-34 - 2-45: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. RULES OF ORDER
2-46: MEETING DATE, TIME, PLACE, ETC. 1 :
   A.   Meetings of the county board shall be held in the meeting room provided
for that purpose at the county seat. Regular meetings shall be held in the Kane
County Government Center, 719 South Batavia Avenue, Geneva, Illinois. Meetings
of the county board shall commence at the hour of nine forty five o'clock (9:
45) A.M. unless otherwise specifically provided by the county board.
   B.   The regular meeting shall be held on the second Tuesday in June and the
annual meeting on the second Tuesday in September, all as fixed by statute.
   C.   Adjourned meetings shall be held on the second Tuesday of each month,
or such other day as the county board shall, upon motion duly made, seconded
and carried, be specified.
   D.   Upon the request in writing of the chairman of the county board or not
less than one-third (1/3) of the members of the county board filed with the
clerk of the board, a special meeting of the board shall be called to be held
not earlier than three (3) days from the date of written notice of such call
which shall have been mailed by the clerk of the board to the members, and the
publication of notice as is required by law. Only such business shall be
transacted at any special meeting as has been stated in the notice of the call
of such special meeting.
   E.   Unless there is a substantial reason to the contrary, all regular
meetings, special meetings and subcommittee meetings of the county board will
be held in a county government building. The time, date and place of all
meetings will be included on the county board calendar, and be posted in the
county board office. (Res. 72-21, 4-11-1972; Ord. of 7-10-1973; Res. 77-103, §
1, 8-9-1977; Ord. 97-133, 6-10-1997; Ord. 01-106, 5-8-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2-47: CONDUCT OF MEETINGS:
   A.   Order Of Business: The order of business for meetings of the county
board shall generally be as follows:
      1.   Call to order.
      2.   Roll call.
      3.   Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
      4.   Public comment.
      5.   Chairman’s report/remarks.
      6.   Consent agenda/omnibus vote.
      7.   Closed session (if necessary).
      8.   Zoning petitions.
      9.   Resolutions, ordinances, and other scheduled matters.
      10.   New and unfinished business.
      11.   Committee updates.
      12.   Adjournment.
   B.   Rules Of Order: The latest version of “Robert’s Rules Of Order” shall
govern the meetings of the county board in all cases to which they are
applicable and where they are not inconsistent with the following specific
rules of order:
      1.   The clerk of the board shall distribute a copy of the minutes of
each regular meeting, together with the minutes of such special, or other
meetings not previously printed, to each member at least twenty-four (24) hours
prior to the next succeeding meeting.
      2.   All questions relating to the priority of business shall be raised
by a point of order.
      3.   The chairman shall preserve order and decide all questions of order,
subject to an appeal to the board without debate.
      4.   Every member, previous to speaking, shall respectfully request
recognition from chairman, avoid personalities, and confine themselves to the
question under consideration.
      5.   When two (2) or more members request recognition at the same time,
the chairman shall name the member who may speak first.
      6.   A member called to order shall immediately take their seat, and if
there be no appeal to the board, the decision of the chair shall be conclusive;
but in no case shall the chair be empowered to call to order a member who is
making such appeal.
      7.   When a question is put, every member shall vote thereon, unless a
conflict of interest as defined by Illinois law or the Kane County Code exists
or if the member is excused by the chairman of the board.
      8.   No motion shall be debated or put unless seconded. When seconded, it
shall be stated by the chair before being debated. Every motion shall be
reduced to writing by the member making same, if required by the chair or any
member of the board.
      9.   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided
without debate.
      10.   After a motion is stated by the chairman or read by the clerk, it
will be considered to be in possession of the board; but may be withdrawn at
any time, before a decision or amendment by leave of the board.
      11.   The clerk shall call the names of the members of the board in
alphabetical order when calling the roll or polling a vote.
      12.   On all questions or motions involving the appropriation of money,
the chairman of the board shall cause the clerk of the board to call the roll
and the clerk shall record the vote of ayes and nays.
      13.   The rules may be suspended in any particular case by a vote of two-
thirds (2/3) of the members present, unless such suspension would violate
Illinois law.
      14.   The chairman of the county board shall only vote on any motions,
ordinances, amendments thereto, or other matters coming before the board,
whenever the casting of such vote is necessary to break a tie vote.
      15.   a.   Anyone, including municipalities, desiring to speak on behalf
of, or against, any zoning matter shall file their request to do so with the
zoning officer not later than the Friday preceding the meeting of the county
board at which said zoning matter is to be presented. The presentation of
evidence, debates and argument by nonmembers of the county board in support of,
or in opposition to, zoning petitions coming before the county board shall be
limited in time to a period of not more than fifteen (15) minutes for each side
of a zoning matter; provided that the petitioner shall be authorized to reserve
a portion of their allotted time for rebuttal, limited, however, to any matters
raised in opposition to the petition under consideration. Provided further,
that an additional fifteen (15) minutes of time shall be allowed to any
objecting municipality situated within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
property which is the subject of the petition, or any part thereof. The time
allowed to a municipality shall not be used by anyone other than the duly
authorized representative of such municipality.
         b.   The time period allotted to each side shall be utilized by the
parties on either side of the zoning matter as they shall determine and
apportion among themselves; provided, however, that the petitioner, or
petitioners, shall have the absolute right to apportion the time allotted for
the support of the petition; and provided further, that any person who desires
to be heard in opposition to the petition and who files his request to address
the board with the zoning officer, as required in subsection B15a of this
section, shall be allowed an equitable portion of the time so allotted.
         c.   The chairman of the county board may require of the petitioner on
either side of a zoning matter that a statement showing the name of the persons
who will address the board and the time apportioned to each such person to be
filed with the chairman of the board in advance of the consideration of the
zoning matter by this board.
      16.   a.   In accordance with Illinois law, members of the public and
employees of the county shall be permitted an opportunity to address public
officials under the rules established and recorded by the county board. Any
person wishing to address the county board in person shall provide notice of
their intent to speak by signing in on the specified sheet provided by the
county board in office in the meeting room not less than fifteen (15) minutes
prior to the scheduled meeting on the day of the scheduled meeting, and be
present when their name is called to speak. The sheet shall request that
individuals provide their name, any county employment relationship or
representative capacity, the agenda item or other topic upon which they desire
to address the county board, and the date and time of the request.
         b.   If available, the county board may elect to receive a public
comment through an electronic conferencing application (e.g. Zoom). Any person
who wishes to address the county board through the county’s electronic
conferencing application must provide notice of their intent to speak by
emailing (insert email address) by twelve o’clock (12:00) P.M. on the day prior
to the scheduled meeting.
         c.   A person who has provided proper notice of their intent to speak
at a scheduled meeting will be allowed not more than three (3) minutes to
address the county board. Unless extended by a majority vote of the board
members present, the total time for public comment at a scheduled meeting shall
be limited to forty-five (45) minutes.
         d.   In the event the allotted time for public comment will be
exceeded, based on the number of individuals who have provided written notice
of their intent to speak, the chairman shall have the right to alter the order
of the speakers in order to ensure that all viewpoints are heard.
         e.   Written materials or handouts will be permitted. In the interest
of promoting the efficient conduct of public business, individuals are
encouraged to submit written materials or handouts prior to the scheduled
meeting. Visual aids may be used so long as they are not disruptive to the
proceedings of the county board and/or present a danger to persons or property.
         f.   Unless otherwise allowed by the chairman, all speakers will be
required to address the board from the designated location in the meeting room,
using the microphone provided.
         g.   Speakers desiring to influence specific county board actions are
encouraged, but not required, to make an initial presentation at the
appropriate county board committee. Each standing committee of the board shall
ensure that time is made available for comment by members of the public and
employees, subject to the limitations of time and the business of the
committee, and consistent with Illinois law and the Kane County Code.
         h.   Speakers shall refrain from statements or remarks that concern
the private activities or lifestyles of individual county employees that are
wholly unrelated to the business of the county.
         i.   Individuals addressing the board shall refrain from statements,
remarks or conduct that is disruptive to the conduct of the county board or
which causes a disturbance.
         j.   The chairman may refer all questions submitted by a speaker to
the appropriate county board committee, elected official or department head for
a response at a later date where appropriate.
         k.   Any person who wishes to address the county board by written
submission shall submit their public comments in writing to (insert email
address) by twelve o’clock (12:00) P.M. on the day prior to the scheduled
meeting. All comments received by twelve o’clock (12:00) P.M. on the day prior
to the scheduled meeting for which written public comment is desired will be
forwarded to the county board before the meeting and will be attached to the
minutes of that meeting. Public comment by written submission will not be read
aloud into the record.
   C.   Agendas: Agendas shall be governed by the following provisions:
      1.   The chairman, with the advice of the executive committee, shall
prepare an agenda for each meeting of the county board prior to such meeting.
The agenda shall be in writing and shall be made available in accordance with
the provisions of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.). While the
chairperson reserves the right to place items on the executive committee and
county board agendas, the executive committee and county board agendas shall
include all items previously approved by standing and/or ad hoc committees with
jurisdiction.
      2.   The agenda shall be sufficiently itemized to apprise members and the
public of matters to be considered by the county board. Matters to be placed on
the agenda shall be communicated to the chairman of the county board in writing
prior to the meeting of the executive committee at which the agenda is to be
prepared.
      3.   The meeting agenda, along with all resolutions and ordinances to be
considered at the county board meeting, shall be electronically sent to all
board members or hand delivered to a board member’s mailbox at the County Board
Office not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to such meeting.
      4.   Committee meeting agendas shall be approved by the respective
committee chairperson(s) after receiving submissions from departments and
elected offices, any items requested by the committee through discussion and/or
consensus, and any items forwarded from a previous committee.
   D.   Remote Attendance At Meetings: The remote attendance policy established
herein is in accordance with Section 7 of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/7):
      1.   If a quorum of the members of the County Board, or any of its
committees, is physically present as required by Section 2.01 Open Meetings Act
(5 ILCS 120/2.01), a majority of the County Board, or a majority of a County
Board committee, may allow a member to attend the meeting by “other means,”
which means by video or audio conference, if the member is prevented from
physically attending because of:
         a.   Personal illness or disability;
         b.   Employment purposes or the business of the public body;
         c.   A family or other emergency; or
         d.   An unexpected childcare obligation.
      2.   Any member who desires to attend a meeting remotely by other means
must notify the recording secretary or the clerk, in the manner designated by
the recording secretary or clerk, as soon as reasonably practical prior to the
start of the meeting. Notification shall consist of a statement that the member
is physically unable to attend the meeting for one of the following reasons:
         a.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         b.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the county board; or
         c.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency;
or
         d.   The member cannot attend because of an unexpected childcare
obligation.
   Video conferencing is the preferred means for remote attendance. If a member
is unable to attend by video conference due to technical or other reasons, such
as privacy concerns, the member shall notify the recording secretary or clerk.
A majority of the quorum of the public body may excuse the use of video.
      3.   The recording secretary or clerk, via county board office staff,
after receiving the remote attendance request, shall inform the designated
presiding officer of the request to attend remotely by other means. For county
board meetings, the designated presiding officer shall be the county board
chair, or, in their absence, the vice chair. For committee meetings, the
designated presiding officer shall be the committee chair, committee co-chairs,
or, in their absence, the committee vice chair, if any.
      4.   After establishing that a quorum is physically present at a meeting
where a member desires to attend remotely by other means, the presiding officer
shall state that the member has notified the recording secretary or clerk of
their desire to attend the meeting by other means. The member will be deemed
authorized to attend the meeting by other means unless a motion objecting to
the member’s attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds of the
members of the county board or the county board committee physically present at
the meeting.
      5.   Any member attending remotely by other means shall be counted as
present, and the minutes shall reflect that a member is attending remotely by
audio or video conference, as applicable.
      6.   The equipment and internet or phone connection used for remote
participation shall be of such quality that the members present and the public
shall be able to hear the comments of the member participating.
      7.   The equipment and the internet or phone connection used for remote
participation shall be the responsibility of the member attending remotely
      8.   The member attending the meeting remotely by other means shall have
their microphone off or muted during the meeting, unless they are called to
vote or are otherwise recognized by the chairman or presiding officer to be an
active speaker.
      9.   The county staff managing the conference shall be permitted to mute
a member’s microphone when the member is not speaking or voting in order to
eliminate disruptive background noise.
      10.   The member who makes a presentation at a meeting while in
attendance via video conferencing may have to share their screen. It is the
member’s responsibility to protect their privacy and the information that they
may not want to share with the public.
      11.   The member attending remotely shall have the same rights to
participate in discussions and vote as if the member were physically present.
      12.   At an executive session or closed session of the county board, the
member attending remotely by other means must comply with the privacy and
confidentiality requirements of the meeting and confirm such compliance on the
record.
      13.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the board from
conducting a meeting by audio or video conference, without a physical presence
of a quorum, in the event of a disaster declaration related to public health
concerns, in accordance with the provisions of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS
120/7(e)). (Res. of 7-10-1973; Res. 83-204, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-1983; Ord. 94-256,
10-11-1994; Ord. 06-140, 5-9-2006; Ord. 23-77, 3-14-2023; Ord. 23-362, 10-10-
2023; Ord. 23-473, 11-21-2023; Ord. 24-303, 8-13-2024)
2-48: STANDING COMMITTEES:
   A.   Generally: The standing committees of the county board, each to consist
of seven (7) members unless otherwise provided, shall be as follows:
      1.   Administration: This committee shall have jurisdiction over the
departments of information technologies and building management, including the
approval and oversight of the revenue and expense budgets, capital programs,
capital projects, and purchase of contractual services, commodities and county
vehicles. This committee shall also have jurisdiction over maintenance and
repair of all county grounds and buildings and any permanent improvements
thereon; excepting the grounds and buildings of the county highway department,
and the adult corrections facility. This committee shall also have jurisdiction
over the technology standards and planning and related technology support
systems of the county. The information technologies and building management
department shall make a monthly report to the administration committee.
      2.   County Development: This committee shall have jurisdiction over all
matters pertaining to the offices of the county zoning board of appeals, the
building officer, the zoning enforcing officer, the plat officer and the
director of development and community services, including the approval of the
purchase of supplies and equipment for each of said offices. This committee
shall also have jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the building
ordinances (chapter 6 of this code), the zoning ordinances (chapter 25 of this
code), the subdivision regulations (chapter 19 of this code), the land-cash
regulations, variances to the Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance for
permits issued under the jurisdiction of the Kane County Environmental and
Water Resources and the County Division of Transportation, the planning and
development articles (chapter 16 of this code) and the Kane County cable
television ordinance (chapter 10.5 of this code). Further, this committee may
review and recommend revisions to declared nuisances and property maintenance
issues (chapter 15 of this code) in regards to exterior property areas,
exterior building maitnenance, and vacant and abandoned structures.
      This committee shall work in cooperation with the county regional
planning commission, planning commissions of cities and villages within the
county, and with the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning (CMAP), to the
end that a constructive plan of development for the county may be updated and
adopted consistent with the conceptual land use strategy for Kane County
(chapter 27 of this code).
      This committee shall also have jurisdiction over Water Resources and the
Director thereof under the Department of Environmental and Water Resources.
This includes activities related to end use planning of any County owned
landfill, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and National Flood Insurance
Program, flood response and resiliency, local drainage and cost share
programming, as well as facility planning and infrastructure improvements to
water, wastewater and drainage systems.
      This committee shall also have jurisdiction over the Community
Development Division of the Kane County Office of Community Reinvestment and
the Director thereof. This includes programs that address needs in the areas of
affordable housing, neighborhood improvement, homelessness, and other
priorities, which are generally funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, as well as other agencies.
      3.   Executive: This committee shall consist of the chairpersons of all
standing committees. The chairperson of the county board shall be the
chairperson of this committee, and the vice chairperson of the county board,
and the deputy chairperson of the county board shall be an ex officio member of
this committee. Any member of the executive committee is entitled to one vote
on any matter, regardless of the number of appointments each member of the
executive committee holds as a result of his or her positions with other
standing committees.
   This committee shall have jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the
office of the county auditor, the sheriff's department merit commission, and
the liquor control commission; including approval of the purchase of supplies
and equipment for each of said offices where same is not in conflict with
statutory requirements appertaining to said office.
   Subject to the approval of the county board, this committee shall also have
jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to the compensation of the members of
the county board, the rules of order of the county board, fees, salaries, and
clerk hiring for and in all departments of the county, and the amount of the
salary and per diem compensation of all county officers not otherwise set by
law. The structure for the appointment of department heads and adjustment of
the salaries of department heads and other employees is as follows:
   The county engineer, the supervisor of assessments, and the plat officer,
shall be appointed and compensated in a manner set by operation of state
statute.
   The term "department head" refers to the executive director of the finance
department; the executive director of the human resources management
department; the director of the division of transportation; the director of
development and community services; the director of environmental and water
resources; the executive director of the health department; the director of
office of community reinvestment; the director of office of emergency
management; the executive director of information technologies and building
management; the supervisor of assessments; and the Kane County emergency
communications director of communications.
   The appointment of all executive directors is to be initiated by the county
board chairman with input for advisory and transparency purposes from the
director of human resources management, and the chairman of the standing
committee to which the executive director reports for oversight. These advisers
will be charged with reviewing and amending as needed the job description,
salary range as it fits with the current budget, and the initial review of
applicants. The finalists selected by the chairman will then be reviewed by an
interview group consisting of the chairman of the standing committee, an ad hoc
member of the county board chosen by the board chairman to be preferably
another member of the standing committee, the county board chairman, the
director of human resources management, and either the board vice chairman or
chairman of the finance committee. The final selection for appointment by the
board chairman with consensus advice from the interview group will be sent to
the full board for consent.
   To the extent not set by operation of state statute or other sections of
this code, the adjusting of department head salaries is to be initiated by the
county board chairman with the advice and consent of the standing committee to
which the department head reports, and with the advice and consent of the
executive committee, and then with the approval of the county board.
   The compensation of employees whose compensation is governed by collective
bargaining agreements shall be set by the county board in a manner as set forth
in this code.
   The compensation of all other individual employees within the office of an
elected official with internal control shall be set by the elected official of
their respective office, in accordance with Illinois law. The compensation of
all other individual employees in departments and offices under the
jurisdiction of the county board shall be set in compliance with the fiscal and
personnel policies set forth by the county board.
   This committee shall also have jurisdiction over the approval of all
official bonds. Each county official furnishing a bond for approval shall be
requested to obtain at least three (3) sealed bids from corporate sureties, if
corporate sureties are required by the committee.
This committee shall also have jurisdiction over all matters involving county
policy and shall be the coordinator of the activities of the various standing
committees.
This committee shall also have jurisdiction over all matters relating to the
county budget for each fiscal year and shall annually prepare and submit to the
county board an estimate of receipts, revenue and expenditures required in any
fiscal year, in accordance with the terms and provisions of statute pertaining
thereto and shall authorize and direct that the county finance director provide
and deliver to each member of the county board a copy of said proposed annual
budget and appropriation ordinance at the meeting of the county board at which
the annual budget and appropriation ordinance is presented to said board; and
the budget and appropriation ordinance shall be made conveniently available for
public inspection for at least fifteen (15) days prior to final action thereon
by the county board. The executive committee shall also have jurisdiction over
the preparation of the annual tax levy for consideration and enactment by the
county board in conformance with the statutes of the state.
   This committee shall keep itself informed as to proposed legislation
affecting the county and any of its officers and to bring to the attention of
the board all such legislative matters which the committee deems desirable for
the board’s consideration.
   This committee shall act as liaison committee between the board, county
officers and heads of county departments and the members of the Illinois
legislature.
      4.   Judicial And Public Safety: This committee shall have jurisdiction
over all matters pertaining to the office of state's attorney, public defender,
the police function of the office of sheriff, and the coroner's office, which
shall include the purchase of supplies and equipment for said offices where the
same is not in conflict with statutory requirements appertaining to said
offices. This committee shall also have jurisdiction over the departments of
the youth home, diagnostic center, adult corrections, court services, juvenile
court services, adult probation and community correctional services, including
the approval of purchase of supplies and equipment for said departments, where
the same is not in conflict with statutory requirements, and shall have
jurisdiction over the corrections complex fund and any related matters. This
committee shall also have jurisdiction over maintenance and repair of the
grounds and buildings of the adult correctional facility, and any permanent
improvements thereon. This committee shall also have jurisdiction over the
office of emergency management, which shall include approval of the purchase of
supplies and equipment for said office. This committee shall also have
jurisdiction over all matters relating to the employment of special counsel or
attorneys when the same are required by law or action of the board in
accordance with applicable law; and shall have jurisdiction over all matters
relating to the courts and judiciary, and all matters relating to jury
commissioners, and all matters pertaining to dependent children's care and to
the judicial functions of the sheriff's office such as bailiffs and process
servers. This committee shall have jurisdiction over the office of the circuit
court clerk which shall include approval of the purchase of supplies and
equipment for said office, where the same is not in conflict with statutory
requirements appertaining to said office.
      5.   Human Services: This committee shall have jurisdiction over matters
pertaining to county personnel, including, but not limited to, the job
classification schedule and pay plan of the county and shall have jurisdiction
over the insurance coordinator, and payroll, and the human resources
department. The duties of this committee shall not include those duties of the
labor management committee as defined elsewhere in this code.
      6.   Public Health: This committee shall have jurisdiction over all
matters concerning the county board's function as the board of health
established pursuant to applicable statutes and other county ordinances related
to the board of health and to all matters relating to county noxious weed
control. This committee shall also have jurisdiction over the office of the
animal control administrator, which shall include the purchase of supplies and
equipment for said offices.
      7.   Public Service: This committee shall have jurisdiction of all
matters relating to the offices of the county clerk, recorder, superintendent
of the educational service region, veterans' assistance commission, collector,
board of review and supervisor of assessments. This includes, but is not
limited to, the approval of the purchase of supplies and equipment for said
offices where the same is not in conflict with statutory requirements, tax
extension functions, voter registration, compensation of judges of election and
election supplies and tract indexes.
      8.   Transportation: This committee shall have jurisdiction over all
matters relating to county highways, including the repair, maintenance and
improvements thereof; the purchasing and acquiring of necessary land by
condemnation or otherwise for the construction and improvement of county
highways; the purchase and acquiring of necessary gravel deposits; and approval
of the purchase of supplies, materials and road equipment needed for the
construction and maintenance of county highways; the construction and
maintenance of buildings needed for the housing and repair of road equipment;
and also approval of the purchase of supplies and equipment for the office of
the county superintendent of highways. This committee shall also have
jurisdiction over all matters relating to township motor fuel tax monies
allotted to the township as provided by resolutions adopted by this board.
      9.   Finance/Budget: This committee shall have jurisdiction over review
of budget proposals as presented by standing committees and recommend a
balanced budget to be forwarded to the executive committee. It shall also
continually review the financial operations of departments for forecasting;
recommending policies of planning, economics and efficiency to the executive
committee. The following shall report to this committee: auditor, treasurer and
finance director. Nothing in this subsection A9 shall in any way affect the
reporting of the auditor and finance director to the executive committee of the
county board. This committee shall review all financing expenditures not within
the approved budget as recommended by other standing committees and shall make
recommendations regarding the possibility of financing to the executive
committee. It shall not be within the powers of the finance/budget committee to
determine or change priorities or policies which have been set by the
responsible standing committees.
      10.   Legislative: This committee shall have jurisdiction over
legislative matters pertaining to Kane County government and shall act as the
liaison to Kane County's delegation to the Illinois general assembly and to the
congress of the United States. The committee shall have the responsibility to
review, evaluate and to recommend action with respect to all pending and
proposed legislation affecting or of interest to Kane County government. The
committee shall also work with the chairmen of other standing and special
committees, countywide elected officials, legislative counsel, other units of
local government and nongovernmental organizations in formulating its
recommendations. The committee may also recommend to the county board new
legislation that the committee deems necessary or desirable for the people of
Kane County.
      11.   Energy And Environmental Technology: This committee shall have
jurisdiction to offer assistance and technical expertise to other county
agencies, municipalities, departments and offices to address environmental
concerns and corrective actions for county owned property, and throughout the
county. In addition, this committee shall have responsibility for all matters
pertaining to the Kane County Energy Plan and other energy related issues and
opportunities including but not limited to wind turbines, solar energy
generation, alternative fuels and other energy sources and projects. This
committee shall also have jurisdiction over the Kane County Sustainability
Plan, green sustainable techniques, sustainable/resilient community activities,
and environmental technologies that apply to county board buildings and
properties. It shall have jurisdiction over matters pertaining to water supply
planning, the education and promotion of water conservation and efficiency, and
watershed planning efforts, studies and coalitions. This committee shall
provide educational materials to the public and coordinate with the federal,
state and local governments on all programs and initiatives and closely
coordinate all work programs and projects with the county development, county
administration and county transportation committees. Finally, this committee
shall have jurisdiction over all matters pertaining to solid waste directives,
goals and policies as defined in the Kane County Code or in the Kane County
Solid Waste Management Plan, Chapter 11 of this code and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act. The goal of the Solid Waste Plan is to ensure the
county is meeting its solid waste, recycling and waste reduction requirements
and goals. This committee shall also have jurisdiction to direct and oversee
the management of county owned landfills from inception to final closure,
excluding end use planning, design and construction.
      12.   Jobs: This committee will provide guidance to the county board on
all matters pertaining to job retention and creation in Kane County. Its
objective will be to maintain and increase employment in Kane County and to
promote the creation of more jobs that pay higher and livable wages, especially
in the private economy. Committee leadership and membership will work with
current employers to learn how the county can protect existing jobs and
demonstrate our appreciation for employers’ efforts, as well as create
opportunities to expand the goals of employers. Efforts will be made to focus
attention and community resources on the employment of veterans and underserved
populations. This committee shall have jurisdiction over the Workforce
Development Division of the Kane County Office of Community Reinvestment.
      13.   Agriculture: This committee shall have jurisdiction to offer
assistance and technical expertise to other county agencies, municipalities,
departments and offices to address concerns unique to agriculture. Recognizing
that agriculture is the second leading industry in Kane County, this committee
will meet periodically with organizations and groups representing farming
interests to propose guidelines to the county board as needed.
   B.   Appointments: Members and chairpersons, of all standing committees
shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county board, with the concurrence
of the county board, at the December meeting of the county board, each to serve
to the next December meeting of the county board and until their respective
successors be appointed; provided, however, should a vacancy occur on any
committee or a committee chairpersonship before the ensuing December meeting of
the county board, the chairperson of the county board shall have the power to
fill said vacancy.
The chairperson of the county board is empowered to appoint a member of the
county board who is otherwise duly qualified according to law, as a member of
any committee or committees of the board without necessity of such county board
member having been seated at a meeting of the county board prior to such
appointment. Each member of the county board shall be appointed to serve on no
fewer than two (2) standing committees.
   C.   Quorum: A majority of a standing committee of the county board shall
constitute a quorum. In the absence of a quorum, the members of that committee
present shall have the power to adjourn the meeting to another day without
necessity of further notice.
   D.   Rules: "Robert's Rules Of Order", and the rules of order of the county
board herein contained, shall govern all meetings of standing committees in all
cases to which they are applicable. Provided, however, that in the case of any
conflict between the rules of order and "Robert's Rules Of Order", the rules of
order shall prevail.
   E.   Ex Officio Membership: The chairperson and vice chairperson of the
county board and the deputy chairperson of the county board shall be ex officio
members of all standing committees. Excepting the executive committee, the
membership of the board chairperson and vice chairperson and deputy chairperson
shall be in addition to the number of members otherwise provided in this
division for each of the standing committees, and they shall not be considered
in the determination of the quorum needed for the conduct of business of a
committee; however, their presence at a meeting shall be considered in the
determination of whether a quorum is present at the meeting. The board
chairperson, and vice chairperson, and deputy chairperson shall be entitled to
vote only in the case of a tie, unless their presence was required to
constitute a quorum at a meeting, in which case they may vote on all questions
to come before the meeting.
The chairperson of the county development committee shall be an ex officio
member of the transportation committee. The chairperson of the transportation
committee and the president of the county's forest preserve district shall each
be an ex officio member of the county development committee. The president of
the forest preserve district, and the vice chairperson of the Kane County
board, and the deputy chairperson of the Kane County board shall be ex officio
members of the executive committee. The ex officio membership of each of the
foregoing members shall be in addition to the number of members of said
committees.
   F.   Subcommittees: The formation of a subcommittee requires a majority vote
of the standing committee or county board and shall consist of three (3) or
more members.
   G.   Miscellaneous: Standing committees shall be further governed by the
following provisions:
      1.   Each standing committee of the county board shall examine the
reports and accounts of the offices, departments or functions coming under its
jurisdiction and shall approve or disapprove all purchases of said offices or
departments, and shall generally supervise the conduct of such offices,
departments or functions.
      2.   Each standing committee of the county board shall examine the
proposed annual budget of the office, departments or functions coming under its
jurisdiction, and shall submit all of said budgets with recommendations to the
executive committee at least sixty (60) days before the meeting of the county
board at which the annual budget and appropriation ordinance is to be approved.
      3.   Each standing committee of the county board shall exercise extreme
diligence in supervising expenditures of the offices, departments or functions
under their jurisdiction with a view of holding such expenditures within the
limits established by the county budget and shall require the head of such
office or department to report separately on each division of such office or
department.
      4.   The chairperson of each standing committee shall appoint the
secretary for the committee from the committee membership. The secretary shall
keep the minutes of all meetings of said committee. The chairperson of each
standing committee may assign a county employee the task of taking the meeting
minutes. The secretary of such committee shall file said minutes with the
county clerk no later than thirty (30) days subsequent to the adjournment of
the meeting at which the minutes are approved.
      5.   All standing committee reports, resolutions, recommendations, etc.,
are to be submitted, in writing, and signed by the chairperson(s) of the
committee approving same.
      6.   No standing committee shall begin or continue its sitting while the
board is in session.
      7.   Meetings of all committees shall be subject to call upon forty eight
(48) hours' written notice of the committee chairperson(s), or of the majority
of committee members.
(Ord. 12-415, 1-15-2013; Ord. 13-327, 12-10-2013; Ord. 15-216, 8-11-2015; Ord.
16-127, 5-10-2016; Ord. 20-178, 6-9-2020; Ord. 22-440, 11-22-2022; Ord. 22-482,
1-10-2023; Ord. 23-472, 11-21-2023; Ord. 25-023, 2-11-2024; Ord. 25-106, 4-8-
2025; Ord. 25-217, 7-8-2025)
2-49: PER DIEM PAYMENTS:
   A.   Per diem payments may be authorized as follows by standing committee
chairmen or by the county board chairman:
      1.   For attendance at all regular or special meetings of the standing
committees or county board.
      2.   For attendance at all meetings of a subcommittee of a standing
committee or the county board.
      3.   For attendance at any regular meeting of any group where the board
member is the county board's duly appointed and official representative, or
authorized alternate, to that group.
      4.   For special assignment, where that assignment has been approved by a
standing committee, the county board or county board chairman.
      5.   Reserved.
      6.   Reserved.
      7.   Noncommittee members may be paid a per diem for attendance at a
standing committee meeting when invited for a specific purpose by its chairman.
   B.   Each per diem claim shall be legibly completed with a clear explanation
of the purpose, date, location and time of the meeting. Each claim will be
signed by the appropriate committee chairman. The committee chairman, when he
is unsure of the appropriateness of the claim, may at his discretion ask his
committee to approve the claim by a majority vote of those members present. Any
individual per diem claim where it is necessary that the claimant approve his
own per diem must be countersigned by the county board chairman. When the
county board chairman is unsure of the appropriateness of the claim, he may at
his discretion ask the executive committee to approve the claim by a majority
vote of those members present. (Res. 72-21, 4-11-1972; Ord. 77-103, § 4, 8-9-
1977; Ord. 84-70, 7-17-1984)
2-50: COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE:
In forming a committee of the whole, the chairman of the county board shall
preside in the committee. In his or her absence, the vice chairman of the
county board shall preside. The rules of this board shall be observed in the
committee of the whole as far as practicable. (Res. 72-21, 4-11-1972; Ord. 05-
154, § 2, 5-10-2005)
2-51: DUTIES OF CHAIRMAN:
   A.   Reserved.
   B.   The chairman shall preside over all meetings of the county board.
   C.   The chairman shall have such other duties, powers and functions as may,
from time to time, be assigned to him by the county board. (Res. 72-21, 4-11-
1972; Res. 24, 2-11-1975)
2-52: AMENDMENTS:
No amendment shall be made to this division without the consent of the majority
of the total membership of the county board, nor on the day of introduction of
same. (Res. 72-21, 4-11-1972; Res. 24, 2-11-1975)
2-53 - 2-70: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES IN GENERAL
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
2-71: County Defense And Indemnification
2-72: Travel Expenses Generally
2-73: Salaries; Elected Officials
2-74: Salaries And Per Diem; Certain Appointed Positions
2-75: Number Of Assistant State's Attorneys
2-75-1: State's Attorney's Appellate Service
2-75-2: State's Attorney's Investigators
2-76: Number And Compensation Of Assistant Public Defenders And Investigators
2-77: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
2-78: Salary Of Court Administrator
2-79: Prevailing Rate Of Wages For Laborers, Etc., Engaged In The Construction
Of Public Works
2-80: Use Of County-Owned Vehicles And Taxation Of Use
2-81: Number Of Sworn Deputies
2-82: Purchase, Replacement And Disposal Of Vehicles
2-83: Employee Residency Requirement
2-84 - 2-85:   Reserved
Division 2. Deferred Compensation Plan
2-86: Establishment Of Plan
2-87: Definitions
2-88: Participation In The Plan
2-89: Deferral Of Compensation
2-90: Investments
2-91: Rollovers To The Plan And Transfers
2-92: Distributions
2-93: Beneficiary Information
2-94: Plan Administration
2-95: Amendment Or Termination Of Plan
2-96: Miscellaneous
2-97 - 2-102: Reserved
Division 3. Ethics
2-103: Definitions
2-104: Prohibited Political Activities
2-105: Gift Ban And Honoraria
2-105-1: Exceptions
2-105-2: Disposition Of Gifts
2-105-3: Political Contributions
2-106: Ethics Administration
2-106-1:   Ethics Commission
2-106-2:   Ethics Advisor
2-106-3:   State’s Attorney’s Office
2-106-4:   Inquiries
2-106-5:   Complaints Of Wrongdoing
2-106-6:   Investigations And Hearings
2-106-7:   Reports
2-106-8:   Penalties
2-109: Countywide Elected Officers
2-110: Training
2-111: Whistleblower Protection
2-112: Contractor Disclosure
2-113: Officer Disclosure
2-114: Conflict Of Interest
2-115: Future And Former Employment
2-116: Use Of Proprietary Or Confidential Information
2-117: Freedom Of Information And Open Meetings Act
2-118: Lobbying (Rep. by Ord. 22-93, 3-8-2022)
2-119: Disclosure
2-120: Prohibition On Serving On Boards And Commissions
2-121: Employment Of Family Members
2-122: Representation Of Third Parties
2-123: Dual Pension
2-124: Severability And Declaration Of Unconstitutionality
2-125: Code Of Conduct And Ethical Principles For Officers
2-126: Sexual Harassment
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
2-71: COUNTY DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   The State's Attorney's Office shall provide legal services to defend
all County employees, elected and appointed officials and members of the
state's attorney's office and public defender's office, including special
assistants and conflict counsel, in any legal action wherein such persons shall
be named as a defendant or respondent by reason of their actions arising out of
and in the scope of their employment by the county, or their official position.
   B.   The county will satisfy all claims or judgments in accordance with
applicable laws of the state, against all county employees, elected and
appointed officials and members of the state's attorney's office and public
defender's office, including special assistants and conflict counsel, so long
as said claims or judgments are based on transactions arising out of and in the
course of employment or official acts of said county.
   C.   Subsections A and B of this section do not apply in the following
instances:
      1.   The defense of any criminal charges or traffic charges brought
against such county employees and elected and appointed officials.
      2.   The defense of actions or the satisfaction of claims or judgments to
the extent they are covered by a policy or policies of insurance.
   D.   The county shall provide investigative services and claims
administration services to expedite prompt handling of any claims made against
such county employees and elected and appointed officials to the end that such
county employees and elected and appointed officials, whenever possible, will
not be named as parties defendant to any litigation.
   E.   The policy set out in subsections A through C of this section is
subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No county employees and elected and appointed officials shall use,
or direct anyone else to use, a vehicle not owned by the county on county
business, unless there exists a policy of insurance on such vehicle or person
using such vehicle with at least coverage in the minimum amount provided for by
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-601.
The defense and indemnity by the county as set out herein shall be, in all
cases, secondary to said policy coverage.
County employees and elected and appointed officials shall certify on their
personal expense voucher for mileage reimbursement, that the policy coverage
set out in this subsection E exists.
      2.   If any claim is made or suit or other proceeding is brought against
county employees and elected and appointed officials, said persons shall
forward to the office of the state's attorney within seven (7) working days of
receipt thereof any demand, legal notice, summons or other process or paper
received by said county employees and elected and appointed officials.
      3.   County employees and elected and appointed officials shall cooperate
with the county and, upon the county's request, assist in making settlements in
the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity
against any person or organization which may be liable to the county or its
employees and elected and appointed officials. Where necessary, the county
employees and elected and appointed officials shall attend hearings and trials
and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance of
witnesses.
      4.   County employees and elected or appointed officials shall not,
except at their own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation
or incur any expense relative to any claim.
      5.   In the event of any payment by the county pursuant to the terms of
this section, the county shall be subrogated to the rights of the county
organization and said county employees and elected and appointed officials
shall execute and deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is
necessary to secure such rights. Said county employees and elected and
appointed officials shall do nothing after loss to prejudice such rights.
      6.   County employees and elected and appointed officials driving any
vehicle on county business shall have a valid driver's license.
      7.   Any terms of this section which are in conflict with the statutes of
the state are hereby amended to conform to such statutes.
   F.   Failure by county employees and elected and appointed officials to
comply with the conditions set out above may result in a refusal by the county
to defend and indemnify.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as a policy by the county to
compensate its county employees for damage to their own property.
   H.   The county shall defend members of the state's attorney's office and
the public defender's office, including special assistants and conflict
counsel, against disciplinary proceedings costs up to a maximum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) each claim and against contempt proceedings up to
a maximum of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) each claim for actions
arising out of their activities on behalf of Kane County or their official
positions. (Ord. 94-360, 12-13-1994)
2-72: TRAVEL EXPENSES GENERALLY:
   A.   Authorization; Schedule: Reimbursement for expenses of county board
members, elected officials and county employees traveling on county business
shall be authorized and paid in accordance with the following:
      1.   Permitted Rates:
         a.   Transportation:
            (1)   Private Auto: Business travel by private auto is reimbursable
at the IRS mileage rate. Mileage allowance is to compensate traveler for gas,
oil, insurance and normal vehicle operating expenses. Where private auto is
used on out of town trips, the mileage allowance is not to exceed the related
cost of coach airfare. Travelers attending the same conference or seminar
should car pool.
            (2)   Airfare Or Train: The actual cost, not to exceed coach fare.
Private airplane at private auto mileage rate but not to exceed the related
cost of coach airfare. Airfare shall normally assume seven (7) day advance
purchase and noncancelable basis. Exceptions must be explained.
            (3)   Mode: All travel by the most economical mode of
transportation available.
            (4)   Rental Vehicles: The actual cost for business use of the
vehicle, which includes gas, taxes and any other fees imposed by the rental
agency. When a vehicle is used for both business and personal purposes, there
must be a daily allocation with personal usage being paid by the employee.
Vehicle must be an automobile with a classification not to exceed that which is
required by the county function for which the vehicle is being used by the
employee. If the employee selects a vehicle classification that exceeds that
which is required by the county function, the differential cost shall be paid
by the employee.
         b.   Reserved.
         c.   Lodging:
            (1)   Actual cost of a room at the facility where the seminar or
conference is being held. When rooms are not available at this facility, room
reservations are permitted at a nearby facility with comparable room rates. For
other business trips, actual cost of a room at a facility location convenient
to the business nature of the trip. Actual cost includes all applicable taxes.
Travelers are encouraged but not required to share lodging accommodations.
Receipts are necessary to support actual cost.
         d.   Meals:
            (1)   Overnight Trips: Overnight trips are at a per diem for each
day during which county personnel are performing official business, which
includes the day of departure and day of arrival. The amount per day for
breakfast, lunch and dinner is established annually by the internal revenue
service and shall be communicated to employees by the county auditor.
            (2)   Receipts: Single day, receipts necessary.
            (3)   Guests: Actual cost of meals, receipts necessary. Business
purpose only and does not include elected officials, appointed officials and
other county employees.
         e.   Other Expenses: Other allowable expenses are taxi/limo fares,
tolls and parking fees. Not allowable are parking and/or traffic tickets,
towing charges for removal from illegal parking zones, laundry, entertainment,
movie rentals, personal phone calls, alcoholic beverages and tips in excess of
twenty percent (20%) of the meal and beverage cost. Tips are not allowed for
per diems and meals included in the conference and/or seminar cost.
      2.   Required Documentation:
         a.   Purpose: Purpose of the trip and reason for expenses, dates and
places should be stated on the personal expense voucher.
         b.   Number And Names At Meals: Number and names of people, with
regard to meals, must be indicated on the personal expense voucher.
         c.   Bills And Tickets: Motel/hotel bills, train/plane tickets and
auto rental bills must be attached to personal expense voucher.
         d.   Meal Tickets: Meal tickets must be attached to the personal
expense voucher.
         e.   Submittal Date: Personal expense vouchers with proper approval by
the employee's supervisor or other designated party and supporting receipt
documentation must be submitted within ninety (90) days of the initiation of
travel. Reimbursable expenses that have been incurred in the last quarter of
the fiscal year must be submitted for reimbursement prior to the assigned
closing date in December.
         f.   Approval: Travel expense policy is administered by and any
exceptions must be approved by the auditor.
         g.   Reimbursement:
            (1)   For the purposes of this section, the reimbursement of
expenses shall include, but not be limited to, per diem payments, appearance
fees, honoraria, mileage, airfare, meals, and any other compensation;
            (2)   It is the policy of the county of Kane that persons receiving
reimbursement for all expenses from the county shall not receive reimbursement
for the same expense from any other public or private source. Employees who
sign claims for reimbursement of expenses or who request payment of charges
that have been incurred on a credit card or by any other means shall certify
that the county of Kane is the only entity that will receive a claim for those
specific expenses;
            (3)   It is the duty of the person seeking reimbursement for
expenses to obtain and provide all documentation requested by the county
auditor in order to verify that the expenses for which reimbursement is being
sought has not been paid by any other source;
            (4)   Refusal to provide documentation indicating that
reimbursement has not been sought or received from another source will result
in the reimbursement being rejected until sufficient documentation is provided;
            (5)   The duty to provide documentation shall be of a continuing
nature and shall not terminate once the county has paid the submitted claim;
            (6)   If a person who has received reimbursement from the county
receives any reimbursement from any other source, any such other reimbursement
must be submitted to the county treasurer. The failure to submit such other
reimbursement to the county treasurer shall be deemed an act of official
misconduct that will be referred to the appropriate state or federal legal
authority for prosecution.
   B.   Cash Advances:
      1.   Travel advances are only available for meal allowances and must be
obtained from petty cash funds or the county payables system by the submittal
of a personal expense voucher. Hotel costs, air travel and other transportation
fees, and conference registrations are to be either charged to a county
government credit card or a supplier invoice and processed for payment through
the county payables system.
      2.   Travel advances are administrated and approved by the employee's
supervisor and subject to audit by the county auditor.
      3.   County government credit cards are not to be used for travel
advances or any other cash advances. Unauthorized usage or a history of lost
credit cards will result in a forfeiture of credit card privileges.
   C.   Arbitration:
      1.   Any dispute between the traveler and the auditor will be submitted
to and resolved by the county board chairman. (Ord. 94-118, 5-10-1994, eff. 12-
1-1994; Ord. 96-265, 10-8-1996; Ord. 97-256, 9-9-1997; Ord. 01-230, 7-10-2001;
Ord. 03-255, 8-12-2003; Ord. 07-78, 3-13-2007; Res. 07-338, 10-9-2007)
2-73: SALARIES; ELECTED OFFICIALS:
   A.   The salary of the county auditor is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective June 1, 2008, seventy six thousand eight hundred seventy
three dollars ($76,873.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2012, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2013, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2014, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments..
      5.   Effective December 1, 2015, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 2, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four hundred
twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2026, one hundred thirteen thousand six
hundred fifty-four dollars ($113,654) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2027, one hundred fifteen thousand nine
hundred twenty-seven dollars ($115,927) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
   B.   The salary of the circuit clerk is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective June 1, 2008, seventy nine thousand dollars ($79,000.00)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2012, ninety thousand six hundred fifty five
dollars ($90,655.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2013, ninety thousand six hundred fifty five
dollars ($90,655.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2014, ninety thousand six hundred fifty five
dollars ($90,655.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments..
      5.   Effective December 1, 2015, ninety thousand six hundred fifty five
dollars ($90,655.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 2, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four hundred
twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2026, one hundred thirteen thousand six
hundred fifty-four dollars ($113,654) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2027, one hundred fifteen thousand nine
hundred twenty-seven dollars ($115,927) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
   C.   The salary of the coroner is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective June 1, 2008, seventy six thousand eight hundred seventy
three dollars ($76,873.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2012, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2013, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2014, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2015, eighty eight thousand two hundred
fourteen dollars ($88,214.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 2, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four hundred
twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2026, one hundred thirteen thousand six
hundred fifty-four dollars ($113,654) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2027, one hundred fifteen thousand nine
hundred twenty-seven dollars ($115,927), per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
   D.   The salary of the recorder is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective June 1, 2008, seventy eight thousand dollars ($78,000.00)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2012, eighty nine thousand five hundred seven
dollars ($89,507.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2013, eighty nine thousand five hundred seven
dollars ($89,507.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2014, eighty nine thousand five hundred seven
dollars ($89,507.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2015, eighty nine thousand five hundred seven
dollars ($89,507.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 2, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four hundred
twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2026, one hundred thirteen thousand six
hundred fifty-four dollars ($113,654) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2027, one hundred fifteen thousand nine
hundred twenty-seven dollars ($115,927) per annum payable in biweekly
installments.
   E.   The salary of the chairman of the county board is hereby fixed as
follows:
      1.   Effective June 1, 2008, eighty five thousand dollars ($85,000.00)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective the first Monday in December 2012, one hundred five
thousand three hundred twenty eight dollars ($105,328.00) per annum payable in
biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2013, one hundred five thousand three hundred
twenty eight dollars ($105,328.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2014, one hundred five thousand three hundred
twenty eight dollars ($105,328.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2015, one hundred five thousand three hundred
twenty eight dollars ($105,328.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 2, 2024, one hundred five thousand three hundred
twenty-eight dollars ($105,328) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
   F.   The salary of the members of the county board is hereby fixed as
follows:
      1.   Effective December 1, 2009, twenty three thousand dollars
($23,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2010, twenty four thousand dollars
($24,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2011, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective the first Monday in December 2012, twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2013, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 1, 2014, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2015, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2016, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2017, twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      10.   Effective December 5, 2022, twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      11.   Effective December 2, 2024, twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      12.   Effective December 1, 2025, twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000)
per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      13.   Effective December 7, 2026, thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) per
annum payable in biweekly installments.
      14.   Effective December 1, 2027, thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) per
annum payable in biweekly installments.
   G.   The salary of the Kane County sheriff is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective December 1, 2009, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2010, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2011, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2012, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2013, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 1, 2014, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2015, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2016, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2017, one hundred twenty four thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($124,750.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      10.   Effective December 1, 2022, one hundred sixty thousand dollars
($160,000) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      11.   Effective December 1, 2023, one hundred sixty-three thousand two
hundred dollars ($163,200) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      12.   Effective December 1, 2024, one hundred sixty-six thousand four
hundred sixty-four dollars ($166,464) per annum payable in bi-weekly
installments.
      13.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred sixty-nine thousand seven
hundred ninety-three dollars ($169,793) per annum payable in bi-weekly
installments.
   Notwithstanding the above provisions, in compliance with 55 ILCS 5/3-6007.5,
beginning December 1, 2022, the salary of the Kane County Sheriff shall be
adjusted upwards on an annual basis to the extent necessary so that the
Sheriff’s salary is not less than 80% of the Kane County State’s Attorney’s
salary set by the State of Illinois under 55 ILCS 5/4-2001.
   H.   The salary of the Kane County clerk is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective December 1, 2009, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2010, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2011, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2012, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2013, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 1, 2014, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2015, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2016, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2017, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      10.   Effective December 1, 2022, one hundred five thousand dollars
($105,000) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      11.   Effective December 1, 2023, one hundred seven thousand one hundred
dollars ($107,100) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      12.   Effective December 1, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      13.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four
hundred twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in bi-weekly
installments.
   I.   The salary of the Kane County treasurer is hereby fixed as follows:
      1.   Effective December 1, 2009, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      2.   Effective December 1, 2010, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      3.   Effective December 1, 2011, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      4.   Effective December 1, 2012, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      5.   Effective December 1, 2013, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      6.   Effective December 1, 2014, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      7.   Effective December 1, 2015, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      8.   Effective December 1, 2016, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      9.   Effective December 1, 2017, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per annum payable in biweekly installments.
      10.   Effective December 1, 2022, one hundred five thousand dollars
($105,000) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      11.   Effective December 1, 2023, one hundred seven thousand one hundred
dollars ($107,100) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      12.   Effective December 1, 2024, one hundred nine thousand two hundred
forty-two dollars ($109,242) per annum payable in bi-weekly installments.
      13.   Effective December 1, 2025, one hundred eleven thousand four
hundred twenty-six dollars ($111,426) per annum payable in bi-weekly
installments.
   The salaries indicated in subsections B, C, D, G, H, and I of this section
shall not be reduced by any stipends paid by the State of Illinois, including
without limitation the $6,500 stipends expected to be received from the State
of Illinois for the respective offices under: Section 3-40 of the Property Tax
Code, Section 4-20 of the Property Tax Code, Section 3-10007 of the Counties
Code, Section 4-2001 of the Counties Code, Section 4-6001 of the Counties Code,
Section 4-6002 of the Counties Code, Section 4-6003 of the Counties Code, and
Section 27.3 of the Clerks of Courts Act.
   J.   The salaries indicated in subsections A, B, C, D, G, H, and I of this
section shall not be reduced by any stipends paid by the State of Illinois,
including without limitation the six thousand five hundred dollar ($6,500)
stipends expected to be received from the State of Illinois for the respective
offices under Section 3-40 of the Property Tax Code, Section 4-20 of the
Property Tax Code, Section 3-10007 of the Counties Code, Section 4-2001 of the
Counties Code, Section 4-6001 of the Counties Code, Section 4-6002 of the
Counties Code, Section 4-6003 of the Counties Code and Section 27.3 of the
Clerks of Courts Act.
   K.   In addition to the other compensation set forth in this section, each
elected official shall be entitled to receive the benefits of any comprehensive
health insurance/HMO benefits that are available to Kane County employees who
are not in a collective bargaining agreement. If the provisions of Article VII,
Section 9(b) of the 1970 Constitution of the State would prohibit an elected
official from receiving this benefit set forth in this subsection, then that
elected official would receive the benefit mandated by the constitutional
provision for that year. (Ord. 94-331, 11-15-1994; Ord. 96-144, 5-14-1996; Ord.
96-145, 5-14-1996; Ord. 97-245, 9-9-1997; Ord. 00-03, 1-11-2000; Ord. 01-231,
7-10-2001; Ord. 03-359, 11-12-2003; Ord. 04-80, 2-10-2004; Ord. 06-218, 5-9-
2006; Ord. 07-249, 7-10-2007; Res. 07-418, 12-11-2007; Ord. 10-121, 4-13-2010;
Ord. 14-290, 10-14-2014; Ord. 22-201, 5-18-2022; Ord. 24-216, 5-29-2024)
2-74: SALARIES AND PER DIEM; CERTAIN APPOINTED POSITIONS:
   A.   Aurora Election Commission:
      1.   The following positions shall be annually set by the Aurora election
commission and paid from the county general fund on the pay cycle established
by the county board:
         Executive director
         Assistant executive director
      2.   The salaries of the following positions shall be annually set by the
county board and paid from the county general fund on the pay cycle established
by the county board:
 
Election commissioners (3) $3,669.84
 
   B.   County Officials (Maximum Annual Level Of Compensation; Annually, Paid
Semimonthly):
 
Board of review chairman    $24,480.00 1
Board of review members (2) 21,420. 00 2
Animal control director     17,434.78 3
 
   C.   Per Diem Compensation:
 
                                    $125.00 for half day and $250.00 for full
Additional members; board of review day with no reimbursement for mileage to
                                    and from the county government center
Farmland assessment members         $80.00
Liquor control commissioners (3)    20.00
Sheriff's merit commissioners (3)   85.00
Zoning board of appeals members (7) 60.00
 
The chairman of the county board may appoint additional qualified members to
the board of review to hold separate hearings on complaints.
   D.   Election Judges:
 
Election judge who does not complete training $105.00 1
Election judge who completes training         145.00 2
 
(Ord. 79-158, 9-11-1979; Ord. 79-167, 10-9-1979; Ord. 79-222, 12-11-1979; Ord.
79-226, §§ 1-8, 12-11-1979; Ord. 80-10, 1-8-1980; Res. 80-207, 12-9-1980; Ord.
80-209, §§ 1-10, 12-9-1980; Res. 81-66, 5-12-1981; Ord. 81-183, §§ 1-10, 12-8-
1981; Res. 81-185, 12-8-1981; Ord. 82-189, §§ 1-10, 12-14-1982; Ord. 83-205, §
1, 12-13-1983; Ord. 84-18, 2-14-1984; Ord. 84-179, § 1, 12-11-1984; Ord. 85-12,
2-13-1985; Res. 85-187, 12-10-1985; Ord. 86-84, 6-10-1986; Ord. 86-99, 7-8-
1986; Ord. 86-215, 12-9-1986; Ord. 87-62, 4-14-1987; Res. 87-260, 12-8-1987;
Ord. 88-140, 8-16-1988; Ord. 88-199, 11-15-1988; Ord. 89-102, 6-13-1989; Ord.
89-103, 6-13-1989; Ord. 89-199, 11-14-1989; Ord. 90-7, 1-9-1990; Ord. 243, 11-
13-1990; Ord. 90-263, 12-11-1990; Ord. 91-332, 12-10-1991; Ord. 92-226, 10-13-
1992; Ord. 92-301, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-113, 4-13-1993, eff. retroactive to 4-1-
1993; Ord. 93-145, 5-11-1993; Ord. 93-196, 7-13-1993; Ord. 94-93, 4-12-1994;
Ord. 94-127, 5-10-1994, eff. 12-1-1994; Ord. 94-183, 7-12-1994; Ord. 94-300,
11-7-1994; Ord. 95-02, 1-10-1995; Ord. 95-43, 2-14-1995; Ord. 95-72, 3-14-1995;
Ord. 95-81, 3-14-1995; Ord. 95-94, 4-11-1995; Ord. 95-219, 8-8-1995; Ord. 95-
220, 8-8-1995; Ord. 95-246, 9-12-1995; Ord. 95-283, 10-10-1995, eff.
retroactive to 3-1-1995; Ord. 95-297, 10-10-1995, eff. retroactive to 12-1-
1994; Ord. 95-328, 12-12-1995, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1995; Ord. 95-345, 11-
14-1995; Ord. 95-395, 12-12-1995; Ord. 95-396, 12-12-1995, eff. retroactive to
12-1-1995; Ord. 96-10, 1-9-1996, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1995; Ord. 96-12, 1-
9-1996; Ord. 96-30, 2-13-1996, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1995; Ord. 96-31, 2-13-
1996, eff. retroactive to 5-1-1995; Ord. 96-114, 4-9-1996, eff. retroactive to
4-1-1996; Ord. 96-207, 8-13-1996; Ord. 96-210, 8-13-1996; Ord. 96-300, 11-12-
1996; Ord. 96-301, 11-12-1996, eff. 12-1-1996; Ord. 96-340, 12-10-1996; Ord.
96-341, 12-10-1996; Ord. 96-343, 12-10-1996; Ord. 97-13, 1-14-1997, eff.
retroactive to 12-1-1996; Ord. 97-41, 2-11-1997; Ord. 97-131, 5-13-1997; Ord.
97-329, 11-12-1997; Ord. 98-02, 1-13-1998; Ord. 98-04, 1-13-1998, eff.
retroactive to 12-1-1997; Ord. 98-21, 2-10-1998, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1997;
Ord. 98-108, 4-14-1998; Ord. 98-115, 5-12-1998; Ord. 98-116, 5-12-1998; Ord.
98-174, 7-14-1998; Ord. 98-221, 9-8-1998; Ord. 98-222, 9-8-1998; Ord. 98-289,
11-10-1998; Ord. 98-296, 11-10-1998; Ord. 99-21, 1-12-1999; Ord. 99-261, 9-14-
1999, eff. retroactive to 9-1-1999; Ord. 99-351, 12-14-1999; Ord. 00-167, 6-13-
2000, eff. retroactive to 12-1-1999; Ord. 00-195, 7-11-2000, eff. retroactive
to 7-1-2000; Ord. 00-359, 12-12-2000; Ord. 01-155, 5-8-2001; Ord. 01-237, 7-10-
2001, eff. retroactive to 7-1-2001; Ord. 01-382, 11-13-2001; Ord. 02-421, 12-
10-2002; Ord. 03-389, 12-9-2003; Ord. 04-472, 12-14-2004; Res. 08-12, 1-8-2008;
Ord. 08-234, 7-8-2008; Ord. 13-187, 6-11-2013, eff. 7-1-2013 ; Ord. 19-402, 11-
12-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. Payment to be made from the general fund 001, department 5220, line item
  40-01.
2 2. Payment to be made from the general fund 001, department 5220, line item
  40-01.
3 3. Payments to the animal control director shall be made from fund 051, line
  item 50-14 (contracts and consultation).
1 1. Payment to be made from the general fund 001, department 5420, line item
  50-47.
2 2. Payment to be made from the general fund 001, department 5420, line item
  50-47.
2-75: NUMBER OF ASSISTANT STATE'S ATTORNEYS 1 :
The state's attorney may appoint up to forty nine (49) assistant state's
attorney positions and such other special assistant state's attorneys as he
deems necessary. The assistant state's attorneys shall be paid a salary set by
the state's attorney subject to budgetary limitations set by the county board.
The special assistant state's attorneys shall be paid reasonable compensation
for their contractual services as determined by the state's attorney within
budgetary limitations set by the county board. (Ord. 94-363, § 1, 12-13-1994;
Ord. 96-270, 10-8-1996; Ord. 97-324, 11-12-1997, eff. 12-1-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/4-2001 - 5/4-2005.
2-75-1: STATE'S ATTORNEY'S APPELLATE SERVICE 1 :
   A.   The county board does hereby support the continued operation of the
office of the state's attorney's appellate prosecutor, and designates the
office of the state's attorney's appellate prosecutor as its agent to
administer the operation of the appellate offices and process said appellate
court cases of this county.
   B.   The attorneys employed by the office of the state's attorney's
appellate prosecutor, in addition to those assistants authorized in section
2-75 of this chapter, are hereby authorized to act as assistant state's
attorneys on behalf of the duly elected or appointed state's attorney of this
county in all cases where authorized by law and when requested to do so by the
state's attorney, with the advice and consent of the state's attorney. (Ord.
94-364, § 1, 12-13-1994)
 
Notes
1 2. 725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.
2-75-2: STATE'S ATTORNEY'S INVESTIGATORS:
The state's attorney may appoint investigator(s) as provided for by 55 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-9005(b) for any purpose provided for by law. The
investigators shall be paid a salary determined by the state's attorney within
the budgetary limitations set by the county board. (Ord. 94-365, § 1, 12-13-
1994)
2-76: NUMBER AND COMPENSATION OF ASSISTANT PUBLIC DEFENDERS AND INVESTIGATORS:
   A.   There shall be sixteen (16) assistant public defenders, and four (4)
investigators, in and for the county.
   B.   The annual compensation of said positions shall be as follows 1 :
      1.   From the public defender budget - department 145:
Maximum Annual
Maximum Annual
Assistant public defenders:
1 at $45,000.00
1 at 39,000.00
1 at 37,000.00
1 at 33,000.00
2 at 31,000.00
3 at 30,000.00
4 at 28,000.00
1 at 13,000.00
Investigators:
1 at 35,000.00
1 at 29,000.00
1 at 27,000.00
1 at 25,000.00
 
      2.   From the antidrug abuse defender's fund - fund account number 075:
 
1 at $42,000.00
1 at 32,000.00
 
(Res. 79-159, 9-11-1979; Res. 80-206, 12-9-1980; Res. 82-183, 11-30-1982; Ord.
84-11, § 1, 1-10-1984; Ord. 84-75, 7-17-1984; Ord. 85-204, § 1, 12-10-1985;
Ord. 86-214, § 1, 12-9-1986; Ord. 87-213, § 1, 11-10-1987; Ord. 88-188, § 1,
10-11-1988; Ord. 89-58, § 1, 4-11-1989; Ord. 89-201, § 1, 11-14-1989; Ord. 89-
256, § 1, 12-12-1989; Ord. 90-266, 12-11-1990; Ord. 91-316, 12-10-1991; Ord.
93-13, 1-12-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/3-4008.
2-77: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND 1 :
   A.   The county shall participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund,
and the human resource director shall be the county board's agent for acting in
relation thereto. Such agent shall also exercise the right to file petitions
and cast ballots for any executive trustee of the fund.
   B.   Municipality credits are provided to participants in the Illinois
municipal retirement fund who are employees of the county or an instrumentality
thereof and who left the employment of the county or instrumentality thereof to
serve in the armed services of the United States for all periods of such
services; provided, any such person shall return to active employment of the
county or instrumentality thereof within ninety (90) days after completion of
full time active duty, on the assumption that such employees were receiving
earnings at the rate received at the time each such person left the employment
to enter the armed forces. Any participant in such armed services or in such
women's auxiliary services shall not be considered an employee during such
period of service and no additional death or disability benefits will be
payable for death or disability during such period.
   C.   County employees on personal leave of absence are hereby authorized to
receive continuing service credits with the Illinois municipal retirement fund,
subject to all rules and regulations of such fund pertaining to leaves of
absence.
   D.   For the purpose of guidance direction of the board of trustees of the
Illinois municipal retirement fund, the county board finds that the position of
its members normally requires the performance of duty during six hundred (600)
hours or more each year. (Res. (2) of 12-14-1944; Res. 72-57, 6-12-1972; Res.
79-3, 1-9-1979; Res. 80-35, 3-11-1980; Res. 93-249, 9-14-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 40 ILCS 5/7-101 et seq.
2-78: SALARY OF COURT ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   The circuit judges are hereby authorized to set the salary of the court
administrator until such time as the county board decides to seek a legislative
or judicial determination as to whether such board or judges may set such
salary; provided, however, that no retroactive salary increase shall be
authorized.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be considered prejudicial to any rights
of the county board of the judiciary with respect to the issue of who may set
such salary. (Res. 81-124, 9-8-1981; Res. 82-11, 1-12-1982)
2-79: PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES FOR LABORERS, ETC., ENGAGED IN THE CONSTRUCTION
OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   To the extent and as required by "the act" 1 , the general prevailing
rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers
engaged in construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of Kane
County is hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in this county as determined by the department of labor of
the state of Illinois, as of June of the current year, a copy of that
determination being attached to the resolution codified herein and incorporated
herein by reference. As required by said act, any and all revisions of the
prevailing rate of wages by the department of labor of the state of Illinois
shall supersede the department's June determination and apply to any and all
public works construction undertaken by Kane County. The definition of any
terms appearing in the resolution codified herein which are also used in the
aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
   B.   Nothing herein shall prohibit the county of Kane from investigating and
ascertaining the prevailing rate of wages for categories of workers not
expressly covered by the published determination of the department of labor,
nor prohibit incorporating those rates so ascertained into the published
determination of the department of labor, provided that those rates ascertained
by the county shall be clearly indicated as such.
   C.   Kane County and/or its authorized representatives shall have the power
and authority to request and receive any and all information or documentation,
which would substantiate proper payment under this section. The contract
recipient shall supply the requested documentation or information to Kane
County or its designee within five (5) working days of the receipt of the
request. Failure to comply with the request for information or documentation
will be construed as a material breach of the contract enabling the county to
terminate the contract, seek forfeiture of any performance bond, and proceed
with any other remedy against the contractor at law or in equity.
   D.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of Kane County to the extent required by the
aforesaid act.
   E.   The county clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of the county clerk this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wages. A copy of this
determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of
wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   F.   The county clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer and to any association of employers and to any person or association
of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   G.   The County Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of the resolution
codified herein with both the Secretary of State Index Division and the
Department of Labor of the State of Illinois.
   H.   The County Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the area a copy of the resolution codified herein, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and
this is the determination of this public body. (Res. 13-208, 6-11-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.
2-80: USE OF COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES AND TAXATION OF USE:
   A.   The use of County-owned vehicles and taxation of personal use shall be
governed by the administrative procedures set forth in the "Use of County Owned
Vehicles and Taxation of Use Policy", as may be amended from time to time by
the County Board, consistent with pertinent IRS guidance. Such administrative
procedures shall apply to all County employees as well as to anyone else paid
through the County payroll who receives a W-2 from the County. However, nothing
therein shall be construed as a limitation or restriction upon the rights of
control over internal operations granted by law to elected or appointed
officials.
   B.   Use of County vehicles for personal profit is prohibited.
   C.   Use of County vehicles for personal business, other than commuting to
and from work and de minimis usage while performing official County business
activities, also is strictly prohibited. Consistent with IRS guidance, de
minimis use includes uses such as driving to lunch while out of the office on
business or running a personal errand or stopping at a store located on the way
between a business location and the employee's home.
   D.   Department heads or elected officials will be responsible for
authorizing a vehicle to be driven home and by whom. In authorizing an employee
to drive a vehicle home, all decision- makers shall bear in mind the
limitations on personal use - specifically, that personal use other than
commuting and de minimis personal use is prohibited. (Ord. 17-390, 12-12-2017)
2-81: NUMBER OF SWORN DEPUTIES:
Kane County Sheriff may appoint up to ninety (90) sworn deputies, as he deems
necessary.
Any sworn deputies whose salary and benefits are paid entirely from grants from
other government agencies shall be counted toward the aforesaid limitation
during the duration of such grants. (Ord. 09-238, 7-14-2009)
2-82: PURCHASE, REPLACEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES:
   A.   Purchase: All County departments as well as the Sheriff's Office and
the Coroner's Office are required to follow established purchasing procedures
when purchasing a vehicle. All automobiles, vans, and light duty trucks up to
and including three-fourths (3/4) ton are to be purchased through the
purchasing agent of Kane County. For purchases of vehicles over three-fourths
(3/4) ton the Purchasing Department will work in conjunction with the
requesting department based upon the required specifications.
   B.   Vehicle Requisition Form: All requests for vehicles must include a
completed vehicle requisition form completed by the office/department
requesting the acquisition of the vehicle.
   C.   Replacement Vehicles: All County departments as well as the Sheriff's
Office and the Coroner's Office are required to adhere to the following
procedure when pursuing replacement of a vehicle:
      1.   To request replacement of a vehicle involved in an accident, the
first step is to contact the Department of Human Resource Management for
liability insurance purposes.
      2.   If the vehicle replacement request is for a vehicle not under
control of the Sheriff, KDOT fleet maintenance is to be contacted and the
vehicle scheduled to be brought to the KDOT maintenance facility. The entire
file of all repairs completed on the vehicle, and estimates of all required
repairs should be brought to KDOT with the vehicle. KDOT maintenance personnel
will inspect the vehicle and KDOT staff will evaluate the vehicle using the
"Replacement Guidelines Calculation Sheet".
      3.   If the vehicle replacement request is for a vehicle under control of
the Sheriff, the Sheriff's Fleet Manager will complete all required forms and
inspections.
      4.   Upon receiving the Fleet Manager's evaluation, the office/department
is directed to the Purchasing Department to pursue the acquisition of a new
vehicle (for elected offices, the Purchasing Department is available to assist
you). Purchasing will not assist with the acquisition of a replacement vehicle
until and unless the Fleet Manager has evaluated the vehicle being considered
for replacement.
      5.   All requests for vehicles are required to be approved by the
purchaser's standing committee before being sent to the Administration
Committee for review and approval.
   D.   Required Approvals Of Vehicle Purchases For All County Departments,
Sheriff's Office And Coroner's Office:
      1.   Minimum required approvals:
         a.   All requests for vehicles and vehicle funding are required to be
approved by the committee responsible for the source of funding before being
sent to the Administration Committee for review and approval.
         b.   The Administration Committee will evaluate the need for the
acquisition of the vehicle, along with the type and size of vehicle being
proposed, and shall approve or deny the request based upon such evaluation.
      2.   Additional approvals required after request for vehicle purchase is
approved by committee responsible for source of funding and the Administration
Committee:
         a.   If the total cost of the vehicle is under thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) and has already been budgeted, no further approval is required.
         b.   If the total cost of the vehicle is thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) or greater and has already been budgeted, additional approval from
the Executive Committee and County Board is required for County departments
only.
         c.   If the vehicle purchase requires a budget adjustment, additional
approval from the Finance Committee, Executive Committee and County Board is
required for County departments, Sheriff's Office and Coroner's Office.
   E.   Required Approvals Of Vehicle Purchases By Elected Officials Other Than
The Sheriff And Coroner:
      1.   If the vehicle purchase does not require a budget adjustment, no
County Board approvals are necessary.
      2.   If the vehicle purchase requires a budget adjustment, approval from
the elected official's standing committee, Finance Committee, Executive
Committee and County Board is required.
   F.   Vehicle Obtained By Seizure Or Forfeiture: A motor vehicle obtained by
seizure or forfeiture may be transferred to a department or office without
County Board approval, provided it is consistent with the budget and is
reported to the appropriate County Board Committee.
   G.   Vehicle Marking: All motor vehicles (with the exception of the vehicles
used by the Sheriff's, Coroner's and State's Attorney's Offices) shall be
marked prior to use unless otherwise approved by the Administration Committee
with appeal to the Executive Committee after notice to the Chairman of the
County Board, including, but not limited to, those used by department heads. No
individual names shall be used. No stickers or signage shall be affixed to the
vehicle other than the official County identification.
   H.   Municipal License Plates: All County-owned vehicles shall bear
Municipal license plates except those specifically indicated for undercover law
enforcement activities.
   I.   Vehicle Title: With the exception of Sheriff's Office vehicles and
certain vehicles determined by the State's Attorney to be considered State's
Attorney's Office vehicles, all County-owned vehicles shall be titled to the
"County of Kane" with no department or office name attached.
   J.   Holder Of Title And Registration: The Sheriff's Office, State's
Attorney's Office and Division of Transportation shall hold the original title
and registration of their vehicles. The County Clerk's Office is the holder of
the original title and registration for all other County-owned vehicles.
   K.   Signing Agents: The Sheriff, State's Attorney and County Clerk or their
designees are the authorized signing agents for County- owned vehicle titles.
   L.   Registration Responsibility: The office or department holding the
original title of a vehicle shall be responsible for maintaining the
registration of that vehicle with the Secretary of State of Illinois.
   M.   Fixed Asset; Insurance: All County-owned vehicles shall be listed with
the Finance Department for fixed asset purposes and with the Human Resource
Department for insurance purposes.
   N.   Disposal: Whenever possible, all vehicles are to be disposed of
following established disposal procedures set by the County purchasing agent or
Administration Committee. All automobiles, vans, and light duty trucks up to
and including three-fourths (3/4) ton, are to be disposed of through the
purchasing agent of Kane County. For vehicles over three-fourths (3/4) ton the
Purchasing Department will work in conjunction with the requesting department
for the disposal of the vehicle.
   O.   Elected And Appointed Officials: Nothing herein shall be construed as a
limitation or restriction upon the rights of control over internal operations
granted by law to elected or appointed officials. (Ord. 17-391, 12-12-2017)
2-83: EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Residency Requirement For All Kane County Employees: The county shall
only employ persons who maintain residence within the State of Illinois
throughout their employment. Wages, salary, and employee benefits shall only be
paid to persons residing in Illinois.
   B.   Exemption - Grandfather Clause: Employees for whom out of state
employment has been granted and established prior to the effective date of this
section are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 24-151, 6-11-
2024)
2-84 - 2-85: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
2-86: ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAN:
As provided in section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the "Code"), this division does amend and restate a
deferred compensation plan known as the County of Kane deferred compensation
plan (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "plan" or "agreement") for the
eligible employees of the County. Nothing contained in this plan shall be
deemed to constitute an employment agreement between a participant and the plan
sponsor and nothing contained herein shall be deemed to give a participant any
right to be retained in the employ of the plan sponsor. This amended and
restated plan shall apply to all participants in the plan on the effective date
hereof and to each eligible employee who elects to participate on and after the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-87: DEFINITIONS:
ACCOUNTS: The bookkeeping accounts maintained by the plan administrator with
respect to each participant which reflects the amount of compensation deferred
by the participant to the plan, including earnings or losses thereto, and any
distributions made to the participant or the participant's beneficiary.
BENEFICIARY: The individual, trustee, estate or legal entity properly
designated by the participant to receive benefits under this plan which become
payable in the event of the participant's death.
CODE: The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Reference to a specific
section of the Code includes not only the section but any comparable section or
sections of any future legislation that amends, supplements or supersedes the
section.
COMPENSATION: All amounts payable to an employee from the County as
remuneration for services performed for the County which would be includable in
the employee's gross income for the taxable year for federal income tax
purposes (W-2 earnings). Such term shall include any amount excludable from
gross income under this plan or any other plan described in section 457(b) of
the code, or any amount excludable from gross income under section 403(b), 401
(k), 125 or 132(f)(4) of the code.
COUNTY: The county of Kane located in the state of Illinois.
EFFECTIVE DATE: August 9, 2005.
ELECTIVE DEFERRAL: The annual amount of compensation that a participant elects
to defer pursuant to a properly executed elective deferral agreement.
ELECTIVE DEFERRAL AGREEMENT: The agreement between a participant and the county
to defer receipt by the participant of compensation not yet paid or otherwise
made available. Such agreement shall state the elective deferral amount to be
withheld from a participant's compensation and shall become effective no
earlier than the first day of the month following execution of such agreement.
Once executed, the elective deferral agreement shall be legally binding and
irrevocable with regard to amounts paid or otherwise made available while the
agreement is in effect.
ELIGIBLE DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN OR ELIGIBLE PLAN: A plan that constitutes
an eligible plan within the meaning of section 457 of the code.
ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE: Any employee who satisfies the eligibility requirements of
subsection 2-88A of this chapter. If any individual is not classified as an
eligible employee by the county and is subsequently reclassified as an eligible
employee by any governmental or regulatory authority, such individual shall
nevertheless be deemed to have become an eligible employee prospectively only,
effective as of the date of such reclassification (and not retroactive to the
date on which he or she was found to have first become eligible for any other
purposes), and then only if he or she otherwise satisfies the requirements of
this plan.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who performs services for the county to whom compensation
is paid on a regular basis. Employee shall not include any leased employee as
defined in section 414(n) of the code and any individual classified by the
county as an independent contractor of the county in accordance with its
general administrative policies.
INVESTMENT OPTIONS: One of the available alternatives for investment of
compensation deferred under the plan and allocated to a participant's account,
made available to the participants at the discretion of the plan administrator.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE: Age sixty five (65).
ORIGINAL EFFECTIVE DATE: July 8, 1975.
PARTICIPANT: An eligible employee or former eligible employee who shall have
become a participant in the plan in accordance with section 2-88 of this
chapter. An employee shall cease to be a participant at such time as he or she
no longer has any interest in accounts under the plan.
PLAN: The county of Kane deferred compensation plan set forth herein, as
amended from time to time.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR: The organization(s) appointed by the county to administer
the plan. If the county fails to make such appointment, the county shall be the
plan administrator.
PLAN YEAR: The twelve (12) consecutive month period beginning on January 1 and
ending December 31. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-88: PARTICIPATION IN THE PLAN:
   A.   Eligibility: Each employee shall be eligible to participate in the plan
and defer compensation hereunder upon becoming employed by the employer and
enrolling in the plan.
   B.   Enrollment In Plan: To participate in the plan, each eligible employee
shall complete and return the applicable forms, including an elective deferral
agreement, and submit them to the county or its designee. Enrollment shall be
effective on or after the first day of the month following the date the
enrollment forms are properly completed by the employee and accepted by the
county or its designee.
   C.   Information Provided By The Participant: Each employee enrolling in the
plan should provide to the plan administrator at the time of initial
enrollment, and later if there are any changes, any information necessary or
advisable for the plan administrator to administer the plan, including, without
limitation, whether the employee is a participant in any other eligible plan
under code section 457(b). (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-89: DEFERRAL OF COMPENSATION:
   A.   Elective Deferrals: An eligible employee may elect to make elective
deferrals to the plan pursuant to an elective deferral agreement with the
county. Any such elective deferrals shall not exceed the maximum deferral
limits set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Maximum Deferral:
      1.   Primary Limitation: The maximum amount that may be contributed to
the plan pursuant to subsection A of this section on behalf of any participant,
other than by means of a rollover or transfer, shall not exceed the lesser of:
a) the applicable dollar amount as set forth in code section 457(e)(15) or b)
one hundred percent (100%) of the participant's compensation for the taxable
year.
      2.   Age Fifty Catch Up Contributions: All participants who have attained
age fifty (50) before the close of the plan year shall be eligible to make
catch up contributions in accordance with, and subject to the limitations of,
section 414(v) of the code.
      3.   Limited Catch Up Contributions: In addition to subsection B2 of this
section, for one or more of the participant's last three (3) taxable years
ending before he attains his normal retirement age under the plan, the
participant's maximum deferral shall be the larger of: a) the amount specified
in subsection B1 of this section or b) the lesser of: 1) twice the applicable
limit set forth in section 457(e)(15) of the code reduced by any amount
excludable from the participant's gross income attributable to deferrals to
another section 457(b) eligible deferred compensation plan or 2) the
"underutilized limitation". The "underutilized limitation" is the sum of the
"plan ceiling" (that is, the lesser of the applicable limit set forth in
section 457(e)(15) or 100 percent of the participant's includable compensation
reduced by any amount excludable from the participant's gross income
attributable to deferrals to another section 457(b) eligible deferred
compensation plan) for the taxable year, plus so much of the limit established
in section 457(b)(2) for taxable years before the taxable year as has not been
previously used (that is, the 457(b)(2) limit for any prior taxable year or
years, less the amount of annual deferrals under the plan for such prior
taxable year or years [disregarding any annual deferrals under the plan
permitted under the first paragraph above]). A prior taxable year is taken into
account under the preceding sentence only if it is a year beginning after
December 31, 1978, in which the participant was eligible to participate in the
plan, and in which compensation deferred (if any) under the plan during the
year was subject to the plan ceiling. However, this subsection B3 shall not
apply with respect to any participant who has previously utilized in whole or
in part the limited catch up under this plan or any other section 457 eligible
deferred compensation plan.
   C.   Coordination With Other Plans: If a participant participates in more
than one code section 457(b) plan, the maximum deferral under all such plans
shall not exceed the applicable limit described in subsection B1 of this
section (subject to modification by the catch up limitations described in
subsections B2 and B3 of this section).
   D.   Correction Of Excess Deferrals: If the annual deferral on behalf of a
participant for any calendar year exceeds the limitations described in
subsection B of this section, or the annual deferral on behalf of a participant
for any calendar year exceeds the limitations described above when combined
with other amounts deferred by the participant under another eligible deferred
compensation plan under section 457(b) of the code for which the participant
provides information that is accepted by the plan administrator, then the
annual deferral, to the extent in excess of the applicable limitation (adjusted
for any income or loss in value, if any, allocable thereto), shall be
distributed to the participant as soon as administratively feasible.
   E.   Modifications To Amount Deferred: A participant may elect to change his
or her elective deferral rate with respect to future compensation by submitting
a new properly executed elective deferral agreement to the county. Such change
shall take effect as soon as administratively practicable but not earlier than
the first pay period commencing with or during the first month following
receipt by the county of such elective deferral agreement.
   F.   Termination Of Deferral: A participant may terminate his or her
election to have compensation deferred by so notifying the county in writing.
Such termination shall take effect as soon as administratively practicable, but
not earlier than the first pay period commencing with or during the first month
following receipt by the county of satisfactory written notice of such
revocation.
   G.   Vesting: A participant shall be fully vested at all times in his or her
elective deferrals under this plan. Such elective deferrals shall be
nonforfeitable at all times.
   H.   Uniform Services: Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the
contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified
military service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the
code. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-90: INVESTMENTS:
Participants will direct the investment of their accounts among the investment
options made available by the plan administrator. If any provision of an
investment option agreement is not consistent with the plan provisions, the
terms of the plan shall control. All amounts of compensation deferred under
this plan, all property and rights which may be purchased with such amounts and
all income attributable to such amounts, property or rights shall be held in
trust, a custodial account, or annuity contract described in code section 401
(f) for the exclusive benefit of participants and their beneficiaries. (Ord.
05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-91: ROLLOVERS TO THE PLAN AND TRANSFERS:
   A.   Eligible Rollover Contributions To The Plan:
      1.   A participant who is an employee and who is entitled to receive an
eligible rollover distribution from another eligible retirement plan may
request to have all or a portion of the eligible rollover distribution paid to
the plan. The plan administrator may require such documentation from the
distributing plan as it deems necessary to effectuate the rollover in
accordance with section 402 of the code and to confirm that such plan is an
eligible retirement plan within the meaning of section 402(c)(8)(B) of the
code.
      2.   For purposes of subsection A1 of this section, an "eligible rollover
distribution" means any distribution of all or any portion of a participant's
benefit under another eligible retirement plan, except that an eligible
rollover distribution does not include: a) any installment payment for a period
of ten (10) years or more, b) any distribution made as a result of an
unforeseeable emergency or other distribution which is made upon hardship of
the employee, or c) for any other distribution, the portion, if any, of the
distribution that is a required minimum distribution under section 401(a)(9) of
the code. In addition, an eligible retirement plan means an individual
retirement account described in section 408(a) of the code, an individual
retirement annuity described in section 401(a) of the code, an annuity plan
described in section 403(a) or 403(b) of the code, or an eligible governmental
plan described in section 457(b) of the code, that accepts the eligible
rollover distribution.
      3.   The plan shall establish and maintain for the participant a separate
account for any eligible rollover distribution paid to the plan from any
eligible retirement plan that is not an eligible governmental plan under
section 457(b) of the code. In addition, the plan shall establish and maintain
for the participant a separate account for any eligible rollover distribution
paid to the plan from any eligible retirement plan that is an eligible
governmental plan under section 457(b) of the code.
   B.   Plan To Plan Transfers To The Plan: At the direction of the employer,
the plan administrator may permit a class of participants who are participants
in another eligible governmental plan under section 457(b) of the code to
transfer assets to the plan as provided in this subsection B. Such a transfer
is permitted only if the plan provides for the direct transfer of each
participant's interest therein to the plan. The plan administrator may require
in its sole discretion that the transfer be in cash or other property
acceptable to the plan administrator. The plan administrator may require such
documentation from the other plan as it deems necessary to effectuate the
transfer in accordance with section 457(e)(10) of the code and section 1.457-10
(b) of the income tax regulations and to confirm that the other plan is an
eligible governmental plan as defined in section 1.457-2(f) of the income tax
regulations. The amount so transferred shall be credited to the participant's
account and shall be held, accounted for, administered and otherwise treated in
the same manner as an elective deferral by the participant under the plan,
except that the transferred amount shall not be considered under the plan in
determining the maximum deferral under subsection 2-89B of this chapter.
   C.   Plan To Plan Transfers From The Plan:
      1.   At the direction of the employer, the plan administrator may permit
a class of participants and beneficiaries to elect to have all or any portion
of their account transferred to another eligible governmental plan within the
meaning of section 457(b) of the code and section 1.457-2(f) of the income tax
regulations. A transfer is permitted under this subsection C1 for a participant
only if the participant has had a severance from employment with the employer
and is an employee of the entity that maintains the other eligible governmental
plan. Further, a transfer is permitted under this subsection C1 only if the
other eligible governmental plan provides for the acceptance of plan to plan
transfers with respect to the participants and beneficiaries and for each
participant and beneficiary to have an amount deferred under the other plan
immediately after the transfer at least equal to the amount transferred.
      2.   Upon the transfer of assets under this subsection C, the plan's
liability to pay benefits to the participant or beneficiary under this plan
shall be discharged to the extent of the amount so transferred for the
participant or beneficiary. The plan administrator may require such
documentation from the receiving plan as it deems appropriate or necessary to
comply with this subsection C (for example, to confirm that the receiving plan
is an eligible governmental plan under subsection C1 of this section, and to
assure that the transfer is permitted under the receiving plan) or to
effectuate the transfer pursuant to section 1.457-10(b) of the income tax
regulations. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-92: DISTRIBUTIONS:
   A.   Eligibility For Payment: Distribution of benefits from the plan shall
be made no earlier than: 1) severance from employment or 2) in the event of an
approved financial hardship due to an "unforeseeable emergency", as defined
below.
      1.   Definitions:
   SEVERANCE FROM EMPLOYMENT: The termination of a participant's employment
with the county for any reason including the participant's death, disability or
retirement.
   UNFORESEEABLE EMERGENCY: A severe financial hardship to the participant
resulting from a sudden and unexpected illness or accident of the participant
or of a dependent of the participant, loss of the participant's property due to
casualty, or other similar extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances
arising as a result of events beyond the control of the participant. The
circumstances that will constitute an unforeseeable emergency will depend upon
the facts of each case, but, in any case, payment may not be made to the extent
that such hardship is or may be relieved:
         a.   Through reimbursement or compensation by insurance or otherwise;
         b.   By liquidation of the participant's assets, to the extent that
liquidation of such assets would not itself cause severe financial hardship; or
         c.   By cessation of deferrals under the plan.
The need to send a participant's child to college or the desire to purchase a
home shall not be considered to be an unforeseeable emergency.
   B.   Distribution Due To Unforeseeable Emergency: A participant may request
a distribution due to an unforeseeable emergency by submitting a written
request to the plan administrator, accompanied by evidence to demonstrate that
the circumstances being experienced qualify as an unforeseeable emergency. The
plan administrator shall have the authority to require such evidence, as it
deems necessary to determine if a distribution shall be warranted. If an
application for a distribution due to an unforeseeable emergency is approved,
the distribution shall be limited to an amount sufficient to meet the
unforeseeable emergency.
   C.   Commencement Of Distributions:
      1.   Upon a participant's severance from employment, the participant may
elect to receive distributions under one of the optional distribution forms
then available under the investment option chosen by the participant.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C1 of this section, in
no event shall distribution of benefits commence with respect to any
participant later than the April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar
year in which the participant attains age seventy and one-half (701/2), or if
later, the April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which
the participant incurs a severance from employment.
   D.   Distribution Requirements:
      1.   General Rule: This subsection D is intended to comply with code
section 457(d) and the regulations issued thereunder. To the extent that there
is any conflict between the provisions of code section 457(d) and the
regulations issued thereunder and any other provision in this plan, the
provisions of code section 457(d) and the regulations issued thereunder will
control.
      2.   Distribution Options: Distributions shall be paid in accordance with
the payment option elected by the participant. Payment, method of payment and
settlement options are available as provided by each of the investment options
then available to the participant.
      3.   Minimum Amounts To Be Distributed: If a participant's retirement
payments are to be distributed in a form other than a single lump sum, the
amount to be distributed each year, and the times those amounts are paid, shall
satisfy the requirements specified in section 401(a)(9) of the code and the
regulations issued thereunder.
      4.   Death Distribution Provisions:
         a.   Death After Distributions Begin: If the participant dies after
distribution of his or her interest has commenced, the remaining portion of
such interest shall continue to be distributed at least as rapidly as the
method of distribution being used prior to the participant's death.
         b.   Death Before Distributions Begin: If the participant dies before
distribution of his or her interest has commenced, distribution of the
participant's entire interest shall be completed by the December 31 of the
calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death,
except to the extent that the recipient of such benefits elects to receive
distributions in accordance with the following:
            (1)   If any portion of the participant's interest is payable to a
designated beneficiary, distributions may be made in substantially equal annual
payments over a period of ten (10) years commencing no later than the December
31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the
participant died;
            (2)   If the designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving
spouse, the date distributions are required to begin in accordance with
subsection D4b(1) of this section shall be the December 31 immediately
following the calendar year in which the participant died or, if later, the
December 31 of the calendar year in which the participant would have attained
age seventy and one-half (701/2).
If the participant has not made an election pursuant to this subsection D by
the time of his or her death, the participant's designated beneficiary must
elect the method of distribution no later than the earlier of: a) the December
31 of the calendar year in which distributions would be required to begin under
this subsection D, or b) the December 31 of the calendar year which contains
the fifth anniversary of the date of death of the participant. If the
participant has no designated beneficiary, or if the designated beneficiary
does not elect a method of distribution, distribution of the participant's
entire interest must be completed by the December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the participant's death.
         c.   Death Of Spouse: For purposes of this subsection D4, if the
surviving spouse dies after the participant, but before payments to such spouse
begin, the provisions of this subsection D4 with the exception of subsection
D4b(2) of this section shall be applied as if the surviving spouse were the
participant.
         d.   Determination Of Distribution Date: For the purposes of this
subsection D, distribution of a participant's interest is considered to begin
on the participant's required beginning date (or, if applicable, the date
distribution is required to begin to the surviving spouse). (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-
2005)
2-93: BENEFICIARY INFORMATION:
   A.   Designation: A participant shall have the right to designate a
beneficiary, and amend or revoke such designation at any time prior to
commencement of benefits, in writing, in a form approved by the plan
administrator. Such designation, amendment or revocation shall be effective
upon satisfactory receipt by the plan administrator.
   B.   Failure To Designate A Beneficiary: Benefits shall be paid to a
participant's spouse, or if none, to his estate, in the event: 1) a participant
has the right to designate a beneficiary pursuant to the terms of subsection A
of this section, and 2) prior to the date a participant commences to receive
payment of benefits under the plan, the participant has not designated a
beneficiary or no designated beneficiary survives the participant and benefits
are payable following the participant's death. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-94: PLAN ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Plan Administrator: The county shall be responsible for appointing a
plan administrator to administer the plan. The plan administrator shall have
sole discretionary responsibility for the interpretation of the plan, enrolling
participants in the plan, directing investments of deferrals made pursuant to
the plan, and for performing other duties required for the operation of the
plan. Any action taken on any matter within the discretion of the plan
administrator shall be made in its sole and absolute discretion based on this
plan document, and shall be final, conclusive, and binding on all parties. In
order to discharge its duties hereunder, the plan administrator shall have the
power and authority to delegate ministerial duties and to employ such outside
professionals as may be required for prudent administration of the plan.
   B.   Accounts And Expenses: The plan administrator shall establish and
maintain accounts on behalf of each participant. Each such account shall
reflect the aggregate of elective deferral contributions, transfers and
rollovers, if any, made on behalf of a participant, and shall also reflect the
investment experience attributable to each such account based upon the
investment experience described in subsection C of this section. The account
shall also reflect any reductions due to expense charges applied to, and
distributions made from, each such account.
   C.   Investment Experience: Amounts credited to a participant's account
shall reflect the investment experience of the investment options selected
under the plan. The county authorizes each participant to select the investment
options under the plan that will be used to measure the investment experience
of such participant's account. The investment options shall include the
investment options made available by the plan administrator. The initial
allocation request may be made at the time of enrollment in the plan. Once
made, an investment allocation request shall remain in effect for all
subsequent contributions until changed by the plan administrator, or the
participant, as the case may be. A participant may change any allocation made
by such participant hereunder by submitting a written request to the plan
administrator or its designee on such form as may be required by the plan
administrator or its designee. Any such changes shall become effective as soon
as administratively feasible after the plan administrator or its designee
receives a satisfactory written request. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-95: AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION OF PLAN:
While it is expected that this plan will continue indefinitely, the county
reserves the right at any time to amend, otherwise modify, or terminate the
plan without any liability for such action. In the event of a termination of
the plan, the county shall notify participants of the termination. (Ord. 05-
287, 8-9-2005)
2-96: MISCELLANEOUS:
   A.   Plan Noncontractual: Nothing contained in this plan will be construed
as a commitment or agreement on the part of any person to continue his or her
employment with the county, and nothing contained in this plan will be
construed as a commitment on the part of the county to continue the employment
or the rate of compensation of any person for any period, and all employees of
the county will remain subject to discharge to the same extent as if the plan
had never been put into effect.
   B.   Claims Of Other Persons: The provisions of the plan will in no event be
construed as giving any participant or any other person, firm, corporation or
other legal entity, any legal or equitable right against the county, its board
or employees, except the rights as are specifically provided for in this plan
or created in accordance with the terms and provisions of this plan.
   C.   Assignments: No benefit or interest available hereunder will be subject
to assignment or alienation, either voluntarily or involuntarily, other than as
provided under section 401(a)(13) of the code. The preceding sentence shall
also apply to the creation, assignment, or recognition of a right to any
benefit payable with respect to a participant pursuant to a domestic relations
order, unless such order is determined to be a qualified domestic relations
order, as defined in section 414(p) of the code.
   D.   Pronouns: Whenever used herein, the masculine pronoun is deemed to
include the feminine. The singular form, whenever used herein, shall mean or
include the plural form where applicable, and vice versa.
   E.   Representations: The county does not represent or guarantee that any
particular federal or state income, payroll, personal property or other tax
consequence will result from participation in this plan. A participant should
consult with professional tax advisors to determine the tax consequences of his
or her participation. Furthermore, the county does not represent or guarantee
investment returns with respect to any investment options and shall not be
required to restore any loss which may result from such investment or lack of
investment.
   F.   Severability: If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision
of this plan to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of the
plan shall continue to be fully effective.
   G.   Applicable Law: This plan shall be construed in accordance with
applicable federal law and, to the extent otherwise applicable, the laws of the
state of Illinois. (Ord. 05-287, 8-9-2005)
2-97 - 2-102: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. ETHICS
2-103: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this division, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION: The execution or rejection of any rule, regulation,
legislative rule, standard, fee, rate, contractual agreement, purchasing
agreement or other delegated legislative or quasi-legislative action to be
taken or withheld by any county officer, employee or appointee.
APPOINTEE OR APPOINTED OFFICIAL: A person appointed to a position in or with
Kane County or with any authority, agency, board or commission with or without
the consent of the Kane County board regardless of whether the position is
compensated.
BUSINESS OR ENTITY: The actual organization or person to which a Kane County
contract has been awarded or contract is to be awarded and includes any of the
business' principals, family members of the business' principals and any other
legal entities in which those principals or family members have a controlling
interest or have control over the disbursement of funds of the business.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to any officer, employee or appointee, any time
worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes
of this division, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when said officer, employee
or appointee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers, employees or
appointees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of
time when the officer, employee or appointee is on the premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer, employee or
appointee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATED TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of employment with the county.
COMPENSATION: Any money, thing of value, or economic benefit conferred on, or
received by, any person in return for services rendered, or to be rendered, by
himself or herself or another.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code.
COUNTY: The county of Kane and, where applicable, any of its elected officers.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: The director or executive director of a Kane County
department.
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY: Any purchase, sale, lease, contract, option or other
transaction or arrangement involving property or services wherein a legislator
may gain an economic benefit. The term shall not include gifts.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the county of Kane, whether on a full time or
part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
The term "employment" as used herein shall mean an "employee".
EMPLOYER: The county of Kane.
FAMILY MEMBER AND IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: "Family member" shall mean those
people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
sister, uncle, aunt, husband, wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, and stepsister. "Immediate family member"
shall mean father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, and spouse.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
HONORARIA: Payment of money to an officer or Kane County employee for an
appearance or speech, excluding any actual and necessary travel expenses
incurred to the extent that those expenses are paid by any other person and
does not include: a) cash payments made on behalf of an officer to an
organization described under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of
1986, b) an agent's fee or commission, or c) funds reported under the election
code.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee is on an approved absence
from work.
LOBBYING: Promoting or opposing in any manner the passage of any legislative
matter affecting the interests of any individual, association or corporation as
distinct from those of the people.
LOBBYIST: Any person who engages in lobbying.
MARKET VALUE: The price that a gift would bring for tangible or intangible
assets of like type, quality and quantity in the local market at the time of
acquisition.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, a position in Kane
County government or a position appointed by the county board chair regardless
of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official
capacity.
PERSON OR ENTITY: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, association,
trust, estate, business trust, group or corporation, whether or not operated
for profit, or a governmental agency, unit or subdivision.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee;
   E.   Is registered or required to be registered with the secretary of state
under the lobbyist registration act, except that an entity not otherwise a
prohibited source does not become a prohibited source merely because a
registered lobbyist is one of its members or serves on its board of directors;
or
   F.   Is an agent of, or an immediate family member who is living with a
prohibited source.
VENDOR: Any person, entity, corporation or association which has any contract
or agreement with the county to provide for compensation, labor, materials,
services or professional services. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-104: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of Kane County in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this division.
   E.   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position, the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
   F.   An employee shall not be required to: 1) purchase tickets, solicit
orders to purchase tickets, sell, distribute or receive payment for political
tickets for any political fundraiser or campaign fund for a specific candidate
for political office or 2) financially contribute to any political
organization, political party, political rally, political fundraiser, political
meeting or political event.
   G.   Political contributions shall not be intentionally solicited or
accepted on county property by any employee or candidate for elective office.
An inadvertent acceptance of a political contribution shall not be considered a
violation of this division if reasonable and timely action is taken to return
the contribution to its source.
   H.   An officer or employee or a candidate for an elected office may not
promise anything of value related to county government, including, but not
limited to, positions in county government, promotions, salary increases, other
employment benefits, board or commission appointments, favorable treatment in
any official or regulatory matter, the awarding of any public contract, or
action or inaction on any legislative or regulatory matter, in consideration
for a contribution to a political committee, political party, or other entity
that has as one of its purposes the financial support of a candidate for
elective office.
   I.   Any employee who is requested or directed by an officer, member,
employee, or candidate for elected office to engage in activity prohibited by
this section shall report such request or directive to the state's attorney's
office. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-105: GIFT BAN AND HONORARIA:
Except as permitted by this division, no officer or employee subject to this
section, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or
employee (collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally
solicit or accept any gift from any “prohibited source”, as defined herein, or
which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 10-206, §
2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 22-430, § 3, 11-7-2022)
2-105-1: EXCEPTIONS:
Section
2-105 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services available on the same conditions
as for the general public.
   B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
   C.   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   D.   Educational materials and missions.
   E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss Kane County business.
   F.   A gift from a “relative”, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother- in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiance or fiancee.
   G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the officer or employee subject to this section has reason to
believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the
official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or
immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In
determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the
officer or employee subject to this section shall consider the circumstances
under which the gift was offered, such as:
      1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving the
gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals;
      2.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who
gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
      3.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who
gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
   H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are:
      1.   Consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared;
or
      2.   “Catered”, defined as food or refreshment that is purchased ready to
consume which is delivered by any means.
   I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee) of the
officer or employee subject to this section, if the benefits have not been
offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the
officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.
   J.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
section, “intragovernmental gift” means any gift given to an officer or
employee subject to this section from another officer or employee subject to
this section, and “intergovernmental gift” means any gift given to an officer
or employee subject to this section by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   K.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 22-430, §
3.1, 11-7-2022)
2-105-2: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee or an immediate family member living with the officer or
employee, does not violate the gift ban provisions of this division if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited
source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3)
of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered,
or succeeded. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-105-3: POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS:
Any officer or candidate subject to this section shall comply with Section 9-
8.5 of the Election Code and its limitations on political committee campaign
contributions, and any subsequent revisions thereto as adopted by the General
Assembly. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Ord. 23-36, 1-10-2023)
2-106: ETHICS ADMINISTRATION:
   A. This division shall be administered by the Kane County Department of
Human Resources in conjunction with the Ethics Commission and the Ethics
Advisor, as hereafter provided.
   B. Any records, disclosure statements or other documents (collectively,
"Records") filed or required to be filed pursuant to this division shall be
kept and maintained by the officer, employee, department or office specified in
this division. Copies of all records sall be filed with the Department of Human
Resources by the officer, employee, department or office responsible for the
original documents.
2-106-1: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission of Kane County ("Ethics Commission"). The Ethics Commission shall be
comprised of five members appointed by the chairman of the Kane County board
with the advice and consent of the Kane County Board. No person shall be
appointed as a member of the ethics commission who is related, either by blood
or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the
County of Kane. No more than three members of the Ethics Commission shall
belong to the same political party at the time such appointments are made.
Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person appointed.
   B.   At the first meeting of the Ethics Commission, the initial appointees
shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Three commissioners shall
serve 2- year terms and the remaining two commissioners shall serve a one-year
term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to 2-year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
   C.   At the first meeting of the Ethics Commission, the commissioners shall
choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the chairperson or any 3 commissioners. A quorum shall consist three
   commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of three members.
   D.   The chairman of the Kane County Board, with the advice and consent of
the Kane County Board, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency,
neglect of duty or malfeasance in officer after service on the commissioner by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges
against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in
person or by counsel upon not less than 10 days' notice. Vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as original appointments.
   E.   The Ethics Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
      2.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue written recommendations
for disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with Section
2-106-8 of this Ordinance and refer violations of Section
2-104 or Section
2-104 of this Ordinance to the Kane County State's Attorney's Office. The
Ethics Commission shall, however, act only upon receipt of a written complaint
alleging a violation of this Ordinance and not on its own prerogative.
      3.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigation and to require additional information and documents from person
who may have violated the provisions of this Ordinance.
      4.   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees, subject to this ordinance, of Kane County to cooperate
with the Ethics Commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or
refusal to cooperate with requests by the Ethics Commission shall constitute
grounds for discipline or discharge.
The powers and duties of the Ethics Commission are limited to matters clearly
within the purview of this ordinance. (Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-2: ETHICS ADVISOR:
   A.   The Chairman of the Kane County Board, with the advice and consent of
the County Board, shall appoint an Ethics Advisor for a term of three (3)
years. Applications for the Ethics Advisor appointment may be solicited by way
of a request for qualifications. The Human Services Committee shall initially
review all timely responses to the request for qualifications and shall forward
all written responses of the applicants to the Chairman of the Kane County
Board together with the committee's evaluation of each application. The
Chairman of the Kane County Board may, in his/her sole discretion, interview
potential candidates prior to recommending the appointment of a particular
candidate to the full County Board. The Ethics Advisor may be compensated as an
independent contractor, as determined by the County Board.
   B.   Minimum qualifications for the office of Ethics Advisor may include,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Has not been convicted of any felony under the laws of the State of
Illinois, another state or the United States; and
      2.   Has a juris doctorate or master's degree in public administration;
and
      3.   Has five (5) or more years of cumulative service:
         a.   With a federal, state or local law enforcement agency, with
investigatory experience;
         b.   As a federal, state, or local prosecutor or public defender;
         c.   As a senior manager, executive, or official of a federal, state
or local agency;
         d.   As a state or federal judge;
         e.   As an elected officer of a unit of local government;
         f.   As a law professor;
         g.   As an ethics professor;
         h.   As an attorney in private practice;
         i.   As a member of the clergy; or
         j.   With a combination of any subsection listed in this division
B.3.; and
      4.   Has strong oral and written communication skills; and
      5.   Has the ability to interpret, explain and apply laws and
regulations; and
      6.   Has a high level of integrity and ability to maintain
confidentiality.
   C.   The Ethics Advisor shall perform the following duties pursuant to this
division:
      1.   Provide guidance to the officers and employees of Kane County
concerning the interpretation and compliance with the provisions of this
division.
      2.   Prepare and conduct ethics training in conjunction with the State's
Attorney's Office and request the assistance of the Kane County Human Resources
Department to keep attendance records of all employees receiving ethics
training.
      3.   Prepare and disseminate, with the assistance of the Kane County
Department of Human Resources, informational and training materials relating to
this Ordinance.
      4.   Receive all inquiries concerning this Ordinance not otherwise
directed to the Ethics Commission.
      5.   Report apparent violations of this ordinance to the Ethics
Commission.
      6.   Forward any written complaints directly to the Ethics Commission for
resolution.
      7.   Notify the elected official or department head or County Board of
the ultimate disposition of any investigations undertaken by the ethics
commission so that appropriate disciplinary action, if appropriate may be
taken.
      8.   Prepare written opinions on any interpretation of the Ordinance and
records of any informal or unwritten opinions in order to maintain consistency
of interpretation and promotecompliance.
      9.   Maintain records of all written or verbal guidance on interpretation
and application of this Ordinance (redacted so as to preserve the privacy of
the persons making the inquiry) and make such records available to officers,
employees and the general public in order to maintain consistency of
interpretation and promote compliance.
      10.   Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the County Board.
   D.   The following activities are prohibited by the Ethics Advisor during
his/her term of office:
      1.   May not become a candidate for any elective office.
      2.   May not hold any other appointed public office, except for
appointments on governmental advisory boards or study commissions.
      3.   May not otherwise currently be employed by Kane County or any of its
employing units, or by any of its elected officers.
   E.   The Kane County Board Chairman may remove the Ethics Advisor, with or
without cause, by notice to the Ethics Advisor, by USPS certified mail, return
receipt requested, and shall immediately notify the County Board of such
action. The County Board may overrule the removal of the Ethics Advisor at its
next regularly scheduled meeting by a majority vote of the members then holding
office. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-3: STATE’S ATTORNEY’S OFFICE:
The State's Attorney's Office shall perform the following duties with regard to
this division:
   A.   File a legal complaint in the Circuit Court of the Sixteenth Judicial
Circuit alleging a violation of this Ordinance as warranted by the facts or
exercise such discretion to resolve complaints without resorting to the filing
of a legal complaint. Except as otherwise provided in this division, all legal
complaints filed in Circuit Court by the State's Attorney's Office shall be
prosecuted as a quasi-criminal ordinance violation. Except as otherwise
provided in this ordinance, the prosecution shall be under and conform to the
rules of civil procedure. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the
standard of proof for establishing a violation shall be proof by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   B.   The State's Attorney's Office shall perform such other duties as may be
requested by the County Board when deemed appropriate by the State's Attorney's
Office in the exercise of professional judgment. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010;
amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-4: INQUIRIES:
All inquiries concerning interpretation of this Ordinance shall be in writing
and submitted to the Ethics Advisor and all responses shall be in writing. The
Ethics Advisor may issue informal oral opinions and guidance provided that a
record of the inquiry and the response is kept and maintained as provided in
Section 2-106-2 hereof. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-
2023)
2-106-5: COMPLAINTS OF WRONGDOING:
   A.   Complaints concerning violations of this Ordinance shall be signed,
notarized, and submitted in writing to the Ethics Commission. Complaints shall
describe in detail the act or acts complained of and provide a list of
witnesses to the act or acts. The Complaint shall contain the home address and
personal telephone number of the individual submitting an allegation.
   B.   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of the complaint, The
Ethics Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and
a copy of the complaint. The Ethics Commission shall send by certified mail,
return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the
Complainant within three (3) business days after receipt by the Ethics
Commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise
them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency
of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
   C.   The Complaint must be filed within thirty (30) days following knowledge
of the alleged violation, but in no event, more than one (1) year after the
actions giving rise to the alleged violation except where there is reasonable
cause to believe that fraudulent concealment has occurred. To constitute
fraudulent concealment there must be an affirmative act or representation
calculated to prevent discovery of the fact that a violation has occurred.
   D.   The Ethics Commission shall endeavor to keep the identity of an
individual (the "complainant") submitting a complaint confidential unless:
      1.   Public legal proceedings have been initiated regarding the
Complaint, or
      2.   The complainant consents to disclosure, or
      3.   The interests of fairness or due process require disclosure, or
      4.   Disclosure is otherwise required by law or court order. (Ord. 10-
206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-6: INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARINGS:
   A.   Upon receipt of a written Complaint, upon not less than 48 hours'
public notice, the Ethics Commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of
the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation
of this Ordinance, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the
evidence presented by the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to
the public to the extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. The Ethics
Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the
Ethic Commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if
necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven (7) business days after
receiving the complaint unless good cause exists to extend the time period.
   B.   If a complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this
Ordinance and there is a determination of probable cause, then the Ethics
Commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the Ethics
Commission may elect to notify, in writing, the State's Attorney to prosecute
such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the
complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no
determination of probable cause, then the Ethics Commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the
decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
   C.   The Ethics Commission shall have the discretion to determine the
appropriate means of investigation as permitted by law and to request
information relating to an investigation consistent with Section
2-106-1.
   D.   An investigation may not be initiated more than one (1) year after the
most recent act of alleged violation or a series of alleged violations except
where there is reasonable cause to believe that fraudulent concealment has
occurred. To constitute fraudulent concealment there must be an affirmative act
or representation calculated to prevent discovery of the fact that a violation
has occurred.
   E.   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours' public notice of the
meeting incompliance with the Open Meetings Act, the Ethics Commission shall
conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity
to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only
if authorized by the Open Meetings Act.
   F.   Within thirty (30) days after the hearing or any recessed hearing is
concluded, the Ethics Commission shall either:
      1.   Dismiss the complaint; or
      2.   Recommend disciplinary action to the alleged violator and the
chairman of the Kane County Board or other officer having authority to
discipline the officer or employee, or impose a fine upon the violator, or
both.
      The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline,
and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
   G.   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand,
the Ethics Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at
least forty-eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both
parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7)
days thereafter, the Ethics Commission shall public issue a final
recommendation to the alleged violator and the chairman of the Kane County
Board or other officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee,
or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
   H.   It is the obligation of all officers and employees subject to this
ordinance to cooperate with the ethics commission during the investigation.
Failure or refusal to cooperate may constitute grounds for discipline or
discharge of an employee. Any party may represent himself or herself or be
represented by legal counsel of his or her own choice and own expense. (Ord.
10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-7: REPORTS:
At least twice per fiscal year, the Ethics Advisor with the assistance of the
Kane County Department of Human Resources and the ethics commission shall
compile and deliver to the Chairman of the County Board and to the Kane County
Human Services Committee a report consisting of: The number of inquiries
received concerning interpretation of this Ordinance and the State ethics laws.
   A.   The number of filed Complaints.
   B.   The number of Complaints deemed to sufficiently allege a violation of
this division.
   C.   The number of Complaints deemed to be insufficient.
   D.   The number of Complaints found to be supported by substantial evidence.
   E.   The number of Complaints found not to be supported by substantial
evidence.
   F.   The number of Complaints filed in Circuit Court.
   G.   The number of Complaints settled prior to Court ruling.
   H.   The disposition of each Complaint.
   I.   The status of pending Complaints.
   J.   The number of officers and employees receiving ethics training. (Ord.
10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-106-8: PENALTIES:
Any employee, officer or agent of the County who intentionally violates any
provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to disciplinary actions, as well
as such fines and penalties as are prescribed in the Kane County Code or other
applicable laws. Any employee, officer or agent of the County who willfully and
intentionally files a Complaint for the purpose of influencing the State's
Attorney's Office or Ethics Commission to initiate an investigation and without
regard for the truth of the matters set forth in the Complaint, shall be
subject to discipline, up to and including termination. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-
13-2010; amd. Res. 23-254, 6-13-2023)
2-107:      EMPLOYEE COOPERATION:
   A.   All employees shall conduct themselves in a way that complies with the
“Kane County Personnel Policy Handbook” as adopted and amended from time to
time as if it were reproduced in this division in its entirety.
   B.   Each employee shall be obligated to cooperate during the course of an
investigation and to comply with requests for information from the state’s
attorney’s office. Failure or refusal to comply with said requests for
information shall constitute a violation of this division and may be considered
grounds for discipline or discharge. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-108:      COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS:
Any investigation and any recommendation for discipline of an employee pursuant
to this division are subject to the provisions of any collective bargaining
agreement that may apply to the employee. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-109: COUNTYWIDE ELECTED OFFICERS:
All countywide elected officers of Kane County shall be subject to this
division with the exception of the state's attorney and the clerk of the
circuit court to the fullest extent not otherwise prohibited by law. Any such
officer may adopt or maintain an ethics policy that is more restrictive than
that set forth in this division and may continue to follow any existing
policies, ordinances, rules or regulations that are more restrictive and are in
addition to those set forth in this division. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-110: TRAINING:
Officers and employees must complete, within six (6) months after adoption of
this division and at least annually thereafter, an ethics training program
conducted by the Kane County department of human resources, the ethics advisor,
and, as appropriate, the state's attorney's office. A new employee must
complete his/her initial ethics training during orientation within the first
month of employment. Officers shall attend a training program within six (6)
months of being elected or appointed (or as soon thereafter as an ethics
training program is offered) and at least annually thereafter. The department
of human resources shall maintain records evidencing each employee's and
officer's attendance at such training programs. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-111: WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION:
   A.   An officer, employee or agency shall not take any retaliatory action
against an employee or independent contractor because the employee or
independent contractor does any one of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, county agency, or
other county employee that the county employee or independent contractor
reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation.
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, county agency, or other county
employee.
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
this division.
   B.   A violation of this section may be established only upon a finding
that: 1) the county employee or independent contractor engaged in conduct
described in subsection A of this section and 2) that conduct was a
contributing factor in the retaliatory action alleged by the county employee or
independent contractor. It is not a violation, however, if it is demonstrated
by clear and convincing evidence that the officer, employee or agency would
have taken the same unfavorable personnel action in the absence of that
conduct.
   C.   The county employee or independent contractor may be awarded all
remedies necessary to make the county employee or independent contractor whole
and to prevent future violations of this section. The circuit court shall have
jurisdiction to hear cases brought under this section. Remedies imposed by the
court may include, but are not limited to, all of the following:
      1.   Reinstatement of the employee to either the same position held
before the retaliatory action or to an equivalent position;
      2.   Twice the amount of back pay;
      3.   Interest on the back pay;
      4.   Reinstatement of full fringe benefits and seniority rights; and
      5.   Payment of reasonable costs and attorney fees.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish the rights,
privileges, or remedies of a county employee or independent contractor under
any other federal, state or county law, rule or regulation or under any
collective bargaining agreement or employment contract.
   E.   All offices, agencies and departments shall conspicuously display
notices of employee protection under this section.
   F.   An employee or independent contractor who reports a violation or
concern in good faith on behalf of another employee shall not be subjected to
retaliation, harassment, abuse, threats, and discrimination or any adverse
employment consequences as a result of coming forward.
   G.   This section shall not apply to a complainant or employee or
independent contractor acting on behalf of a complainant who knowingly makes a
false report. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-112: CONTRACTOR DISCLOSURE:
   A.   Prior to award, every contractor or vendor who is seeking or who has
obtained contracts or change orders to contracts or two (2) or more individual
contracts with Kane County resulting in an amount greater than fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) shall disclose to the Kane County purchasing department,
in writing all cumulative campaign contributions (which includes multiple
candidates) made within the previous twelve (12) months of awarding of the
contract made by that contractor, union, or vendor to any current officer or
countywide elected officer whose office the contract to be awarded will
benefit. Disclosure shall be updated annually during the term of a multiyear
contract and prior to any change order or renewal requiring board level
approval. For purposes of this disclosure requirement, "contractor or vendor"
shall include owners, officers, managers, insurance brokers, lobbyists, agents,
consultants, bond counsel and underwriters counsel, subcontractors
corporations, partnerships, associations, business trusts, estates, trustees,
and/or beneficiaries under the control of the contracting person, and political
action committees to which the contracting person has made contributions.
   B.   All contractors and vendors who have obtained or are seeking contracts
with Kane County must disclose the following information which shall be
certified and attached to the application or document. Penalties for knowingly
violating disclosure requirements will potentially result in immediate
cancellation of the contract, and possible disbarment from future county
contracts.
      1.   Name, address and percentage of ownership interest of each
individual or entity having a legal or a beneficial interest of more than five
percent (5%) in the applicant. Any entity required by law to file a statement
providing substantially the information required by this paragraph with any
other government agency may file a duplicate of such statement.
      2.   Names and contact information of their lobbyists, agents and
representatives and all individuals who are or will be having contact with
county employees or officials in relation to the contract or bid. This
information disclosure must be updated when any changes to the information
occurs.
      3.   Whenever any interest required to be disclosed in subsection B1 of
this section is held by an agent or agents, or a nominee or nominees, the
principals for whom such agents or nominees hold such interest shall also be
disclosed. The application of a spouse or any other party, if constructively
controlled by another person, or legal entity as set forth above, shall state
the name and address and percentage of beneficial interest of such person or
entity possessing such constructive control and the relationship under which
such control is being or may be exercised. Whenever a stock or beneficial
interest is held by a corporation or other legal entity, such shareholder or
beneficiary shall also make disclosure as required by subsection B1 of this
section.
      4.   A statement under oath that the applicant has withheld no
disclosures as to economic interests in the undertaking nor reserved any
information, data or plan as to the intended use or purpose for which it seeks
county board or other county agency action.
   C.   All disclosures and information shall be current as of the date upon
which the application is presented and shall be maintained current until such
time as Kane County shall take action on the application. Furthermore, this
information shall be maintained in a database by the purchasing department, and
made available for public viewing.
   D.   Notwithstanding any of the above provisions, the county purchasing
department with respect to contracts awarded may require any such additional
information from any applicant which is reasonably intended to achieve full
disclosure relevant to the application for action by the county board or any
other county agency.
   E.   Any failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall render
any ordinance, ordinance amendment, county board approval or other county
action in behalf of the applicant failing to comply voidable at the option of
the county board or other county agency involved upon the recommendation of the
county board chairman or the majority of the county board.
   F.   The purchasing department is authorized to prepare forms to effectuate
the purpose of this section and shall ensure that all disclosure requirements
of this division are set out in any notice to bidders in a request for
qualification or proposal. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-113: OFFICER DISCLOSURE:
All officers shall disclose their financial interests and holdings in any
business seeking a relationship with Kane County where the officer has an
ownership interest of seven and one-half percent (71/2%) or greater. These
disclosures shall be in compliance with the public officer prohibited
activities act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/0.01 et seq., and shall
include: a) publicly disclosing the nature and extent of interest prior to or
during deliberations concerning the proposed award of the contract and b)
withdrawing from discussion and not voting on the award of the contract. (Ord.
10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-114: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
   A.   An officer or any of their employees while representing Kane County or
employed by Kane County shall disclose any act that may be in conflict with the
performance of his or her official duties. No officer nor any of their
employees while representing Kane County or employed by Kane County shall
engage in any act that is in conflict with the performance of his or her
official duties. A conflict of interest exists whenever official action could
result in a personal advantage or disadvantage to the interested officer or
employee, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Receives or has any financial interests in any purchase, sale or
lease to or by the county where that purchase, sale or lease was obtained with
prior knowledge that the county intended to take such action.
      2.   Represents, or whose firm represents, any person who would receive
direct financial benefit as a result of the official action under
consideration.
      3.   Accepts or seeks any employment, travel, compensation or gift from
any person doing business or seeking to do business with the county for which
the employee has responsibility.
      4.   Receives or accepts a gift, compensation, or travel that was given
for the purpose of obtaining special consideration or to influence county
action where a reasonable and prudent person would believe that the purpose was
to obtain special consideration or to influence county action.
      5.   Violates any provision of the public officer prohibited activities
act 1 .
   B.   The officer who has a conflict situation should abstain from discussion
and shall not vote on any contract with the person or business involved in the
conflict. If the conflict situation is an action that is prohibited by the
public officer prohibited activities act, a member cannot avoid the conflict by
abstaining from discussion or vote on the contract.
   C.   Any employee who becomes aware that he or she may have a conflict of
interest that arises in the course of his or her official duties shall notify,
in writing, the department of human resources of such conflict. The disposition
of the potential conflict shall be stated in writing and maintained by the
department of human resources. An officer shall not participate in
deliberations where they have a conflict of interest as defined under this
division and must not participate in the decision making in any manner.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other law or ordinance, on and after the effective
date hereof, a person and his or her immediate family members are ineligible to
serve on a board, commission, authority, or task force authorized or created by
the Kane County board if: 1) that person is entitled to receive more than seven
and one-half percent (71/2%) of the total distributable income under a Kane
County contract other than an employment contract or 2) that person together
with an immediate family member are entitled to receive more than fifteen
percent (15%) in the aggregate of the total distributable income under a Kane
County contract other than an employment contract; except this provision does
not apply to any of the following:
      1.   A person and his or her family member living with that person, who
is serving in an elective public office, whether elected or appointed to fill a
vacancy; and
      2.   A person and his or her family member living with that person, who
is serving on a Kane County advisory body that makes nonbinding recommendations
to an agency of Kane County but does not make binding recommendations or
determinations or take any other substantive action. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-
2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 105/0.01 et seq.
2-115: FUTURE AND FORMER EMPLOYMENT:
   A.   No officer shall solicit or accept employment with the county within
one year of such officer's resignation or termination of an elected term
(whichever shall first occur). The county board by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
all of the members then holding office may waive the prohibition in this
subsection.
   B.   Any vendor who employs or retains as a consultant, lobbyist, attorney
or other independent contractor a former county officer within one year of such
officer's resignation or termination of an elected term (whichever shall first
occur) shall disclose to the Kane County purchasing department, in accordance
with but in addition to the requirements of section 2-112 of this chapter, the
name, title, and job description or the nature of the contracted services of
the former officer and shall disclose the amount of compensation paid or to be
paid to such officer for such employment or services. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-
2010)
2-116: USE OF PROPRIETARY OR CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
No employee, officer, or the ethics advisor may intentionally disclose or use
for his or her personal benefit or for the benefit of his or her family members
any information acquired in the course of official duties, which is not
available as a matter of public knowledge or public record, or which is exempt
from disclosure under the freedom of information act or this division.
Violations of this section shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action
consistent with the enforcement provisions of this division. (Ord. 10-206, § 2,
7-13-2010)
2-117: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION AND OPEN MEETINGS ACT:
   A.   Documents generated by the ethics advisor under this division are
exempt as allowed by law from the provisions of the freedom of information act.
   B.   Meetings held by the ethics advisor under this division are exempt as
allowed by law from disclosure pursuant to the provisions of the open meetings
act. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-118: LOBBYING:
(Rep. by Ord. 22-93, 3-8-2022)
2-119: DISCLOSURE:
Officers and those persons appointed to a board, commission, authority, or task
force authorized or created by Kane County, must file with the county clerk a
disclosure of all contracts the person or his or her spouse or immediate family
members living with the person have with the county and all contracts between
the county and any entity in which the person or his or her spouse or immediate
family members living with the person have a majority financial interest. Rules
for the implementation and administration of this section must be adopted.
Disclosures filed under this section are public records. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-
13-2010)
2-120: PROHIBITION ON SERVING ON BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
No officer shall be appointed to serve on a board or commission which is a
compensated position for which appointment is made by the Kane County board
chairman without the advice and consent of the Kane County board unless
otherwise authorized by state law. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-121: EMPLOYMENT OF FAMILY MEMBERS:
   A.   This section shall not apply to any family members employed on the
passage date hereof.
   B.   No officer may approve, recommend or otherwise take action with regard
to the appointment, reappointment, hiring, promotion, salary or supervision of
a family member.
   C.   Officers and employees shall fully disclose the existence of any
relationship to a family member who is an officer or employee of the county at
the time of election or employment or that develops at any time during the
course of their term of office or employment. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-122: REPRESENTATION OF THIRD PARTIES:
   A.   No officer or employee may represent or act on behalf of any person or
entity other than the county in a formal or informal proceeding, application or
transaction before any county office or agency.
   B.   No officer or employee may represent any person or entity in any
judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding before any administrative agency or court
in which the county is a party and that person's interest is directly adverse
to that of the county.
   C.   No officer or employee shall have an economic interest in the
representation by others of any person or entity in the circumstances set forth
in subsections A and B of this section.
   D.   No appointed official may represent any person in the circumstances
described in this section unless the matter is wholly unrelated to the
appointed official's county duties and responsibilities.
   E.   For purposes of this section, "economic interest" shall not include the
interest of the spouse of an officer, appointed official, or employee which
interest is related to the independent occupation, profession or employment of
the spouse.
   F.   Nothing in this section shall preclude any officer or employee from
being an applicant or party to any proceeding or transaction before any county
office, agency, or judicial or quasi-judicial entity to the extent not
otherwise prohibited by law.
   G.   Representation shall not include inquiries for information or other
services rendered in a legislative capacity on behalf of a constituent or other
member of the public. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-123: DUAL PENSION:
Within not more than three (3) months after taking office and annually, but not
later than May 1 of each succeeding year, any officer subject to this division
shall disclose on a form provided by the department of human resources the
identity of any unit of state or local government from which any pension or
retirement package is currently received or vested. To the extent not
prohibited by other law or regulation, such disclosure shall include the nature
of the pension benefit as well as any other benefits received including, but
not limited to, healthcare. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-124: SEVERABILITY AND DECLARATION OF UNCONSTITUTIONALITY:
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code.
(Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-2010)
2-125: CODE OF CONDUCT AND ETHICAL PRINCIPLES FOR OFFICERS:
   A.   No officer may accept any economic opportunity, under circumstances
where he knows or should know that there is a substantial possibility that the
opportunity is being afforded him with intent to influence his conduct in the
performance of his/her official duties.
   B.   No officer may charge to or accept from a person known to have an
interest in the county a price, fee, compensation or other consideration for
the sale or lease of any property or the furnishing of services which is
substantially in excess of that which the officer would charge in the ordinary
course of business.
   C.   No officer in order to further his/her own economic interests, or those
of any other person, may disclose or use confidential information acquired in
the course of his/her official duties.
   D.   No officer may accept a representation case where there is substantial
reason for him/her to believe that it is being offered with intent to obtain
improper influence over a Kane County agency.
   E.   No officer may use or attempt to use improper means to influence a Kane
County agency in any representation case in which the officer or any person
with whom he/she maintains a close economic association is participating.
   F.   No officer may engage in other conduct which is unbecoming to an
officer or which constitutes a breach of public trust.
   G.   Where feasible, and taking into account the fact that officers may
serve part time, officers should avoid accepting or retaining an economic
opportunity which presents a substantial threat to his/her independence of
judgment.
   H.   When an officer must take official action on a matter as to which he/
she has a conflict situation created by a personal, family, or client interest,
he/she should consider the possibility of eliminating the interest creating the
conflict situation. If that is not feasible, he/she should consider the
possibility of abstaining from such official action. In making his/her decision
as to abstention, the following factors should be considered:
      1.   Whether a substantial threat to his/her independence of judgment has
been created by the conflict situation.
      2.   The effect of his/her participation on public confidence in the
integrity of the county.
      3.   Whether his/her participation is likely to have any significant
effect on the disposition of the matter.
      4.   The need for his/her particular contribution, such as special
knowledge of the subject matter, to the effective functioning of his/her office
or the county.
      5.   He/she need not abstain if he/she decides to participate in a manner
contrary to the economic interest which creates the conflict situation.
      6.   If he/she does abstain, he/she should disclose that fact to his/her
respective agency or body.
   I.   When, despite the existence of a conflict situation, an officer chooses
to take official action on a matter, he/she should serve the public interest
and not the interest of any person.
   J.   An officer participating in a representation case shall disclose,
wherever feasible, their participation in a representation case.
   K.   Employees or officers shall not intentionally disclose any information
discussed during executive session of the county board or any of its
committees.
   L.   This section is intended only as a guide for officer conduct and not as
rules meant to be enforced by disciplinary action. (Ord. 10-206, § 2, 7-13-
2010)
2-126: SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   A.   All persons have a right to work in an environment free from sexual
harassment.
   B.   All county officers subject to this section are prohibited from
sexually harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or
lack thereof, including other county officers.
   C.   The provisions of the county's Policy on Prohibition of Discrimination
and Harassment ("The County's Policy") are incorporated herein by reference and
are applicable to all elected officials of the county subject to this section,
including but not limited to, prohibition on retaliation for reporting
discrimination or sexual or other forms of harassment in accordance with the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, the Whistleblower Act and the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
   D.   As more fully detailed in the county's Policy on prohibition and
harassment, "Sexual harassment" is any unwelcome sexual advances or requests
for sexual favors or any other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature
when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of a board member's appointments;
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive working environment.
   E.   Allegations of sexual harassment made against a county officer by
another county officer: In addition to the procedures outlined in the county's
Policy, a county officer may report a complaint of sexual harassment against
another county officer to the ethics advisor for an independent review. The
ethics advisor, in consultation with the Kane County State's Attorney Office,
shall take immediate action (keeping with the procurement process of the
county) to retain a qualified individual or entity for the independent review
of the allegations of sexual harassment, with costs to be paid from the
county's contingency fund, insurance liability fund, or such other funds
identified by the County Board. The outcome of the independent review shall be
reported to the Kane County Board for further action. (Res. 22-430, § 24, 11-7-
2022)
ARTICLE IV. JOB CLASSIFICATION MANUAL AND PERSONNEL POLICY HANDBOOK
SECTION:
2-127: Paid Leave Policies
2-128 - 2-190: Reserved
2-127: PAID LEAVE POLICIES:
   A.   Pursuant to Section 5-1018 of the Counties Code and Sections 15(p) and
15(n) of the Paid Leave for All Workers Act (the "Act"), the County hereby
adopts the Sick and Personal Leave Policy, attached to the ordinance codified
herein as Exhibit A and incorporated herein, which may be amended from time to
time in compliance with law, as a required paid leave policy for its employees.
The Kane County Employee Handbook is hereby amended by repealing and deleting
the short term sick leave provisions contained in Sections (A)-(D) of the
County's Sick Leave Policy and adding the new Sick and Personal Leave Policy,
attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A.
   B.   Pursuant to Section 15(p) of the Act, the County expressly affirms that
the provisions of the Act shall not apply to the County's employees. This
Ordinance governs and supersedes all provisions of the Act impacting the
employment relationship between the County and its employees.
   C.   Pursuant to Section 15(p) of the Act, elected and appointed County
officials with internal control shall have the ability, at their option, to
expressly adopt the County Policy on Sick and Personal Leave for non union
employees by notifying their employees and the County Department of Human
Resource Management and the County Payroll Department in writing.
   D.   Pursuant to Section 15(n) of the Act, the County hereby affirms the
paid leave benefits included in the respective and currently existing
collective bargaining agreements to which the County is a party. Nothing in the
Act or this Ordinance shall be deemed to affect the validity or change the
terms of the currently existing collective bargaining agreements. To the extent
the terms of any collective bargaining agreement conflict with the County's
Sick and Personal Leave Policy, the terms of the collective bargaining
agreement shall prevail.
   E.   No additional obligations with regard to mandatory paid leave,
including without limitation, any obligations adopted under the Act by the
State of Illinois, shall apply to the County in its capacity as an employer,
except those required by federal or State of Illinois laws and regulations
preempting the County's authority.
(Ord. 23-529, 12-12-2023)
2-128 - 2-190: RESERVED:
ARTICLE V. FINANCIAL AFFAIRS
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
2-191: Finance Director
2-192: Internal Audit Procedure
2-193: Expenditure Of Funds And Settlement Of Claims
2-194: Waste Disposal Enterprise Fund
2-195: Tax Sale Purchase Trust Account
2-196: Depositories For Funds Of The County Treasurer/Collector
2-196-1: Administrative Fee For Child Support Disbursements
Division 2. Industrial Revenue Bonds
2-197: Purpose; Powers; General Conditions
2-198: Uses
2-199: Advantages
2-200: Sale
2-201: Technical Limitations
2-202: Customary Clauses To Be Included In Lease
2-203: Procedures
2-204: Bond Counsel
2-205: Costs
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
2-191: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
   A.   Position Established; Duties: The position of finance director is
hereby established, and shall further be charged with the responsibility of
creating and maintaining all necessary systems and procedures which may be
required to control, through planning, evaluating and reporting, the financial
affairs of the county. The finance director shall also supervise the financial/
budgetary administration of all county departments for which the county board
is responsible, and to further cooperate with elected officials in order to
facilitate effective budget planning and execution; and shall, under the
direction of the executive committee and the county board chairman:
      1.   Review monthly financial reports prior to distribution.
      2.   Reconcile cash balances with the treasurer's records for all funds
and prepare required monthly journal entries.
      3.   Prepare monthly cash and budget forecasts.
      4.   Approve travel advance requests from the imprest fund, prepare
disbursement checks and follow up on reimbursements.
      5.   Approve cash transfers between and within funds, and initiate the
appropriate county resolutions.
      6.   Set up accounting system and procedures for newly established funds
and initiate the appropriate county resolutions.
      7.   Review activity with administrators of deferred compensation plans
on a quarterly basis.
      8.   Such other special projects as may be assigned by the executive
committee or the county board chairman.
The finance director shall work under the general direction of the county board
chairman, and shall remain employed at the will of the county board. (Ord. 91-
303, 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-10, 1-12-1993)
2-192: INTERNAL AUDIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Access To Records: The county auditor shall have access to all records,
documents and resources necessary to maintain a continuous internal audit.
   B.   Internal Audit Report: Upon the completion of each internal audit, the
county auditor shall issue an internal audit report to the affected county
officer, agent, or division, with a copy of said report to be sent to the
county board committee responsible for financial management. This internal
audit report will address actual or potential weaknesses within the internal
control of the operations and/or financial reporting of the county officer,
agent or division and recommend procedures which will improve or eliminate the
problem areas.
   C.   Response To Internal Audit Report:
      1.   Each county officer, agent or division shall, within three (3)
business days, acknowledge receipt of the internal audit report.
      2.   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the internal audit report,
each county officer, agent or division shall submit a written response to the
county auditor, outlining the action that has been taken in response to the
recommendations made by the auditor.
      3.   Subsequent to the issuance of the internal audit report, the county
auditor shall review the operations and financial reporting of the affected
county officer, agent or division. This review will focus on, but not be
limited to, the recommendations suggested in the internal audit report. Upon
completion of the review, a report outlining the conditions found at the time
of the review will be prepared and delivered to the county board. (Ord. 94-260,
10-11-1994)
2-193: EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS AND SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS:
Since the county is self-insured, the Kane County board hereby delegates to the
State's Attorney, by and through Assistant State's Attorneys, the authority to
determine whether claims initiated by the County, its officers, employees or
agents should be allowed or disallowed, and whether claims against the County,
its officers, employees or agents should be allowed or disallowed, up to the
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), if sufficient funds have been
budgeted and are available in the appropriate county fund. The State's
Attorney, by and through Assistant State's Attorneys, shall provide the legal
affairs and claims committee and the Executive Director of Human Resources
electronic notice of intent to settle a claim up to ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), and the legal affairs and claims committee and the Executive
Director of Human Resources shall have two (2) business days after receipt of
notice to object to a settlement and require that a claim be reviewed by the
committee. For all claims that exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the
Kane County board hereby delegates to a special committee of the county board
to be known as the "legal affairs and claims committee", to be appointed by the
chairman of the county board with the advice and consent of the county board
the authority to determine whether claims initiated by the county, its
officers, employees or agents should be allowed or disallowed, and whether
claims against the county, its officers, employees or agents should be allowed
or disallowed, up to the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
claim, if sufficient funds have been budgeted and are available in the
appropriate county fund. If there is a dissenting vote by a committee member on
the allowance of any claim, the claim shall be referred to the county board for
final action. The authority herein delegated shall not extend to any claims
arising from goods, products or services furnished to the county which are the
subject of article VI of this chapter. The finance director is authorized to
expend from the insurance liability fund the amount authorized by the legal
affairs and claims committee to settle such claim without further resolution of
the Kane County board.
   A.   Legal Affairs And Claims Committee: The legal affairs and claims
committee shall be a subcommittee of the county board executive committee and
shall consist of four (4) members thereof appointed by the chairman of the
county board with the advice and consent of the county board, and a chairman,
who shall be the chairman of the county board. The chairman may vote on all
matters considered by the committee. The committee shall have the powers and
duties set out in this section, and such other duties as may be assigned or
delegated to it from time to time. The committee shall meet at the call of the
chair.
   B.   Monthly Reports On Claims: The county auditor shall file a monthly
report of all claims paid in the prior month to the chairman and all other
members of the county board. For each claim paid, the monthly report shall
identify the claimant, the nature of the claim and the official or department,
if any, against which the claim was made, the fund from which the payment was
made, the amount of the payment and the date the check was issued. (Ord. 95-
152, 5-23-1995; Ord. 07-33, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-2007; Ord. 24-544, 2-11-2025)
2-194: WASTE DISPOSAL ENTERPRISE FUND:
   A.   There shall be created the Kane County waste disposal enterprise fund.
   B.   All monies received pursuant to the amended agreement for operation of
landfill at Settler's Hill, authorized by resolution 94-376 and effective
January 1, 1995, shall be deposited in said enterprise general fund.
   C.   The enterprise general fund shall be utilized for any purpose deemed
appropriate by the county board. (Res. 83-129, 9-13-1983; Ord. 88-59, 4-12-
1988; Ord. 91-302, 11-12-1991; Ord. 97-189, 7-8-1997)
2-195: TAX SALE PURCHASE TRUST ACCOUNT:
   A.   There is established the "tax sale purchase trust account" which shall
be maintained by the county treasurer.
   B.   The following money shall be deposited into said trust fund:
      1.   The proceeds from the redemption of taxes purchased by the county at
tax sales.
      2.   The proceeds from the sale of tax sale certificates or of property
to which the county obtains title by tax deed.
      3.   All interest earned from the investment of money held in the trust
fund.
   C.   Within ten (10) days of receipt of the proceeds from the redemption of
tax sale certificates, the treasurer shall transfer to the county collector the
face amount of the tax sale certificates for distribution as required by law.
   D.   The following expenses shall be paid by the treasurer out of the trust
fund upon approval of the agent designated by the county board to act upon its
behalf at the tax sale:
      1.   The salary of any person hired by the county to process the
paperwork necessary to buy taxes or proceed to tax deed, as well as the
necessary expenses, office supplies, equipment, and postage required by said
employee.
      2.   All fees required to obtain title reports, provide for notices and
newspaper publications required by law to obtain a tax deed, and necessary
court fees.
      3.   Money required by law to be distributed to taxing districts as the
proceeds from the sale of property obtained by tax deed or tax sale
certificates.
   E.   The treasurer at the direction of the executive committee, shall
transfer to the county general fund any excess funds not needed to pay the
expenses allowed in subsection D of this section.
   F.   The county treasurer shall make quarterly financial reports to the
executive committee on the status of the trust fund. The fund shall be audited
as a part of the annual county audit. (Res. 83-199, § 1, 12-13-1983)
2-196: DEPOSITORIES FOR FUNDS OF THE COUNTY TREASURER/COLLECTOR:
   A.   The following are hereby designated depositories for County Funds and
monies which are in custody of Christopher J. Lauzen, Treasurer and ex-officio
County collector of the County of Kane:
AURORA TOWNSHIP BATAVIA TOWNSHIP
AURORA TOWNSHIP                       BATAVIA TOWNSHIP
Associated Bank                       American Bank & Trust
Aurora Bank & Trust                   Bank of America
Bank of America                       BMO Harris Bank
Bank of Montgomery                    Fifth Third Bank
BMO Harris Bank                       First State Bank
Citibank, NA                          JP Morgan Chase Bank
Earthmovers Credit Union              Old Second Bank Corp
Fifth Third Bank                      PNC Bank
First American Bank                    
Old National Bank                     BLACKBERRY TOWNSHIP
First Secure Community Bank           American Bank & Trust
First State Bank                      Fifth Third Bank
Fox Valley Credit Union               Old National Bank
Huntington National Bank (FirstMerit) Old Second Bank Corp
JP Morgan Chase Bank                   
Kane County Teachers Credit Union     BURLINGTON TOWNSHIP
Marquette Bank                        Old Second Bank Corp
Old Second Bank Corp                   
PNC Bank                              CAMPTON TOWNSHIP
St. Charles Bank & Trust Wintrust     Old Second Bank Corp
U.S. Bank                              
                                      
ELGIN TOWNSHIP                        DUNDEE TOWNSHIP
American Eagle Bank                   Associated Bank
Associated Bank                       Bank of America
Bank of America                       BMO Harris Bank
BMO Harris Bank                       Fifth Third Bank
Elgin State Bank                      First American Bank
Fifth Third Bank                      JP Morgan Chase Bank
First American Bank                   Old Second Bank Corp
First Community Bank                  PNC Bank
First Federal Savings Bank             
FNBC Bank & Trust                     KANEVILLE/VIRGIL TOWNSHIP
JP Morgan Chase Bank                  American Bank & Trust
Kane County Teachers Credit Union     Old Second Bank Corp
Old Second Bank Corp                   
PNC Bank                              RUTLAND TOWNSHIP
Prairie Community Bank                BMO Harris Bank
RBS Citizens Charter One              Heartland Bank & Trust Company
TBK Bank, SSB                         JP Morgan Chase Bank
U.S. Bank                             PNC Bank
Union National Bank                    
                                      
GENEVA TOWNSHIP                       ST. CHARLES TOWNSHIP
American Bank & Trust                 American Bank & Trust
Bank of America                       Bank of America
BMO Harris Bank                       BMO Harris Bank
CIBC Bank                             CIBC Bank
Fifth Third Bank                      Citibank, NA
First American Bank                   Fifth Third Bank
First State Bank                      First American Bank
Geneva Bank & Trust                   First State Bank
Byline Bank                           Heartland Bank & Trust Company
JP Morgan Chase Bank                  JP Morgan Chase Bank
Kane County Teachers Credit Union     Old Second Bank Corp
Old Second Bank Corp                  PNC Bank
State Bank of Geneva                  RBS Citizens Charter One
U.S. Bank                             St. Charles Bank & Trust Wintrust
                                     U.S. Bank
HAMPSHIRE TOWNSHIP                     
Fifth Third Bank                       
First American Bank                    
Heartland Bank & Trust Company         
Old Second Bank Corp                   
Resource                               
                                      
SUGAR GROVE TOWNSHIP                  OTHER
First National Bank of Omaha          Associated Bank
First Secure Community Bank           Autoagent Data Solutions, LLC
JP Morgan Chase Bank                  Fifth Third Securities
Old Second Bank Corp                  Old National Bank
                                     Illinois Trust
                                     Byline Bank
                                     JP Morgan Chase Bank
                                     MBS Multi-Bank Securities, Inc.
                                     PFM Asset Management, LLC
                                     Raymond James
                                     Speer Financial, Inc.
                                     Stifel
                                     Suburban Bank & Trust Company
                                     The Illinois Funds
                                     Truist Financial Corporation
                                     UBS Financials
                                     US Bank
                                     Vining Sparks IBG, L.P.
                                     Vectors Asset Management
                                     Zions Bancorporation, NA
 
   B.   No bank herein designated shall be qualified to receive funds or monies
until it has provided statements of resources and liabilities which such bank
is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies, or the
comptroller of currency, or the Federal Home Loan Bank;
   C.   Such bank designated as depository for such funds or monies shall
furnish the county treasurer with a copy of all bank statements which it is
required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies, or the
comptroller of currency, or the Federal Home Loan Bank; and
   D.   If such funds or monies are deposited in a bank herein designated as a
depository, the amount of such deposits shall not exceed seventy five percent
(75%) of the capital stock and surplus of such bank, and the county treasurer
and ex officio county collector shall not be discharged from responsibility for
such funds or monies deposited in such bank in excess of such limitations; and
   E.   Depositories mentioned herein have furnished the body with copies of
their past two (2) statements as furnished to the comptroller of currency, or
commissioner of banks and trust companies, or the Federal Home Loan Bank, which
statements are approved and accepted. (Ord. 94-126, 5-10-1994; Ord. 95-136, 5-
9-1995; Ord. 96-112, 4-9-1996; Ord. 97-130, 5-13-1997; Ord. 98-126, 5-12-1998;
Ord. 99-114, 4-14-1999; Ord. 00-131, 5-9-2000; Ord. 00-196, 7-11-2000; Ord. 01-
170, 5-8-2001; Ord. 02-156, 5-14-2002; Ord. 04-181, 4-13-2004; Ord. 05-162, 5-
10-2005; Ord. 06-148, 4-11-2006; Ord. 07-174, 5-8-2007; Ord. 08-97, 4-8-2008;
Ord. 09-134, 4-14-2009; Ord. 10-138, 4-13-2010; Ord. 11-83, 3-8-2011; Ord. 12-
62, 3-13-2012; Ord. 13-57, 3-12-2013; Ord. 14-45, 2-11-2014; Ord. 15-21, 2-10-
2015; Ord. 16-42, 2-9-2016; Ord. 17-44, 2-14-2017; Ord. 21-49, 2-9-2021; Ord.
24-018, 1-9-2024; Ord. 25-105, 3-11-2025)
2-196-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR CHILD SUPPORT DISBURSEMENTS:
The office of the circuit clerk, 16th judicial circuit, shall be authorized to
assess against and shall collect from any respondent in any order of
maintenance or child support the sum of thirty six dollars ($36.00) annually as
costs for administering the collection and disbursement of maintenance of child
support payments. (Ord. 86-120, § 1, 9-9-1986)
DIVISION 2. INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BONDS
2-197: PURPOSE; POWERS; GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   Industrial revenue bonds are tax exempt securities issued for the
purpose of building and equipping industrial facilities, which facilities may
be leased to responsible companies. In the alternative, the county may simply
loan the proceeds of the industrial revenue bonds to a responsible company
without the necessity of entering into a lease of the financed facilities. The
county authority includes the power to build, rebuild, acquire, improve or
extend industrial buildings as well as the acquisition of machinery and
equipment. Industrial revenue bonds issued to finance facilities are to be
repaid from lease or loan repayments made by the company, which lease or loan
repayments must be sufficient to amortize the bonds. The rentals or loan
repayments are used to pay the principal and interest requirements on the
bonds. The company must have sufficient financial strength to assure the
retirement of the bonds.
   B.   If a lease agreement is used, the lease agreement stipulates that the
company may acquire the project from the county after the bonds are retired for
a nominal fee. The lease or loan agreement will further provide that the
company accepts an unconditional obligation to make lease or loan payments and
satisfy other agreements of the lease or loan agreement so long as any part of
the bond issue remains outstanding. The county will in no way be liable for the
payment of the bonds or interest due thereon; however, holders of the bonds
will have a lien on the rentals or loan repayments due under the lease or loan
agreement. (Res. 86-37, § A, 3-11-1986; Res. 88-111, 7-12-1988)
2-198: USES:
Industrial revenue bonds may be sold to finance the cost of industrial
buildings, for use as a factory, mill, processing plant, assembly plant,
packaging plant, fabricating plant, office building, industrial distribution
center, warehouse, repair, overhaul or service facility, freight terminal,
research facility, test facility, railroad facility or commercial facility, and
also including the sites therefor and other rights and land therefor whether
improved or unimproved, site preparation and landscaping, and all appurtenances
and facilities thereto incidental, including machinery and equipment. (Res. 86-
37, § B, 3-11-1986; Res. 88-111, 7-12-1988)
2-199: ADVANTAGES:
   A.   Advantages To Industry: The attraction of industrial revenue bonds is
the lower rate of interest they must pay compared to the rate currently
available in the conventional money market.
   B.   Advantages To Bond Purchasers: The principal advantage of industrial
revenue bond financing derives from the fact that the interest on the bonds is
exempt from federal and state taxation (subject to certain limitations).
   C.   Advantages To County: The industrial revenue bond financing procedure
provides a valuable means to increase employment opportunities within the
county area and the state. (Res. 86-37, §§ C-E, 3-11-1986)
2-200: SALE:
As a general policy, the county requires the company to arrange for the private
placement of the bonds with a reputable financial institution. The repayment
schedule for industrial revenue bonds may be negotiated to best suit the needs
of the company. It may be level debt service or any variation acceptable to the
bond purchasers, including balloon, serial and term bonds. Length and maturity
schedules are also subject to negotiations. (Res. 86-37, § F, 3-11-1986)
2-201: TECHNICAL LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Each revenue bond project must stand alone on the obligation of the
tenant company, security by a mortgage of the project and other pledges of
securities; i.e., fixtures, personal property, rolling stock, given by the
tenant company.
   B.   Industrial revenue bonds may be issued for a maximum of forty (40)
years. However, the retirement schedule is generally shorter, depending on the
size of the issue and other bond market considerations. Illinois law places no
limit on the size of the issue. Federal taxation legislation limits United
States income tax exemption for industrial revenue bond issues to ten million
dollars ($10,000,000.00). Bonds issued for financing pollution control
facilities are not limited as to amount. In addition, bonds issued for
financing facilities to be owned and operated by entities exempt from taxation
under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code are not limited as to
amount.
   C.   Bonds are not considered a liability of the county or a charge against
the county's general credit.
   D.   In order to preserve the tax exempt status of the bonds, the bond
issue, after notice and public hearing, must be approved by an elected
legislative body or an elected public official. In addition, if the facility to
be financed by the issue is to be located in whole or in part outside of the
geographical jurisdiction of the issuer, the issue, must be approved, after
public hearing, by a legislative body or an elected public official.
   E.   A statement must be filed with the internal revenue service by the
issuer no later than the fifteenth day of the second month following the close
of the calendar quarter during which the bonds are issued. (Res. 86-37, § G, 3-
11-1986; Res. 88-111, 7-12-1988)
2-202: CUSTOMARY CLAUSES TO BE INCLUDED IN LEASE:
The following clauses are customarily included in the lease or loan agreement:
   A.   The limit of the lease or loan agreement.
   B.   Amount of periodic rental or loan repayments to be paid by the company
to amortize the bond issue.
   C.   Provisions indicating that the company must pay all expenses of repair
and maintenance.
   D.   Provisions indicating that the company must pay all insurance expenses,
including liability for property damage, personal injury and workers'
compensation.
   E.   Provisions indicating that the company must pay all taxes and special
assessments levied upon the property.
   F.   Provisions indicating that the company must maintain all real and
personal properties without waste, regardless of whether the company is the
owner or the lessee of said properties.
   G.   If a lease agreement is used, an option to purchase or release the
property at the termination of the lease.
   H.   If a trustee is employed, clauses defining the relationships between
the trustee, the county and the company.
   I.   Duties of the county. (Res. 86-37, § H, 3-11-1986; Res. 88-111, 7-12-
1988)
2-203: PROCEDURES:
A company interested in exploring the feasibility of industrial revenue bond
financing within the county should follow the hereinafter described procedures:
   A.   The county board office shall be contacted by a representative of the
company and apprised of the proposed bond issue. The county board office should
then notify the chairman of the executive committee and the director of the
county development department. The executive committee will review and make
recommendations to the full county board on all requests for bonds or financing
to further building and expansion of industry and business.
   B.   After the board chairman is notified of the proposed bond issue, a
representative of the company should contact the county board executive
secretary and arrange that the matter be placed on the agenda of the executive
committee. During the course of the committee meeting at which the matter is
discussed, a public hearing shall be conducted on the matter.
   C.   The company representative or its bond counsel shall cause to be
published, at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the public hearing,
notice of the meeting at which the public hearing will take place. This meeting
is to serve as the public hearing required for the bond issue under the
internal revenue code.
   D.   The committee meeting should include a discussion of the following
facts regarding the bond issue:
      1.   The general description of the proposed development.
      2.   Nature of the proposed industrial operation.
      3.   Anticipated number of employees.
      4.   Anticipated traffic impact on the municipality.
      5.   The economic benefits to be derived from the project.
      6.   Breakdown of the project costs (including costs attributed to the
land, building and equipment).
      7.   Nature of equipment to be financed, if applicable.
      8.   Credit worthiness of the company seeking bond.
   E.   After hearing the testimony of the company representative and any
parties that may wish to be heard, the executive committee shall then vote to
approve or disapprove of the bond issue.
   F.   1. At the next county board meeting, the board chairman or his designee
shall report his recommendation to the entire board. The county board shall
then vote to approve or disapprove of the bond issue.
      2.   The county board chairman shall then notify the company
representative of the result of the county board vote on the bond issue.
   G.   Once the bond issue is approved by the county board, a memorandum of
agreement and inducement resolution may then be presented to the county board.
These documents are to be prepared by the company representative in conjunction
with the county counsel. The memorandum of agreement and inducement resolution
may be presented at the county board meeting wherein the bond issue is approved
or at the next regularly scheduled county board meeting.
   H.   Once the inducement resolution is passed, commencement of preparation
of the document is authorized.
   I.   In addition to the documents necessary for the bond issue, the company
representative or bond counsel shall prepare a statement for filing with the
internal revenue service to satisfy federal tax requirements.
This document shall be prepared by the date of the final resolution, and
presented at that time for the signature of the county board chairman.
   J.   Once preparation of the necessary documents is completed and the county
counsel has approved of those documents, the bond issue may proceed to closing
and presentation of a final resolution in a scheduled county board meeting.
   K.   Bond issues in which the county is not the issuer but must provide
public approval shall follow the same notice and hearing procedure as described
herein. (Res. 86-37, § I, 3-11-1986; Res. 88-111, 7-12-1988)
2-204: BOND COUNSEL:
A nationally recognized counsel shall be designated as bond counsel. It shall
be the obligation of bond counsel and/or counsel for the company to prepare all
documents. A minimum of fourteen (14) days shall be allowed for review of
documents by the county counsel (copies of any proposed documents must be
delivered to the county counsel's office at least 14 days prior to any
scheduled time for official action or execution of documents).
Typical documents frequently include bond resolution; memorandum of agreement;
lease agreement; deed conveying the land to the issuer; bill of sale conveying
to issuer company's interest in leased facilities; indenture of trust between
issuer and trustee; guarantee agreement between company and trustee; bonds;
resolution of issue authorizing sale of bonds; certificate of counsel of issuer
as to zoning and legislation; corporation certificate of incorporation; current
standing of corporation; documentation of approval of various corporate matters
by appropriate corporate officers; documents furnished by trustee including
authentication of signature identification; certificate of trustee, etc.;
opinions of bond counsel, corporation counsel and counsel for issuer; UCC
financing statements; title insurance policy; survey, arbitrage certificate;
certificate of purchaser. The above are examples of the types of documents
which must be reviewed. The actual documents will vary depending upon each
particular project. (Res. 86-37, § J, 3-11-1986)
2-205: COSTS:
All costs of the industrial revenue bond project shall be borne by the company.
Said costs shall include trustee's expense, bond counsel expenses, corporate
counsel expenses, land surveys, title commitments and recording of documents.
In addition thereto, reasonable county counsel fee shall be paid by the company
for legal services rendered in the review and adoption of the bond issues. Any
additional costs incurred by the county shall be borne by the company. Said
fees and costs shall be paid on or before the adoption of the legislation
providing for the issuance of industrial revenue bonds. (Res. 86-37, § K, 3-11-
1986)
ARTICLE VI. PURCHASING
SECTION:
Division 1. General Provisions
2-206: Generally
2-207: Definitions
Division 2. Procurement Organization
2-208: Official
2-209: Regulations And Operational Procedures
2-210: Public Access To Procurement Information
2-211: Delegation To Other County Officials
Division 3. Source Selection And Contract Formation
2-212: Purchases Below Simplified Acquisition Threshold
2-213: Artificial Division Or Fragmentation Prohibited
2-214: Bidding
2-215: Request For Proposals
2-216: Professional Services Selection Process
2-217: Emergency Purchase
2-218: Auction Purchases
2-219: Request For Information
2-220: Change Order(s)
2-221: Cooperative Joint Purchasing
2-222: Solicitation Amendments
2-223: Bids/Offers
2-224: Solicitation
2-225: Rejection Of Individual Bids Or Proposals
2-226: Responsibility Of Bidders And Offerors
2-227: Multiyear Contracts
2-228: Extension Of Bid/Offer Acceptance Time
2-229: Electronic Reverse Auction Bidding
2-230: Communication During The Procurement Process
2-231: Revenue Generating Contracts
2-231-1: Responsible Bidder Requirements For Public Works Projects
Division 4. Specifications
2-232: Responsibility For Specifications
2-233: Relationship With Using Agencies
2-234: Maximum Practicable Competition
2-235: Contractors Engaged For Specification Development
Division 5. Appeals And Remedies
2-236: Bid Protests And Claims
2-237: Appeal
Division 6. Debarment And Suspension
2-238: Prohibition To Award Contracts To Parties Debarred Or Suspended
2-239: Certification Language To Be Included In Solicitations And Contracts
DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
2-206: GENERALLY:
   A.   Purpose: Pursuant to Kane County's statutory obligation to provide for
the purchase of commodities, equipment and services, the purpose of this
article is to manage the procurement process in compliance with all applicable
laws and ensure that fair and equitable treatment is provided to all parties
involved in Kane County's purchasing activities. The intent is to foster a
competitive bidding environment to maximize public procurement funds, thereby
increasing public confidence in the county's purchasing practices.
   B.   Applicability: This article applies to procurement of materials,
services, supplies, equipment, construction, construction related services and
professional services by Kane County. These provisions shall apply to all
expenditures of public funds by a county agency for purchasing regardless of
its source, except as otherwise provided by federal or state law, regulations,
Kane County ordinance or administrative policy. Procurements involving federal
or state funding will be subject to any applicable law, regulation or grant.
   C.   Severability: If any provision of this article or any application
thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect the validity of the remaining provisions or application of this
article.
   D.   Property Rights: Receipt of a solicitation or other procurement
document, or submission of any response thereto, or other offer, confers no
right to receive an award or contract, nor does it obligate Kane County in any
manner. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-207: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Singular-Plural: Words in the singular number include the plural and
those in the plural include the singular.
   B.   Gender: Words of a particular gender include any gender and the neuter,
and when sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer to any
gender.
   C.   Definitions:
   ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES: Those professional
services within the fields of architecture, professional engineering,
structural engineering or land surveying as defined by the local government
professional services selection act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 510/1 et
seq.
   BID SECURITY: A guarantee that the bidder will enter into a contract, if an
offer is presented within the specified period of time, otherwise failure on
the bidder's part will result in forfeiture of the bid security.
   CHANGE ORDER: Written authorization directing the contractor to modify or
change an existing purchase order or contract.
   COMPETITIVE PROPOSALS: Purchases over the simplified acquisition threshold
(SAT). Formal solicitation required as well as fixed price cost reimbursement
contracts and is used when sealed bids are not appropriate. The contract should
be awarded to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the
program, with pricing being one of the factors.
   COMPETITIVE SELECTION: A process whereby public solicitation is used to
select the most qualified and responsible provider of materials, equipment,
supplies, services, construction, and construction related services. Methods of
competitive selection include invitation for bids, requests for proposals and
requests for qualifications and multiple price quotations.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION: Any information which is available to an
individual, solely due to his/her status as a county employee, and which is not
a matter of public knowledge or accessible to the public on request.
   CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or
demolishing any structure or building, or other improvements of any kind to any
real property.
   CONTRACT: All types of county agreements, including purchase orders, whether
oral or written and regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement
of materials, services, equipment, supplies, or construction and construction
related services that are legally binding promises enforceable by law.
   CONTRACT MODIFICATION: Any written alteration in the terms or conditions of
any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract.
   CONTRACT RENEWAL: Continuation of the contract for an additional period of
time, under the original terms and conditions, when allowed by provisions for
renewal, which were included in the original bid document. If the bid document
does not include provisions for renewal, any continuation of the contract would
be considered a new contract and therefore must be rebid.
   CONTRACT, REVENUE GENERATING: Revenue generating contracts are agreements
under which the county receives from a vendor either a commission or share in
the profit generated from the sale of goods or services. Examples include
vending machines, food service, and joint purchasing agreements.
   CONTRACTOR: Any person or entity that is a party to a contract with the
county or a using county agency thereof.
   COOPERATIVE JOINT PURCHASING: Procurement conducted by or on behalf of more
than one governmental unit.
   COUNTY AGENCY: A county officer, employee, department, division, office,
official, commission, board, or agency whose purchasing authority is subject to
the provisions of this article.
   DEBARMENT: Debarment is the process of determining that a contractor is
ineligible to receive contract awards based upon a preponderance of evidence,
usually a conviction. Debarment is usually three (3) years in length. The name
of the debarred contractor may be published as ineligible on the system for
award management (SAM), which is a website administered by the U.S. general
services administration, or on the list of sanctioned providers maintained by
the state of Illinois office of inspector general.
   DISCUSSIONS: Oral or written negotiations between the county or its agencies
and an offeror during which information is exchanged about specifications,
scope of work, terms, conditions and price set forth in the initial proposal.
Communication with an offeror for the sole purpose of clarification does not
constitute discussions.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL: For the purposes of this article, elected official
includes: clerk of the circuit court, county auditor, county board chairman,
county board members, county clerk, county coroner, county treasurer, county
recorder of deeds, superintendent of the regional office of education, county
sheriff and state's attorney. For purposes of this article, the chief judge of
the 16th circuit is deemed an elected official.
   EMERGENCY PURCHASE: Procurements obtained in circumstances which include,
but are not limited to: situations threatening public health or safety, where
immediate repairs are required to county property to protect or prevent against
further loss or damage, where immediate action is needed to prevent or minimize
disruption to county services, where immediate action is required to ensure
integrity of county records, or where immediate action is necessary to avoid a
lapse or loss of federal, state or donated funds.
   EQUIPMENT: Goods that are purchased or used by a county agency that are not
materials or supplies that are not expendable except through depreciation or
wear and tear, and do not lose their identity or become integral parts of other
items or installations.
   FULLY EXECUTED CONTRACT: An agreement is fully executed when it bears the
signatures of all parties obligated by the agreement, including the department
head or county board chairman.
   GOVERNMENTAL UNIT: The state of Illinois, any public authority which has the
power to tax, or any other public entity created by federal or state statute.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS: A formal request to prospective vendors soliciting
price quotations or bids; contains, or incorporates by reference, the
specifications or scope of work and all contractual terms and conditions.
   MATERIALS: Items or supplies required in the performance of day to day
operations.
   MICROPURCHASES: Purchases that are less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) ($2,000.00 for those construction projects subject to the Davis-
Bacon act).
   MULTIPLE PRICE QUOTATION: Where competitive selection is not required or
cannot be utilized because of an emergency, a process of obtaining price
information from at least three (3) sources or vendors prior to purchase.
   PARENT COMMITTEE: A standing or ad hoc committee established by the Kane
County board with specific using agency jurisdiction and responsibilities.
   PERSON: Any individual or group of individuals, business, union, firm,
corporation, trust, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, partnership,
association, joint venture, committee, club, or any entity.
   PROCUREMENT: The purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of
materials, supplies, equipment, services, construction and construction related
services. Includes all functions that pertain to obtaining any material,
equipment, supplies, services, construction or construction related services,
including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources,
preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration.
Procurement shall include, without limitation, the entering into of all
contracts or agreements, whether the same are oral or written.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Those services requiring special knowledge, education
or skill whereby the qualifications of persons rendering the services are of
primary importance. Professional services shall include, but not be limited to,
appraisers, attorneys, architects, engineers, accountants, land surveying
services, psychologists, physicians and other health professionals and clergy.
An essential element distinguishing professional services from other services
is confidence, trust, and belief in not only the ability, but also the judgment
and talent, of the person performing the service.
   PURCHASE ORDER: A written document signed and issued by the purchasing
department to a vendor formalizing all terms and conditions of a proposed
transaction, such as a description of requested item(s), delivery schedule,
terms of payment, and transportation; and directing a business to provide
materials, equipment, supplies, services, construction and construction related
and professional services to the county.
   PURCHASING AGENT: The director of purchasing or any staff member of the
purchasing department authorized to act as a purchasing agent for the county
and shall be responsible for the procurement of materials, supplies, equipment,
services, construction, construction related services and professional
services, and processing contract and purchase orders.
   REQUEST FOR INFORMATION: All documents issued to vendors for the sole
purpose of seeking information about the availability in the commercial
marketplace of materials, equipment, supplies, services, construction, and
construction related services.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: A formal request to prospective vendors soliciting
proposals for professional services contains, or incorporates by reference, the
specifications or scope of work and all contractual terms and conditions.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, which are used for soliciting qualifications in accordance with
procedures defined herein.
   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER OR OFFEROR: A person who has the capability, in all
respects, to fully perform the contract requirements and who has the
facilities, personnel, experience, integrity, reliability, equipment,
acceptable past performance, financial strength, credit ranking which will
assure good faith performance and is a responsive bidder.
   RESPONSIVE BIDDER: A person who has submitted a bid that conforms, in all
material respects, to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bid.
   REVERSE AUCTIONS: A reverse auction is a real time bidding process taking
place at a scheduled time and internet location, in which multiple suppliers,
anonymous to each other, submit bids to provide the designated goods and
services specified in the invitation to bid.
   SEALED BIDS: Purchases over the simplified acquisition threshold (SAT).
Formal solicitation required and the fixed price is awarded to the responsible
bidder who conformed to all material terms and is the lowest in price.
   SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports, which are
merely incidental to the required performance. This definition shall not apply
to employment agreements, collective bargaining agreements or to the definition
of "professional services" as provided in this section.
   SIMPLIFIED ACQUISITION THRESHOLD: The acquisition of supplies and services
including construction, research and development and commercial items, the
aggregate amount of which does not exceed thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00)
in any one year period.
   SMALL PURCHASE THRESHOLD: The threshold established by the county at which
public bids are not required.
   SMALL PURCHASES: Purchases that are at least ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) ($2,000.00 for those construction projects subject to the Davis-
Bacon act) and less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
   SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT: Award of contract when there is only one source for
the required supply, service, or construction item as determined through a
competitive selection process.
   SOLICITATION: An invitation for bids or request for proposals to provide
materials, services, equipment, supplies or construction and construction
related services and professional services.
   SPECIFICATIONS: Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics or nature of materials, services, equipment, supplies or
construction and construction related services. It may include a description of
any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing materials, services,
supplies, equipment, construction and construction related services.
   STRINGING: Dividing or fragmenting procurements in order to circumvent
competitive selection processes and procedures. For purposes of this article,
"stringing" is the practice of issuing multiple purchase orders or requisitions
for purchasing like items or services, with the wilful intent to circumvent
purchasing policies.
   SUBCONTRACTOR: A person who contracts to perform work or render service to a
contractor or to another subcontractor as a part of a contract with the county.
   SUPPLIES: Materials or items used in day to day operations, which are
usually stored and dispensed as required.
   SURPLUS PROPERTY: Any tangible county owned property no longer having any
use to the county. Surplus property includes obsolete supplies, scrap
materials, vehicles, equipment and nonexpendable supplies that have completed
their useful life cycle.
   SUSPENSION: The process of determining that a contractor is ineligible to
receive contract awards based upon adequate evidence, usually an indictment.
Suspension is a temporary measure having a twelve (12) month limit. It is
usually used pending completion of an investigation or legal proceedings. The
name of the suspended contractor will be published as ineligible on the system
for award management (SAM), which is a website administered by the U.S. general
services administration, or on the list of sanctioned providers maintained by
the state of Illinois office of inspector general.
   USING AGENCY: Any county agency which utilizes any materials, services,
supplies, equipment or construction and construction related services procured
under this article. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015; amd. Ord. 21-538, 12-14-2021)
DIVISION 2. PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION
2-208: OFFICIAL:
   A.   Principal Public Purchasing Official: The director of purchasing shall
serve as the purchasing agent for the county and shall be responsible for the
procurement of materials, supplies, equipment, services, construction,
construction related services and professional services in accordance with this
article.
   B.   Duties: In accordance with this article and subject to the direction of
the Kane County board, the finance committee, and the director of finance, the
director of purchasing shall:
      1.   Procure or supervise the purchasing of materials, services,
supplies, equipment, construction, construction related services and
professional services required by the county.
      2.   Process contracts and purchase orders solicited through open
competition for materials, equipment, services, supplies, construction, and
construction related services and professional services required by the county.
      3.   Create and maintain programs for contract administration,
specification preparation, inspection, testing and acceptance, in cooperation
with the county agencies using the materials, supplies, services, equipment,
construction, construction related services and professional services.
      4.   Make written determinations as required by this article, specifying
the facts supporting the determination, for retention in the permanent contract
file.
      5.   Sell, trade, transfer, or otherwise dispose of surplus county
property. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-209: REGULATIONS AND OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES:
Consistent with this article, in conjunction with the approval of the finance
committee and director of finance, the director of purchasing may adopt
purchasing regulations and procedures, which relate to the execution of his/her
duties. All such regulations and procedures shall be made available for public
inspection.
As a matter of accounting procedure to ensure the county has accurate real time
accounting records, department heads are required to use the purchasing module
of the county's finance system for requisitioning materials, supplies,
equipment, services, construction, construction related services and
professional services, in order for the purchasing department to issue purchase
orders for these transactions. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-210: PUBLIC ACCESS TO PROCUREMENT INFORMATION:
Procurement information is a public record but is subject to certain exemptions
from disclosure under the Illinois freedom of information act. (Ord. 15-364,
12-8-2015)
2-211: DELEGATION TO OTHER COUNTY OFFICIALS:
   A.   Authority: Pursuant to this article, the director of purchasing may
delegate authority to a using agency to purchase certain supplies, equipment,
materials, services or construction and construction related services, if such
delegation is determined to be the most effective means for procurement of
these items.
   B.   Procurement Authority: When the director of purchasing has delegated
procurement authority to a county agency, delegation of all duties and
responsibilities of the director of purchasing under this article shall
transfer to the county official to whom procurement authority has been
delegated.
   C.   Specific Delegation; Elected Officials: Elected officials having
"purchasing authority" pursuant to an internal control statute are encouraged
to use the support services of the county's director of purchasing wherever
possible. In all cases where the county's purchasing department is not a part
of the purchasing transaction, and as a part of the county's duty to provide
timely financial information, the duty to follow the provisions of section 2-
209 of this chapter and all other provisions regarding the requisition of goods
and services is hereby delegated to each and every such elected official.
As a matter of accounting procedure to ensure the county has accurate real time
accounting records, elected officials are required to use the purchasing module
of the county's finance system for requisitioning materials, supplies,
equipment, services, construction, construction related services and
professional services.
   D.   Department Of Transportation: The procurements as set forth below by
the county's department of transportation need not be processed by the director
of purchasing, but the department shall be subject to the requirements of this
article and the regulations promulgated hereunder in making these procurements:
      1.   Road and bridge construction, construction related services,
engineering services, land acquisition, appraisal services and technical
services necessary to meet the operational requirements of the Kane County
engineer.
   E.   Purchasing Records: All records relating to a purchase shall be
maintained by the county agency to which procurement authority has been
delegated and a copy of all such records shall be provided to the purchasing
department upon selection of a vendor. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
DIVISION 3. SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION
2-212: PURCHASES BELOW SIMPLIFIED ACQUISITION THRESHOLD:
   A.   Simplified Acquisition Threshold (SAT): The simplified acquisition
threshold (SAT) for the purpose of this article is established at the level of
thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00).
      1.   Micropurchases: Procurement of materials, services, supplies,
equipment, construction or construction related services that are less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) ($2,000.00 for those construction projects
subject to the Davis-Bacon act). There is no requirement to obtain competitive
quotes but efforts should be made to distribute purchases equitably among
qualified providers.
      2.   Small Purchases: Procurement of materials, services, supplies,
equipment, construction or construction related services that are at least ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) ($2,000.00 for those construction projects
subject to the Davis-Bacon act) and less than the simplified acquisition
threshold of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) may be awarded by department
heads and/or the director of purchasing where there has been a competitive
price quotation process and at least three (3) quotations have been obtained
prior to selection. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015; amd. Ord. 21-538, 12-14-2021)
2-213: ARTIFICIAL DIVISION OR FRAGMENTATION PROHIBITED:
Procurements shall not be artificially divided or fragmented (stringing) so as
to fall below the simplified acquisition threshold (SAT) in order to circumvent
any bidding or competitive selection process and procedures described in this
article. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-214: BIDDING:
   A.   Competitive Bidding:
      1.   Conditions For Use: All procurements whose value equals or exceeds
the simplified acquisition threshold (SAT) of thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) shall be awarded either by competitive sealed bidding or
electronic reverse auction in accordance with section
2-229, "Electronic Reverse Auction Bidding", of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided in sections 2-215, "Request For Proposals",
2-216, "Professional Services Selection Process",
2-217, "Emergency Purchase", and
2-221, "Cooperative Joint Purchasing", of this chapter or as provided by state
statute.
      2.   Invitation For Bids: An invitation for bids shall be issued and
include all specifications, terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.
      3.   Public Notice: Reasonable time for the required public notice of the
invitation for bids shall be given, not less than ten (10) calendar days,
excluding county holidays, prior to the date set forth therein for the
submittal and opening of bids. For bids requiring a mandatory prebid
conference, the public notice must be published at least five (5) calendar days
prior to the conference date. Such notice shall include publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within Kane County. The public notice shall
state the project, place, submittal date and time of bid opening.
      4.   Bid Opening: Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
name of each bidder, bid amount and the relevant information the director of
purchasing deems appropriate shall be read aloud and recorded on an abstract.
The abstract shall be available to public inspection in accordance with section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
      5.   Late Bids: No bids received after the time specified in the
invitation for bids will be considered, as it is the responsibility of the
bidder to ensure the bid is delivered according to the requirements stated in
the solicitation. All bids received after the specified time will be returned
unopened to the bidder.
      6.   Acceptance And Evaluation Of Bids: Bids shall be unconditionally
accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized by this
article. Bids shall be evaluated to determine which bidder offers the lowest
cost to the county in accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in the
solicitation. Only objectively measurable criteria set forth in the invitation
for bids shall be applied in determining the lowest responsive bidder. Examples
of such criteria include, but are not limited to, quality of the product
supplied, the product's conformity with the specifications, suitability of the
product to the requirements of the county, availability of support services,
uniqueness of the service, materials, equipment or supplies as it applies to
networked integrated computer systems, compatibility to existing equipment,
delivery terms, discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs.
The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used and
no other criteria, not stated in the specifications, shall be used. Alternative
bids may be considered and accepted, only if provisions authorizing such offers
are specifically stated in the invitation for bids and fulfill the required
evaluation criteria set forth therein.
      7.   Award: Upon submittal and approval from the using agency's parent
committee and executive committee or county board, whichever is appropriate,
the contract shall be awarded by appropriate notice to the lowest responsible
bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the
invitation for bids. All contractually required documentation will be required
prior to any notice to proceed.
   B.   Multistep Sealed Bids:
      1.   Conditions For Use: The multistep sealed bid method may be used if
the purchasing director determines:
         a.   Available specifications or purchase descriptions are not
sufficiently complete to permit full competition without technical evaluations
and discussions to ensure mutual understanding between the bidder and the
county.
         b.   Definite criteria exists for evaluation of technical offers.
         c.   More than one technically qualified source is expected to be
available.
         d.   A fixed price contract will be utilized.
      2.   Invitation To Submit Technical Offers: In phase one, multistep
bidding shall be initiated by the issuance of an invitation to submit technical
offers and shall be prepared in a format approved by the director of
purchasing. The invitation to submit technical offers shall contain the
following information:
         a.   Notice that the procurement will be conducted in two (2) phases
and priced bids shall be considered only in the second phase from bidders whose
unpriced technical offers are found acceptable in the first phase.
         b.   Instructions and information concerning submission requirements,
due date and time, submittal address, time period the offer shall remain open
and any other special information.
         c.   The best description of the materials, equipment or services
requested.
         d.   The requirements of the technical offers, such as drawings,
descriptive literature, samples, technical data and inspection or testing of a
product before award.
      3.   Public Notice: Reasonable time for the required public notice of the
invitation to submit technical offers shall be given, not less than ten (10)
calendar days, excluding county holidays, prior to the date set forth therein
for the submittal and opening of bids. For offers requiring a mandatory
preproposal conference, the public notice must be published at least five (5)
calendar days prior to the conference date. Such notice shall include
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within Kane County. The
public notice shall state the project, place, submittal date and time of bid
opening.
      4.   Public Opening: The name of each offeror and other information
deemed appropriate by the director of purchasing shall be read aloud and
recorded on an abstract, which will be available for public inspection. The
abstract and each technical offer shall be open to public inspection in
accordance with section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
      5.   Amendments To Technical Offers: The invitation to submit technical
offers may be amended after the submission of the unpriced technical offers and
shall only be distributed to bidders who submitted unpriced technical offers.
These bidders will be permitted to submit new unpriced technical offers or to
amend the offers previously submitted. If an amendment materially changes the
procurement, the invitation to submit technical offers shall be canceled in
accordance with subsection
2-224A of this chapter.
      6.   Acceptance And Evaluation Of Technical Offers: Unpriced technical
offers shall be evaluated solely in accordance with the criteria set forth in
the invitation to submit technical offers and shall be determined to be either
acceptable or potentially acceptable for further consideration or unacceptable.
A determination that an unpriced technical proposal is unacceptable shall be in
writing, state the basis of the determination and be retained in the
procurement file. If the director of purchasing determines a bidder's unpriced
technical offer is unacceptable, the director of purchasing shall notify the
bidder of this determination and that the bidder shall not be afforded an
opportunity to amend its technical offer.
      7.   Discussions With Vendors: The director of purchasing may hold
discussions with any bidder who submits an acceptable or potentially acceptable
technical offer, before submission or at any time during the evaluation of the
unpriced technical offers. During discussions, the director of purchasing shall
not disclose any information derived from one unpriced technical offer to any
other bidder. After discussions, the director of purchasing shall establish a
closing date for receipt of final technical offers and shall notify, in
writing, bidders submitting acceptable or potentially acceptable offers of the
closing date. The director of purchasing shall keep a record of all
discussions.
      8.   Receipt Of Final Technical Offers: After receipt of final technical
offers, the director of purchasing shall determine whether the technical offers
are acceptable for consideration in phase two or are unacceptable.
      9.   Withdrawal Of Offers In Phase One: At any time during phase one,
offers may be withdrawn.
      10.   Public Access: Technical offers received shall be open to public
inspection after the execution of a contract except to the extent set forth in
section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
      11.   Phase Two Of Multistep Sealed Bidding: Upon completion of phase
one, the director of purchasing shall conduct phase two by issuing an
invitation for bids under subsection A, "Competitive Bidding", of this section,
except that the invitation for bids shall be issued only to bidders whose
technical offers were determined to be acceptable in phase one. (Ord. 15-364,
12-8-2015)
2-215: REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS:
   A.   Conditions For Use: In cases where the county seeks to contract for a
project or service whose goals, tasks or results are known, but for which the
procedure or method of accomplishing same either may not be specified or is
otherwise undetermined, a contract may be entered into by use of the request
for proposal procedure. Reasons for using the request for proposal procedure
shall be approved by the director of purchasing prior to the commencement of
this procedure and presented for informational review to the finance committee
and the appropriate parent committee at their next scheduled meeting.
Professional service contracts that equal or exceed thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) shall be subject to a request for proposal according to the
selection process set forth in section
2-216, "Professional Services Selection Process", of this chapter.
   B.   Request For Proposals: A request for proposals shall be issued and
include all specifications, terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.
   C.   Public Notice: Reasonable time for the required public notice of the
invitation to submit proposals shall be given, not less than ten (10) calendar
days, excluding county holidays, prior to the date set forth therein for the
submittal and opening of the proposals. For offers requiring a mandatory
preproposal conference, the public notice must be published at least five (5)
calendar days prior to the conference date. Such notice shall include
publication in a newspaper of general circulation within Kane County. The
public notice shall state the project, place, submittal date and time of bid
opening.
   D.   Receipt Of Proposals: Names of offerors will be read aloud in the
presence of one or more witnesses and recorded on an abstract. Contents of the
sealed proposals shall not be disclosed to any of the competition or offerors
during the negotiation process. The abstract shall be open for public
inspection only after the contract is awarded in accordance with section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
   E.   Evaluation Factors: The request for proposals shall state the relative
importance of price and other evaluation factors.
   F.   Discussions With Responsible Offerors And Revisions To Proposals: As
provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with the
responsible offerors, who submitted proposals determined to be susceptible of
being selected for award, for the purpose of clarification to assure full
understanding and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Offerors
shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for
discussions and revision of proposals and such revision may be permitted after
submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final
offers.
   G.   Award: After submission and approval by the using agency's parent
committee and executive committee or county board, whichever is appropriate,
award will be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal conforms to the
solicitation and is determined, in writing, to be in the best interests of the
county based on the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals.
The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. (Ord. 15-
364, 12-8-2015)
2-216: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES SELECTION PROCESS:
There will be circumstances where it will be necessary or advisable for Kane
County to engage the services of independent professionals because of the
county's requirement or need for such services determined on a project specific
basis. In such cases, it shall be the goal of the county to negotiate the
lowest reasonable fees consistent with obtaining the highest possible quality
of service and professional expertise from the service providers. Independent
professional service providers shall be selected on the basis of their
demonstrated competence and expertise relative to the services to be rendered,
the cost of the services, and their demonstrated or perceived ability to work
with county staff, elected officials, and, where applicable, other units of
government and members of the public.
The services may require mandatory or essential technical skills as well as, in
some cases, professional licenses or certifications and are provided by
accredited professionals in connection with defined assignments, which may
result in the preparation of a report, the review and analysis of reports
prepared by others, preparation of plans or specifications, recommendations of
a particular course of action or policy, and include supervision of an activity
(such as construction).
   A.   Requirements For Engagement Of Independent Professionals: The need or
requirement of the county for the engagement of independent professional
services shall be based on a determination that one or more of the following
circumstances exist:
      1.   The project requires an independent professional as a condition of
federal, state or local law or regulation, or as a condition of a federal,
state or other grant or intergovernmental agreement;
      2.   The project requires specialized expertise or multiple areas of
expertise not available from existing staff;
      3.   County staff is not available for the project due to present or
anticipated workload or other time constraints;
      4.   The project requires a limited engagement where it is not cost
effective to hire new full time staff to provide the necessary services or
expertise;
      5.   An actual emergency exists where existing staff cannot effectively
be deployed or mobilized due to the nature of the occurrence or time
constraints.
   B.   Procedures For Selection Of Independent Professionals Not Subject To
The Local Government Professional Services Selection Act: Contracts for
professional services that are less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may
be awarded by department heads pursuant to rules promulgated by the Director of
Purchasing.
Contracts for professional services that are at least ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) and less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) may be awarded
by department heads and/or the Director of Purchasing where there has been a
competitive price quotation process and at least three (3) quotations for the
services have been obtained prior to selection.
Contracts for professional services that equal or exceed thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00) shall be awarded after a competitive selection process
that includes a request for proposal to provide the services, except in cases
of actual emergency as set forth in section
2-217, "Emergency Purchase", of this division. The County may require a uniform
request for proposal process to be employed in the case of all contracts
subject to the jurisdiction of the Kane County Board and such other cases where
it can be made applicable.
Contracts for professional services shall include or be accompanied by
documentation from the appropriate department head or parent committee
referencing the specific provision(s) of subsection A, "Requirements For
Engagement Of Independent Professionals", of this section applicable to the
particular project.
   C.   Procedures For Selection Of Independent Professionals Subject To The
Local Government Professional Services Selection Act: Professional services of
architects, engineers and land surveyors are governed by the requirements of
the Local Government Professional Services Selection Act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 510/1 et seq. (the "Act"), and by local policy, rules and regulations,
including where applicable, the qualification based selection process of the
Kane County Division of Transportation. All professional service contracts or
agreements for professional services for architectural, engineering or land
surveying purposes, which equal or exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
shall be subject to the Act.
   D.   Legal Services: Legal services are subject to the supervision and
control of the Kane County State's Attorney.
   E.   Procedures For Purchase Of Items Not Suitable For Competitive Bid, 55
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1022(c): The purchase of used computer hardware,
used computer hardware maintenance, and used computer hardware support services
shall not be required to be competitively procured. Purchases over thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) must be authorized for purchase by the County
Board.
The purchase of computer software, computer hardware, and computer databases
that have been competitively procured and that require additional proprietary
licensing, software integrations, software development, software maintenance,
computer hardware maintenance, database maintenance, software support services,
database support services and computer hardware support services are not
suitable for competitive procurement and may be authorized for purchase.
Purchases over thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) must be authorized by the
County Board.
   F.   Sole Source Procurement: With the exception of micropurchases
(subsection
2-212A1 of this division), no contract may be awarded without complying with
the competitive selection process appropriate for the type of procurement as
determined by one of the following sections of this division: subsection
2-212A2, "Small Purchases", subsection
2-214A, "Competitive Bidding", subsection
2-214B, "Multistep Sealed Bids", section
2-215, "Request For Proposals", this section, section
2-217, "Emergency Purchase", section
2-218, "Auction Purchases", or section
2-221, "Cooperative Joint Purchasing".
      1.   Purchases below the simplified acquisition threshold ($30,000.00):
If after conducting a good faith review of available sources, there is only one
source for the required supply, service, or construction item, both the
Purchasing Director and the department head must approve of the negotiated
price, delivery and terms.
      2.   Purchases at or above the simplified acquisition threshold
($30,000.00): If after complying with the appropriate competitive selection
process only one responsive bid or offer is received, the procurement shall
comply with the procedures stated in subsection
2-223F, "Only One Bid/Offer Is Received", of this division. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-
2015; Ord. 19-46, 2-11-2019; Ord. 21-538, 12-14-2021)
2-217: EMERGENCY PURCHASE:
   A.   Conditions For Use: An emergency purchase equaling or exceeding thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) may be authorized without bidding in certain
situations including, but not limited to, situations threatening public health
or safety, where immediate repairs are required to County property to protect
or prevent against further loss or damage, where immediate action is needed to
prevent or minimize disruption to County services, where immediate action is
required to ensure integrity of County records and where immediate action is
necessary to avoid the lapse or loss of Federal, State or donated funds. An
emergency purchase shall be limited to those materials, supplies, equipment,
services, construction and construction related services necessary to satisfy
the emergency and these purchases shall be made with such competitive
evaluation as is practicable under the circumstances.
   B.   Emergency Affidavit: A department seeking an emergency purchase shall
prepare an emergency affidavit documenting both the existence of an emergency
condition and the nature of the emergency. The department head shall sign the
affidavit and submit to the County Board Chairman the emergency affidavit
requesting authorization to make the emergency purchase. If the county board
chairman is unavailable, then the signature authorizing approval shall be
obtained from the board vice chairman. If the board vice chairman is
unavailable, then the signature authorizing approval shall be obtained from the
using agency's parent committee chairman and the finance committee chairman.
   C.   Cost Or Pricing Data: The director of purchasing may require from the
requesting county agency the submission of cost or pricing data in connection
with an award under this section.
   D.   Negotiations: The director of purchasing shall negotiate with the
supplier, to the extent practical, a contract in the best interest of the
county. The price being paid must be reasonable considering the circumstances.
   E.   Contract Documentation: The emergency affidavit must be submitted to
the director of purchasing as soon as practicable and shall be included in the
contract file.
   F.   Board Ratification: Any emergency purchase equaling or exceeding thirty
thousand dollars ($30,000.00) under this section shall be placed on the agenda
for ratification at the next regularly scheduled parent committee, executive
committee and county board meeting. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-218: AUCTION PURCHASES:
Purchases may be made at auction in accordance with the procedures and
requirements applicable to that particular auction. Notice and competitive
selection is not a requirement and the amount paid shall be the amount bid and
accepted, plus any required buyer's premium. Prior to the auction, the county's
finance director must authorize in writing an upper expenditure limit for the
item(s) under consideration at auction. Auction purchases shall be treated as
an emergency purchase and shall comply with the procedures stated in
subsections
2-217B and C of this chapter. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-219: REQUEST FOR INFORMATION:
The director of purchasing may issue a request for information to obtain data
about services, equipment, materials, supplies, or construction and
construction related services to meet a specific county requirement. Sufficient
public notice shall be provided in the same manner as stipulated in subsection
2-214A3, "Public Notice", of this chapter. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-220: CHANGE ORDER(S):
Change order(s) for a contract obtained pursuant to this article shall be
processed under the following guidelines:
   A.   A change order(s) where the cost equals or exceeds thirty thousand
dollars ($30,000.00), either singularly or in the aggregate, requires approval
from the authorized official of the using agency, the parent committee of the
using agency and the county board.
   B.   In situations where the time required for processing approval of a
change order necessitated by field conditions, whose total purchase cost
exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), would unreasonably interrupt
project schedules to the financial detriment of the county, the change order
may be processed by an authorized official of the county's using agency after
written notification to the using agency's parent committee chairman. Change
orders made under these conditions shall be placed on the agenda for
ratification at the next regularly scheduled executive committee or county
board meeting, whichever is appropriate. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-221: COOPERATIVE JOINT PURCHASING:
   A.   The director of purchasing may procure materials, services, supplies,
equipment, construction or construction related services, through any
governmental agency without complying with the requirements of subsection
2-214A, “Competitive Bidding”, of this chapter, provided:
      1.   Such procurements are made pursuant to a written agreement between
the governmental agency and the Kane County board.
      2.   Competitive selection procedures, similar to the requirements of
subsection
2-214A, “Competitive Bidding”, of this chapter, were used in the applicable
procurement.
      3.   This type of procurement is not employed as a means for
circumventing the general intent of this article.
      4.   The county is authorized by Illinois law or regulation to contract
with such governmental agency, including, without limitation, authorization
under the Governmental Joint Purchasing Act, 30 ILCS 525/.01 et seq.
Prior to entering into any such written agreement, the director of purchasing
shall obtain a written opinion from the Kane County state’s attorney that such
agreement is authorized by law.
   B.   The Director of Purchasing may, without violating any bidding
requirements of Section 4.2, procure supplies and services under any contract
let by the State pursuant to lawful procurement procedures in accordance with
the Governmental Joint Purchase Act, 30 ILCS 525/4.2. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015;
amd. Ord. 22-144, 4-12-2022)
2-222: SOLICITATION AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Conditions For Use: If necessary, an amendment to a solicitation shall
be issued to:
      1.   Make changes in the solicitation.
      2.   Correct defects or ambiguities.
      3.   Furnish other bidders information provided one bidder if the
information will assist the other bidders in submitting bids or the lack of
information will prejudice the other bidders.
   B.   Distribution: Amendments to solicitations will be identified as such
and shall be sent to all persons to whom the solicitation was originally sent.
   C.   Receipt Acknowledgement: Amendments shall require the bidder to
acknowledge receipt of the amendment by signing and returning the offer to
contract page with their bid response on or before the scheduled date and time
of the opening.
   D.   Time Frame For Vendor Evaluation: Amendments shall be issued a
reasonable period before the due date to allow prospective bidders sufficient
time to consider the amendment in preparing their bids. If the due date does
not allow the bidder sufficient time to review the amendment, the due date may
be extended. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-223: BIDS/OFFERS:
   A.   Prebid Conferences: The county may conduct a prebid conference within a
reasonable time, but not less than five (5) days before the scheduled bid
opening date, to explain the procurement requirements. Verbal statements made
at the prebid conference which are not consistent with the written solicitation
shall not be binding upon the county unless a written amendment is issued.
   B.   Preopening Modification Or Withdrawal Of Bids/Offers:
      1.   Invitation For Bid Modification Or Withdrawal: A bidder may modify
or withdraw its bid at any time before the bid opening, if the sealed
modification or withdrawal is received in writing before the due date. A bidder
or the bidder's authorized representative may withdraw the bid in person if,
before the scheduled opening date, the identity of the individual requesting
withdrawal is established and that person signs a receipt for the bid. A bid
may not be withdrawn if the bid opening has begun.
      2.   Request For Proposal Withdrawal: A proposal may be withdrawn at any
time before the scheduled opening date and time. An offeror or the offeror's
authorized representative may withdraw the proposal in person if, before the
scheduled opening date, the identity of the individual requesting withdrawal is
established and that person signs a receipt for the proposal. A proposal may
not be withdrawn if the offer opening has begun.
      3.   Document Retention: All documents concerning a modification or
withdrawal of a bid/offer shall be retained in the appropriate procurement
file.
   C.   Late Bids/Offers, Late Withdrawals And Late Modifications:
      1.   Definition Of Late Bid/Offer/Withdrawal/Modification: A bid, offer,
withdrawal, or modification is considered late by the county if it is received
after the date and time set for the submission of such bids/offers.
      2.   Conditions For Rejection: A late bid, late offer, late withdrawal,
or late modification shall be rejected unless it would have been received on
time but for the action or inaction of county personnel.
      3.   Vendor Notification: Bidders submitting late bids, late offers, late
withdrawals, or late modifications shall be notified of the rejection as soon
as practicable.
      4.   Document Retention: Documentation regarding a late bid, late offer,
late withdrawal, or late modification shall be retained in the appropriate
procurement file.
   D.   Unidentified Bids/Offers: An unmarked envelope that does not identify a
bid or bidder may be opened for the purpose of identification. Record shall be
made on the envelope regarding the reason for its opening, date and time it was
opened, the solicitation to which the bid applies and the signature of the
individual who opened the envelope. The envelope shall then be resealed and
retained in the procurement file until the scheduled bid date.
   E.   Mistakes In Bids/Offers:
      1.   Mistake Discovered Prior To Bid/Offer Opening: A bidder/offeror may
correct mistakes discovered before the scheduled date and time for the bid/
offer opening by withdrawing or correcting the bid/offer as provided in
subsection B, "Preopening Modification Or Withdrawal Of Bids/Offers", of this
section.
      2.   Mistake Discovered After Bid/Offer Opening: After bid/offer opening,
a bid/offer mistake may not be corrected or withdrawn except in the following
situations:
         a.   In the case of a mathematical error, the unit cost shall prevail
and any corrections required due to an error of this nature shall be done by
the county.
         b.   The director of purchasing may waive any minor (nonprice)
informalities in a bid/offer or allow the bidder/offeror to correct them if the
revision is in the best interests of the county.
         c.   Corrections to a bid/offer shall be permitted only to the extent
the bidder/offeror can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of
nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake and the bid/offer
price actually intended. The director of purchasing shall consult with the
using agency and parent committee chairman prior to allowing the correction.
         d.   In lieu of bid/offer correction, a bidder/offeror alleging a
material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if:
            (1)   The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid
document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
            (2)   The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made.
            (3)   The director of purchasing consults with the using agency and
parent committee chairman prior to allowing the bid withdrawal.
      3.   Mistake Discovered After Award: Mistakes shall not be corrected
after award of a contract except in cases where the director of purchasing
makes a written determination that it would be unconscionable in not allowing
correction to the error and upon approval from the using agency, parent
committee, and county board.
      4.   Written Determination: If a correction or withdrawal of a bid/offer
after bid/offer opening is permitted or denied under this section, the director
of purchasing shall prepare a written determination indicating the basis of the
decision to approve or deny the correction or withdrawal.
This section shall not preclude any offer modifications requested or allowed as
part of a request for proposal process.
   F.   Only One Bid/Offer Is Received: If only one responsive bid/offer is
received to a solicitation, an award may be made to the single bidder/offeror
if the director of purchasing determines in writing that the price submitted is
fair and reasonable and that other prospective bidders/offerors had reasonable
opportunity to respond or that there is not sufficient time for initiating
another solicitation. Otherwise the director of purchasing may exercise the
option to reject the bid/offer and seek bids/offers through a new solicitation.
   G.   Tie Bids:
      1.   Conditions For Tie Bids: Tie bids are the lowest cost bids from
responsive and responsible bidders that are identical in price.
      2.   Award Determination: Award of tie bids will be determined as
follows:
         a.   If the bids are equal in all respects, the award shall be made by
a coin toss by the director of purchasing with one or more witnesses upon three
(3) days' written notice to the bidders. Tie bidders will be afforded the
opportunity to witness the coin toss, however, attendance is voluntary.
   H.   Confidential Information: If a person believes a bid, proposal, offer,
specification or protest submitted to the county contains either trade secrets
or proprietary property, a statement should be included in the submission,
which describes and supports their claim. The trade secrets or proprietary
property must be specifically identified as the information considered
confidential. Entire bid submissions shall not be eligible for consideration as
confidential material. Trade secrets or proprietary property are exempt from
inspection and copying under the Illinois freedom of information act (the
"act").
The county does not represent, warrant or guarantee that any information
designated as trade secrets or proprietary property will in fact be so deemed
by any court, and all bidders assume the risk that any and all information
contained in a bid or proposal may not be exempt from disclosure under the act.
The county expressly disclaims all liability for such disclosure. (Ord. 15-364,
12-8-2015)
2-224: SOLICITATION:
   A.   Cancellation Of A Solicitation: A solicitation may be canceled or
submitted bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or part as may be
specified in the solicitation if it is in the best interests of the county. The
reasons for such cancellation or rejection shall be included in the procurement
file. Every solicitation issued by the county shall contain language stating
the county's right to cancel the solicitation and to reject submitted bids or
proposals.
   B.   Cancellation Of A Solicitation Before The Due Date And Time:
      1.   Authority For Determining Cancellation: The director of purchasing
has the authority to cancel a solicitation, in whole or part, before the due
date and time if a determination is made that cancellation is in the best
interests of the county.
      2.   Notification Of Cancellation: If a solicitation is canceled before
the required submittal date and time, notice of the cancellation shall be sent
to all persons to whom the solicitation had been distributed. The notice shall
identify the solicitation and the reason for cancellation.
      3.   Handling Of Received Bids/Proposals: Any received bids/proposals
shall be returned unopened to the vendors.
   C.   Cancellation Of A Solicitation After Receipt Of Bids Or Proposals:
      1.   Authority For Determining Cancellation: The director of purchasing
has the authority to cancel a solicitation after receipt of bids or proposals,
but before award, if a determination is made that cancellation is in the best
interests of the county.
      2.   Notification Of Cancellation: A notice of cancellation shall be sent
to all bidders or offerors submitting bids or proposals.
      3.   Document Retention And Public Inspection: Bids or proposals received
for the canceled solicitation shall be retained in the appropriate procurement
file. If, within a reasonable time, the director of purchasing intends to issue
a new solicitation for the same materials, services, equipment, supplies,
construction or construction related services the proposals submitted under the
canceled solicitation may be withheld from public inspection upon written
determination that this action is in the county's best interest. After award of
the second solicitation, bids or proposals submitted in response to both
solicitations shall be open for public inspection to the extent set forth in
section 2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-225: REJECTION OF INDIVIDUAL BIDS OR PROPOSALS:
   A.   Conditions For Rejection: A bid or proposal may be rejected if:
      1.   The bidder is determined to be nonresponsible in accordance with
section
2-226 of this chapter.
      2.   The bid is nonresponsive pursuant to subsection
2-207C, definition of "responsive bidder", of this chapter.
      3.   The proposed price is unreasonable.
      4.   The bid or proposal is not in the best interests of the county.
   B.   Notification Of Rejection: Bidders or offerors will be notified in
writing of the rejection of their bids or proposals with a copy retained in the
appropriate procurement file.
   C.   Document Retention And Public Inspection: The determination for
rejection will be retained in the procurement file and shall be available for
public inspection to the extent set forth in section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter. (Ord. 15-
364, 12-8-2015)
2-226: RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERORS:
   A.   Determination Of Vendor Responsibility: Before awarding a contract to a
bidder or offeror, the director of purchasing will determine whether that
bidder or offeror is responsible. The signature of the appropriate official
authorized to execute the contract award signifies the bidder or offeror is
responsible.
      1.   Factors In Determining Responsibility: Factors considered in
determining whether a bidder or offeror is responsible are:
         a.   The bidder's or offeror's resources in terms of financial,
physical and personnel.
         b.   The bidder's or offeror's record in terms of past performance and
integrity, such as a recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory
performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; a violation
of the county's ethics ordinance; a debt owed by the contractor to the county;
or suspension or debarment by another governmental entity.
         c.   Whether the bidder or offeror is legally qualified to do business
with the county.
         d.   Whether the bidder or offeror complied with requirements for
submitting information regarding their responsibility.
         e.   Whether the bidder or offeror met specific responsibility
criteria established within the solicitation for a particular procurement.
         f.   Where a bidder or offeror fails to promptly supply information in
connection with any inquiries concerning responsibility.
         g.   The qualities of the products supplied, their conformity with the
specifications and their suitability to the requirements of the county.
         h.   Availability of support services.
         i.   Uniqueness of the services, materials, equipment or supplies as
it applies to networked, integrated computer systems.
         j.   Compatibility to existing equipment.
         k.   Delivery terms.
      2.   Determination Of A Nonresponsible Bidder/Offeror: A determination of
a nonresponsible bidder or offeror shall be in writing by the director of
purchasing outlining the basis of the determination and a copy shall be
included in the procurement file.
      3.   Notification To Nonresponsible Bidder/Offeror: A notice shall be
sent to the nonresponsible bidder or offeror stating the basis of the
determination. The decision may be appealed as provided in division 5 of this
article.
      4.   Dissemination Of Bidder/Offeror Information: Information furnished
by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed outside
of the purchasing department without the prior written consent by the bidder or
offeror except in accordance with section
2-210, "Public Access To Procurement Information", of this chapter.
      5.   Bidder/Offeror Rights: A finding of nonresponsibility shall not be
construed as a violation of the rights of any person.
   B.   Bid Security And Performance/Payment Bonds: Bid security may be
required for contracts when provided by statute or when the director of
purchasing determines it is in the best interests of the county.
Acceptable forms of security which may be submitted are: an executed surety
bond issued by a firm licensed and registered to transact such business with
the state of Illinois; cash, certified check or cashier's check payable to Kane
County (personal or company checks are not acceptable); an irrevocable letter
of credit; or any other form of deposit issued by a financial institution and
acceptable to the county.
Bid security shall be in an amount not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the bid/offer.
When a contract is awarded the required performance bonds or payment bonds, in
the amount stated in the bid document, shall be delivered to the county and
shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract. Bid
security, performance bonds or payment bonds shall not serve as a substitute
for determining bidder responsibility. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-227: MULTIYEAR CONTRACTS:
The county's policy on multiyear contracts includes the following:
   A.   All multiyear contracts presented for approval shall contain the total
value of the award for the multiyear period.
   B.   Multiyear contracts shall not be presented to a parent committee or
county board where the terms of the contract exceeds two (2) years without
prior approval by the director of purchasing and director of finance.
   C.   All multiyear contracts will include a nonappropriations clause stating
that continuation of the contract is based on the appropriation of funding
approved by the county board.
   D.   The resolution authorizing the chairman to execute the multiyear
contract shall include the following, or substantially similar language:
      Whereas, the Contract calls for the use of funds beyond the present
budget year and the County of Kane acknowledges the necessity of the
appropriation of such funds.
(Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-228: EXTENSION OF BID/OFFER ACCEPTANCE TIME:
After opening of bids or offers, the director of purchasing may request, in
writing, an extension of time during which the county may accept the bids or
offers only from bidders or offerors meeting the stipulated submission date and
time requirements of the solicitation.
Subsequent to receipt of the county's extension request the bidder or offeror
may withdraw their bid or offer, without penalty, through written notification
to the director of purchasing. No other modifications shall be allowed. (Ord.
15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-229: ELECTRONIC REVERSE AUCTION BIDDING:
The purchasing director may procure materials, services, supplies, equipment,
construction, construction related services and professional services with an
electronic reverse auction company, in accordance with the Illinois procurement
code, when deemed to provide the best value or all purchasing methods provide
equal value to the county.
   A.   Soliciting Reverse Auction Bids: Reverse auction bids will be solicited
in the same manner as other invitation for bids in subsection
2-214A, "Competitive Bidding", of this chapter, with the exception that the
bids will be done electronically with an internet company. During the auction,
a bidder's price shall be disclosed to other bidders. Bidders shall have an
opportunity to reduce their bid prices during the auction. At the conclusion of
the auction, the record of bid prices received and the name of each bidder
shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-230: COMMUNICATION DURING THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS:
In an effort to create a more competitive and unbiased procurement process, the
county desires to establish a single point of contact throughout the
solicitation process. Therefore, from the issue date of any solicitation, until
the due date of the solicitation, all requests for clarification or additional
information regarding the solicitation, or contact with county personnel
concerning this solicitation or the evaluation process must only be through the
purchasing department staff. Inquiries will be collected by purchasing
department staff who will then submit the inquiries to the department head
responsible for the procurement. Responses by the department head to the
inquiries will be submitted to the purchasing department staff who will then
distribute the responses to all vendors responding to the solicitation. In this
way it will be assured that all vendors participating in the process will be
receiving the same information. No contact regarding this solicitation with
other county employees, agents of the county or elected officials is permitted
unless expressly authorized by the purchasing director. A violation of this
provision is cause for the county to reject the bidder's proposal. If it is
later discovered that a violation has occurred, the county may reject any
proposal or terminate any contract awarded pursuant to this solicitation. (Ord.
15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-231: REVENUE GENERATING CONTRACTS:
Revenue generating contracts are agreements under which the county receives a
commission from a vendor or other public entity for goods or services sold,
such as a joint purchasing agreement or vending contract. Departments should
ensure that an agreement has been fully executed between the county and the
vendor or public entity. The purchasing director and/or state's attorney's
office is required to be notified of any revenue generating agreements that are
executed by department heads or elected officials. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-231-1: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   A.   Public Works: For purposes of this section, the term “Public Works”
shall mean construction projects advertised and awarded by Kane County, and
financed, in whole or in part, with County public funds. Public Works projects
shall only include those projects where Kane County is the awarding authority
and that require County Board approval as designated by the Kane County
Purchasing Ordinance. Additionally, Public Works projects shall only include
cost share drainage projects that exceed One Hundred Thousand Dollars
($100,000).
   B.   Bid Submission Requirements:
      1.   In determining whether a bidder is a “responsible bidder” for the
award of a Public Works contract, the bidder must submit the following
information and supporting documentation, as directed on corresponding forms
designated by the purchasing department, which may include a notarization
requirement and/or a requirement that the bidder submits a signed statement as
to their compliance with the bid submission requirements supported by
affidavit, in order for the bid to be accepted:
         a.   A copy of the Illinois Secretary of State’s Department of
Business Services online records evidencing that the bidder has a current
corporate annual report on file. If the bidder is an individual, sole
proprietor, or partnership, this subsection shall not apply.
         b.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Revenue if bidder has employees (e.g. document with account
number, Illinois Business Tax number).
         c.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois
Department of Employment Security if bidder has employees (e.g. document with
UI account number).
         d.   Disclosure of any federal, state or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies against the bidder or any officers of the bidder in the last five
(5) years.
         e.   A statement that all employees are (i) covered under a current
workers’ compensation insurance policy and (ii) properly classified under such
policy. If the bidder is insured with a carrier, the evidence of workers’
compensation insurance shall be a copy of the “Information Page” of the
bidder’s workers’ compensation policy and any continuation of that Information
Page which include the name and address of the insured, as well as the class
codes the compensation premium is based on and the total estimated remuneration
per class code.
         f.   A statement of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act (820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) and all rules and regulations
therein, for the past five (5) years. Such statement shall also provide that
the bidder has reviewed the Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis Bacon and
Related Acts, has reviewed and agrees to pay the applicable prevailing wage
rates attached to the bid specifications, and will strictly comply with the
Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis Bacon and Related Acts and related
requirements. A bidder who has been found by the Illinois Department of Labor
to be in violation of the Prevailing Wage Act twice within a three (3) year
period shall be deemed not to be a Responsible Bidder for two (2) years from
the date of the latest finding.
         g.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance
abuse to be filed with a public body pursuant to the Substance Abuse Prevention
on Public Works Projects Act (820 ILCS 265/1 et seq.).
         h.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the Public
Works project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either (i)
an employee or (ii) an independent contractor under all applicable state and
federal laws and local ordinances.
         i.   Documents evidencing any professional or trade license required
by law or local ordinance for any trade or specialty area in which the bidder
is seeking a contract award. Additionally, the bidder must disclose any
suspension or revocation of such license held by the company, or of any
director, officer or manager of the company.
         j.   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship training programs
applicable to the work to be performed on the project, which are approved by
and registered with the United States Department of Labor’s Office of
Apprenticeship, or its successor organization; and evidence that any applicable
apprenticeship program has graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of
the past five (5) years for each of the construction crafts the bidder will
perform on the project. Evidence of graduation rates are not required for
apprenticeable crafts dedicated exclusively to the transportation of material
and equipment to and from the Public Works project.
      The required evidence includes but is not limited to a copy of all
applicable apprenticeship standards and Apprenticeship Agreement(s) for any
apprentice(s) who will perform work on the Public Works project; and
documentation from each applicable apprenticeship program certifying that it
has graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of the past five (5) years
for each construction craft the bidder will perform on the project. Additional
evidence of participation and graduation requirements may be requested by the
purchasing department at its discretion.
         k.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work
on the project and who face hazards on the job have completed a 10 hour or
greater OSHA safety program. Only workers that have satisfactorily completed a
10 hour or greater OSHA safety program will be allowed to participate on the
project. The bidder must have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the
purchasing department may request the bidder provide copies of employees OSHA
cards; failure to produce an employee’s OSHA card may result in a determination
that the bidder is not a responsible bidder.
         l.   Disclosure of the name and address of each subcontractor from
whom the bidder has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the
project.
      Further, any subcontractor that will complete either (1) 10% or more of
the work on a project, or (2) at least $100,000 of the work on a project, shall
be required to adhere to all of the requirements set forth herein as though it
were bidding directly to Kane County. All other subcontractors shall only be
required to adhere to the requirements of subsections (j), (k), and (o) as
though it were bidding directly to Kane County. Each bidder shall submit all
subcontractor information and supporting documentation to the purchasing
department prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the project.
         m.   Statements as to past performance, which shall give an accurate
and complete record of three (3) similar public works projects completed in the
past three (3) years by the bidder. Such statements shall include the name of
the public body and the project, original contract price, final contract price,
the names of all subcontractors used, if applicable, and a statement as to
compliance with completion deadlines.
         n.   Any determinations against the bidder by a court or governmental
agency for violations of federal, state, or local laws, including but not
limited to serious, willful or repeated violations of the Occupational Safety
and Health Act (OSHA), violations of contracting or antitrust laws, tax or
licensing laws, environmental laws, or the Federal Davis Bacon and Related
Acts.
         o.   All bidders will be required to turn in certified payrolls as
specified in Illinois Public Act 94-0515, and follow all provisions of the
Employee Classification Act, 820 ILCS 185/1 et seq.
      2.   Any material changes to the bidder’s status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of its occurrence.
Failure to comply with this requirement is grounds for the bidder to be deemed
a non responsible bidder.
      3.   If a bidder submits proof of appropriate prequalification through
the Illinois Capital Development Board or Illinois Department of
Transportation, the bidder need only to submit documentation referenced in
subsection (B)(1)(j), evidence of participation in apprenticeship training
programs applicable to the work to be performed on the project.
   C.   Incomplete Submissions by Bidders and Subcontractors:
      1.   It is the sole responsibility of the bidder to comply with all
submission requirements at the time it submits its bid to the purchasing
department. Bidder submissions deemed incomplete shall result in a
determination that the bidder is not a responsible bidder. A submission is
deemed incomplete if the Bidder has not cured the deficiency in its submission
within seven (7) calendar days after written notice given by the County.
      2.   The submission requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except
that the successful bidder shall submit all applicable subcontractor
submissions, as outlined in subsection B(1)(l) prior to the subcontractor
commencing work on the project. Failure of a subcontractor to submit the
required information shall not disqualify the successful bidder from performing
work on the project and shall not constitute a contractual default and/or
breach by the successful bidder. However, Kane County shall withhold all
payments otherwise due for work performed by a subcontractor, until the
subcontractor submits the required information and the director of purchasing
approves such information. Where the director of purchasing deems there to be a
non material error in the submission of the required information for a
subcontractor, the director of purchasing can utilize limited discretion in
implementing such withholding requirement. Further, where the director of
purchasing deems necessary, Kane County may also require that the successful
bidder remove the subcontractor from the project and replace it with a
responsive and responsible subcontractor.
   D.   Validity of Pre Qualification Classification:
      1.   Upon designation by the director of purchasing that a bidder’s or
subcontractor’s submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely, and
upon any further consideration deemed necessary by the director of purchasing,
the bidder or subcontractor may be pre qualified for future Kane County Public
Works projects. A bidder’s classification as “qualified” shall exempt the
bidder or sub contractor from the comprehensive submission requirements
contained herein for a total period of three (3) calendar years. However, Kane
County may ask a bidder to submit additional documents during the time period
in which a bidder is pre qualified. Thereafter, during the three (3) calendar
year period, bidders or subcontractors who are pre qualified must submit a
complete application for continuation of “pre qualified” standing, on a form
provided by the purchasing department, (also referred to as the “short form”)
by December 31st for the upcoming calendar year. Failure by any pre qualified
bidder or subcontractor to timely submit its complete application for
continuation of “pre qualified” standing shall result in automatic removal of
the designation, effective January 1 of the upcoming year. However, the
“removed” bidder or subcontractor shall still be permitted to bid on Kane
County Public Works projects. Kane County may establish rules permitting
bidder’s to be pre qualified outside of the bidding process.
      2.   Any material changes to the bidder’s status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within fourteen (14) calendar days of its occurrence to the
purchasing department. The pre qualification designation is solely within the
discretion of the director of purchasing and Kane County specifically reserves
the right to change or revoke the designation for a stated written reason(s).
      3.   Denial of pre qualification shall be in writing and shall be
forwarded to the bidder within seven (7) calendar days of such decision. Any
bidder denied or losing pre qualification status may request reconsideration of
the decision by submitting such request in writing to the director of
purchasing within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of notice of denial.
   E.   Lowest Bidder Not Chosen:
      1.   When the award is not recommended to be given to the lowest bidder,
a statement of the reason for such recommendation shall be prepared by the
purchasing department.
      2.   In the event that there are no bidders pursuant to the Responsible
Bidder Ordinance, Kane County may pursue bidders pursuant to the standard
provisions otherwise set out by the Kane County Purchasing Ordinance.
   F.   Multiple Low Bids: When two or more responsible bidders submit the same
low bid, the contract award shall be determined by drawing lots at a public
meeting.
   G.   Public Records: All information submitted by a successful bidder
pursuant to this Ordinance are public records subject to review pursuant to the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
   H.   Materiality: The requirements of this Ordinance are a material part of
the bid documents and the contract and the successful bidder shall insert this
Ordinance in all subcontracts.
   I.   Severability: If any portion of this Ordinance or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall
not affect other portions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given
effect without the invalid portions or applications and, to this end, the
portions of this Ordinance are severable.
   J.   Other Ordinances: Any prior ordinance or portion thereof in conflict
with this Ordinance is superseded by the requirements of this Ordinance. Where
this Ordinance is silent, Kane County may adhere to the requirements laid out
in the Kane County Purchasing Ordinance.
(Ord. 23-340, 8-8-2023)
DIVISION 4. SPECIFICATIONS
2-232: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SPECIFICATIONS:
The director of purchasing or delegated using agency shall prepare, revise,
maintain and monitor specifications for materials, supplies, services,
equipment and construction or construction related services required by the
county. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-233: RELATIONSHIP WITH USING AGENCIES:
The director of purchasing shall obtain expert advice and assistance from
personnel of using agencies in the development of specifications and may
delegate in writing to a using agency the authority to submit its own
specifications. The director of purchasing shall retain authority to approve or
disapprove all specifications. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-234: MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE COMPETITION:
All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the
purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the county's
requirements and shall not be unduly restrictive. This policy applies to all
specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for the county by
architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-235: CONTRACTORS ENGAGED FOR SPECIFICATION DEVELOPMENT:
In order to ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair
competitive advantage, when procuring property and services under a federal
award, contractors that develop or draft specifications, requirements,
statements of work, and invitations for bids or requests for proposals must be
excluded from competing for such procurements. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
DIVISION 5. APPEALS AND REMEDIES
2-236: BID PROTESTS AND CLAIMS:
   A.   Right To Protest: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with any solicitation or award of a
contract may protest to the director of purchasing. Any protest must be
submitted in writing within seven (7) calendar days from the issuance of the
solicitation, addendum, notice of award, or other decision by the director of
purchasing or authorized official of the using agency.
      1.   Stay Of Procurement During Protest: In the event of a timely protest
under this subsection A, the director of purchasing or the authorized official
of the using agency or the using agency's parent committee, after consulting
with the state's attorney, shall determine whether it is in the best interests
of the county to proceed with the solicitation or award of the contract.
   B.   Claims By Contractor After Contract Is Awarded: Unless otherwise
provided by the terms of the contract, all claims by a contractor against the
county relating to a contract shall be submitted in writing to the director of
purchasing. The contractor may request a conference with the director of
purchasing on the claim. Claims include, without limitation, disputes arising
under a contract and based upon breach of contract, mistake, or
misrepresentation. In the case of a contract based dispute, the provisions of
this article shall prevail over any inconsistent provision in the contract,
unless the county board has expressly waived such protection.
   C.   Bid Protests And Contract Claims:
      1.   Authority: The director of purchasing is authorized to settle any
procedural protest regarding the solicitation or award of a county contract
prior to an appeal to the appropriate parent committee thereof so long as all
affected or interested parties are in agreement. The director of purchasing,
after consulting with the state's attorney, shall make recommendations on the
resolution of any unresolved protest or claim to the appropriate parent
committee of the Kane County board for their consideration.
      2.   Notice Of The Director Of Purchasing's Decision: If the protest or
claim is not resolved by mutual agreement, the director of purchasing shall
issue a decision in writing within seven (7) business days of receipt of the
protest or claim, and such decision shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to
the aggrieved party. The decision shall state the reasons for the decision
reached and shall inform the aggrieved party of its appeal rights under section
2-237 of this chapter.
      3.   Finality Of The Director Of Purchasing's Decision And Right To
Appeal: The director of purchasing's decision shall be final and conclusive
unless, within seven (7) business days from the date of receipt of the
decision, the chairman of the using agency's parent committee receives a
written appeal from the aggrieved party.
      4.   Failure To Render Timely Decision: If the director of purchasing
does not issue a written decision regarding any protest or claim within seven
(7) business days of receipt of such protest or claim, or within such longer
period as may be agreed upon between the parties, then the aggrieved party may
proceed as if an adverse decision had been received. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-237: APPEAL:
   A.   Appeal Process: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or
contractor may appeal a decision by the director of purchasing regarding bid
protests or contract claims to the chairman of the using agency's parent
committee. Said appeal shall be made in writing within seven (7) business days
from the date of receipt of the decision by the director of purchasing. The
protestor shall be notified of the time and date when the appeal shall be
considered and afforded a reasonable opportunity to state its position. Any
party whose interests may be adversely affected by a protest or appeal shall
also be notified and have the right to appear for the purpose of protecting
those interests.
   B.   Decision: The using agency's parent committee shall issue a decision:
      1.   Prior to award, said decision shall be referred with the resolution
for award of the contract for consideration by the county board.
      2.   After award, the decision of the using agency's parent committee
shall be scheduled for discussion and decision at the next regularly scheduled
executive committee or county board meeting, whichever is appropriate.
      3.   The decision of the county board is final.
   C.   Elected Officials: Decisions and determinations made under this section
and subsection
2-236C, "Bid Protests And Contract Claims", of this chapter are subject to the
review and prior approval of the appropriate elected county official as
provided by the internal control statutes or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
DIVISION 6. DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION
2-238: PROHIBITION TO AWARD CONTRACTS TO PARTIES DEBARRED OR SUSPENDED:
No contract may be awarded to parties listed on the federal government's
excluded parties list system in the system for award management (SAM), on the
state of Illinois' list of sanctioned persons maintained by the agency's office
of inspector general, or on the county's own list of parties suspended or
debarred from doing business with the county. (Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
2-239: CERTIFICATION LANGUAGE TO BE INCLUDED IN SOLICITATIONS AND CONTRACTS:
All solicitations and related contracts that may be paid in whole or in part by
federal funds shall include the following, or substantially similar
certification language:
Vendor certifies that during the last five (5) years no order, judgment or
decree of any Federal authority has been issued debarring, suspending or
otherwise limiting its right to contract with any governmental entity,
including school districts, or to engage in any business practice or activity.
Vendor further certifies that it will include this certification within every
subcontract related to performance of this contract.
(Ord. 15-364, 12-8-2015)
ARTICLE VII. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
2-240: Reserved
Division 2. Committee Of Local Improvements
2-241: Created
2-242: Membership
2-243: Compensation
2-244: Organization And Duties
2-245 - 2-254: Reserved
Division 3. Job Training Entities
2-255: Established
2-256: Executive Director
2-257: Public/Private Partnership
2-258: Policy Committee; Administration
2-259: Policy Committee; Members
2-260: Policy Committee; Meetings
2-261: Private Industry Council; Members
2-262: Private Industry Council; Functions
2-263 - 2-275: Reserved
Division 4. Public Building Commission
2-276: Finding Of Necessity
2-277: Name
2-278 - 2-279: Reserved
Division 5. Economic Affairs Committee
2-280: Creation
2-281: Membership
2-282 - 2-289: Reserved
Division 6. Kane County Judicial And Public Safety Strategic Planning And
Technology Commission
2-290: Creation
2-291: Membership
2-292: Departments
2-293: Budget
2-294: Consultants
2-295: Proposals
2-296: Recommendations
2-297: Review
2-298: Evaluation
2-299: Centralization
2-299-1: Governing Electronic Attendance
Division 7. Labor Management Committee
2-300: Definitions
2-301: Establishment, Duties Generally, Composition
2-302: Proceedings Involving State Board
2-303: Collective Bargaining
2-304: Agreements
2-305: Enforcement
2-306: Public Hearing
2-307: Employees Excluded From Recognized Bargaining Units
2-308: Negotiating Team
2-309: Memorandums Of Understanding
2-310: Authorized Acts And Statements
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
2-240: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. COMMITTEE OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 1
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-32003 et seq.
2-241: CREATED:
The creation of the committee of local improvements pursuant to the provisions
of an act of the state entitled "an act authorizing certain counties to
undertake local improvements and defining the powers and duties of such
counties with respect thereto" being PA 77-2736, approved August 18, 1972, and
effective October 1, 1972, is hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted. (Res. 73-
125, § 1, 9-11-1973)
2-242: MEMBERSHIP:
The committee of local improvements shall consist of the chairman of the county
board, or some person designated by him as his representative for the purposes
of this committee, the county superintendent of highways or administrative head
of the county department of public works as determined by the chairman of the
county board, and three (3) members of the county board appointed by the
chairman of the county board, each to serve concurrently with the term of
office of members of standing committee of the county board and until their
respective successors be appointed. (Res. 73-125, § 2, 9-11-1973)
2-243: COMPENSATION:
Each member of the committee of local improvements shall receive for
compensation for his services the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per diem
while performing his duties as a member of the committee. (Res. 73-125, § 3, 9-
11-1973)
2-244: ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES:
The committee of local improvements shall organize and shall perform all the
duties and assume all the powers and duties delegated and authorized by the act
of the state entitled "an act authorizing certain counties to undertake local
improvements and defining the powers and duties of such counties with respect
thereto", being PA 77-2736, approved August 18, 1972, and effective October 1,
1972. (Res. 73-125, § 4, 9-11-1973)
2-245 - 2-254: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. JOB TRAINING ENTITIES
2-255: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   The KDK job training consortium, hereinafter referred to as the
"consortium", is created in order to exercise all powers necessary to carry out
the responsibilities and obligations set forth in this division and in the CEO
agreement, for the operation of programs funded primarily, but not exclusively,
by the JTPA, in the area comprising the entirety of Kane County, DeKalb County,
and Kendall County, designated as a service delivery area, hereinafter referred
to as the "SDA", by the governor of the state.
   B.   Kane County shall act as the lead county for purposes of planning,
receiving funds, and administering JTPA programs within the service delivery
area. The KDK job training department of Kane County, hereinafter referred to
as the "department", will be responsible for the operation of the JTPA, in
accordance with the private industry council/chief elected official agreement.
The lead county, or its department, shall act as the primary liaison with the
PIC. The lead county shall have and carry out such other duties as are
specifically provided in this division and the CEO agreement or otherwise
required by the JTPA or by the state.
   C.   The chief elected official of the lead county will appoint the PIC with
the advice and consent of the other board chairpersons with regard to members
from their communities, in accordance with the private industry council
membership selection agreement. The PIC and the private industry committees for
each field office area shall be charged with the responsibility of providing
program guidance for, and exercising oversight with respect to, activities
under the JTPA for the service delivery area in partnership with the lead
county, and performing any other function mandated by governing legislation,
and in accordance with the PIC/CEO agreement.
   D.   Effective October 1, 1983, the lead county, which is designated as the
"planning entity grant recipient", and has full administrative responsibility
for the JTPA program, will assume financial or legal liability arising from the
scope of authority granted to the KDK job training department, or the cost of
insurance to cover such liability, to the extent not provided for with federal
funds.
   E.   The parties hereto agree that all prior obligations and liabilities
arising out of the operation of programs of each county prior to October 1,
1983, shall be met by the county who incurred such debts and liabilities, and
each county promises to hold harmless all other parties from any such prior
liability, except as otherwise agreed to by one or more of these parties. Any
such agreement shall only be binding on those parties making the agreement.
   F.   Any action of law, suit in equity, or judicial proceeding for the
enforcement of this contract or any provisions thereof shall be instituted and
maintained only in any of the courts of competent jurisdiction in the sixteenth
judicial circuit.
   G.   Each of the counties will participate in and be responsible for the
costs of, including, but not limited to, attorney fees for the defense and
litigation of any court or administrative proceedings, when the proceedings
involve actions taken in their counties. Any county may cooperate with any
other county to assist in such litigation, and the lead county may designate
counsel with the approval of the policy committee. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-256: EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR:
The KDK job training department of Kane County shall, through its executive
director, be responsible for the implementation of the job training partnership
act or act replacing it, enacted by the federal government. The executive
director shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the Kane County
board chairperson; and shall operate under the direction of the policy
committee. The executive director shall:
   A.   Be responsible for the administration and implementation of the
department's programs according to the regulations and directives of the PIC
and the policy committee;
   B.   Be responsible for maintaining liaison with the federal offices, state
offices, and all agencies involved in the area of manpower planning and
represent the county board chairperson at all meetings;
   C.   Provide technical assistance, training and management support whenever
needed and improve program operations, eliminate duplication and overlapping,
and achieve maximum efficiency in the use of total manpower resources;
   D.   Provide background data needed by members of the policy committee, PIC
and private industry committees;
   E.   Serve as a major source of continuity in the operations of the
councils; and
   F.   Serve as a liaison with the chief elected officials of the three (3)
counties. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-257: PUBLIC/PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP:
   A.   The JPTA establishes a partnership between the private industry
council, hereinafter referred to as the "PIC", and local chief elected
officials, hereinafter referred to as the "CEOs", in each SDA. A policy
committee shall be formed to represent the latter side of the partnership and
to receive and consider actions taken by the SDA's PIC.
   B.   The policy committee shall in all respects other than for those
responsibilities which are jointly shared with the private industry council, or
otherwise specifically assigned by the private industry council/chief elected
officials partnership agreement, be the body that is responsible for reviewing
and monitoring the planning and operations under JTPA in the three (3) county
area. Recommendations regarding corrective action relating to the
administration and the operations of the JTPA program as well as the allocation
or reallocation of JTPA funds shall be submitted to the policy committee for
final approval.
   C.   Prior to beginning the review and approval process of the two (2)
program year JTPA, the plan available for review by their respective county
board members. The plan will be deemed approved by that chief elected official
unless objected to by a majority vote of their county board at the first
meeting which follows the date the plan is received by the chief elected
official of the county, plus ten (10) working days. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-258: POLICY COMMITTEE; ADMINISTRATION:
The policy committee shall be the governing body of the public aspect of the
JTPA partnership, and shall concur with the private industry council in the
approval of the job training plan and the programs and services provided under
the act, as an equal partner. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-259: POLICY COMMITTEE; MEMBERS:
   A.   The chairperson of the policy committee shall be the Kane County board
chairperson or his/her designee.
   B.   The regular members of the policy committee shall be:
      1.   From Kane County: The county board chairperson, his/her designee and
four (4) other county board members (or representatives of Kane County
organizations, businesses or institutions) appointed by the board chairperson,
with the advice and consent of the executive committee of the county board.
      2.   From DeKalb County: The county board chairperson or his/her designee
and one other member (a county board member or a representative of a DeKalb
County organization, business or institution) appointed by the board
chairperson.
      3.   From Kendall County: The county board chairperson or his/her
designee (a county board member or a representative of a Kendall County
organization, business or institution) appointed by the board chairperson.
      4.   From the private industry council: Members of the private industry
council executive committee, including the chairperson, vice chairperson,
member at large, and the three (3) private industry committee chairpersons from
each field office area.
   C.   No member of the policy committee, private industry council, private
industry committees or any of their task forces or subcommittees shall
participate in a discussion of that body which has direct bearing on services
to be provided by that member (or any organization with which that member is
associated) or shall cast a vote on any matters in connection with such
consideration for services. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-260: POLICY COMMITTEE; MEETINGS:
The policy committee shall meet at least quarterly and shall meet more
frequently if a meeting is requested by at least two (2) of three (3) counties
or as deemed necessary by the lead county. Each policy committee member, or
his/her designee, has the responsibility to attend all meetings of the
committee and is empowered with full authority to participate at all meetings.
The policy committee shall establish the procedures by which all meetings are
called.
No comprehensive plan for the three (3) county area shall be adopted, amended
or repealed except by the two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the regular voting
members present of the policy committee, at a regular or specially scheduled
meeting.
All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Illinois open meetings act 1
, approved July 11, 1975, as amended. "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall be the
parliamentary authority on all matters, except where expressly otherwise
required by these articles. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2-261: PRIVATE INDUSTRY COUNCIL; MEMBERS:
Members of the council shall be appointed by the Kane County board chairperson
according to the guidelines prescribed in the federal regulations governing the
JTPA, and in accordance with the private industry council membership selection
agreement for the counties of Kane, DeKalb, and Kendall with the advice and
consent of the DeKalb and Kendall County chairmen with regard to members from
their communities. (Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-262: PRIVATE INDUSTRY COUNCIL; FUNCTIONS:
   A.   The PIC shall participate in the development and review of the job
training plan, and any modifications thereof, as developed by the department
pursuant to the JTPA and this agreement.
   B.   The PIC is authorized to provide oversight of the programs as conducted
under the job training plan public law (section 103(a)) and title 29 USC
section 1513(a), and shall monitor and evaluate the job training program
operated by the department, independent of the department's monitoring and
evaluation efforts, in accordance with the procedures established by the PIC,
and the PIC shall have access to such information concerning the operations of
such programs as is necessary. At a minimum, the PIC shall receive quarterly
plan versus actual reports for the SDA from the department, and summaries of
all compliance monitoring activities which are delegated to the department by
the PIC, and shall make recommendations for corrective action as appropriate.
The PIC's report shall be distributed by the PIC to its membership and the
counties annually.
   C.   The PIC shall solicit the input and participation of the local business
community in the provision of program services to eligible residents of the
county.
   D.   The PIC shall construct its own constitution and bylaws, which will
assure compliance with the terms of this agreement.
   E.   The PIC will provide a method for the private industry committees to
provide input to the local plan and operation in each field office area, in
accordance with the overall job training plan, including solicitation of
proposals and selection of service deliverers, and oversight of these programs
through monitoring and evaluation of results. At a minimum, the private
industry committee shall receive a quarterly plan versus actual report on each
subcontractor and make recommendations for corrective action as appropriate.
Potential and current service deliverers will be surveyed and monitored by the
department to assure compliance with the act, regulations, and other federal,
state and local laws and statutes and department policy. Results will be
reported to the appropriate private industry committee or PIC.
   F.   The PIC will participate in the development of programs and standards
for youth and adult programs.
   G.   The PIC may hire staff, incorporate, and if incorporated, solicit and
accept contributions and grant funds from other public and private sources.
   H.   In accordance with the job training plan, the PIC shall prepare and
approve a budget for PIC activities.
   I.   The PIC shall consult on the establishment and implementation of any
other JTPA funded program in the SDA, e.g., the dislocated workers programs.
(Ord. 83-135, 9-13-1983)
2-263 - 2-275: RESERVED:
DIVISION 4. PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSION 1
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 20/1 et seq.
2-276: FINDING OF NECESSITY:
The county board hereby determines that there is a need and that it is in the
best interest of the public that a public building commission be organized to
exercise the powers and authority prescribed by the public building commission
act 1 . (Res. 66-87, 10-11-1966)
 
Notes
1 2. 50 ILCS 20/1 et seq., 20/4.
2-277: NAME 1 :
The name of the commission created pursuant to the provisions of the public
building commission act shall be the public building commission of Kane County.
(Res. 66-87, 10-11-1966)
 
Notes
1 3. 50 ILCS 20/4.
2-278 - 2-279: RESERVED:
DIVISION 5. ECONOMIC AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
2-280: CREATION:
There is hereby created the Kane County economic affairs committee to prepare
an overall economic development program, to review economic development
projects, and to prepare recommendations to the county board on viable
projects. (Ord. 84-21, 2-14-1984)
2-281: MEMBERSHIP:
The committee shall consist of fifteen (15) members appointed annually by the
chairman of the county board with the advice and consent of the county board.
(Ord. 84-21, 2-14-1984)
2-282 - 2-289: RESERVED:
DIVISION 6. KANE COUNTY JUDICIAL AND PUBLIC SAFETY STRATEGIC PLANNING AND
TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
2-290: CREATION:
The County of Kane ("County") hereby establishes the Kane County Judicial and
Public Safety Strategic Planning and Technology Commission ("Commission"). The
Commission is to function in all ways as a successor to the Judicial and Public
Safety Technology Task Force, the Judicial and Public Safety Technology
Commission, and the Judicial Center Master Plan Subcommittee previously
established by the County. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011; amd. Ord. 14-12, 1-14-
2014)
2-291: MEMBERSHIP:
   A.   The Commission shall be composed of the following members:
      1.   The County Board Chair;
      2.   The County Board Public Safety Chair;
      3.   The County Board Finance Chair;
      4.   Three County Board Members, appointed by the County Board Chair;
      5.   Five Members from the Public at Large, one of whom shall be a
licensed attorney practicing in Kane County, appointed by the County Board
Chair;
      6.   The County State's Attorney;
      7.   The County Public Defender;
      8.   The Chief Judge of the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit;
      9.   Two Judges presiding in the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit, appointed by
the Chief Judge;
      10.   The County Sheriff;
      11.   The Circuit Clerk;
      12.   A member from the Kane County Bar Association, appointed jointly by
the County Board Chair and the Chief Judge.
   B.   The Chair of the Commission shall be elected from among the members by
a majority vote. The term of Chairman shall commence at the meeting next
following the expiration of the outgoing Chairman’s two (2)-year term. The term
of Chairmanship shall be for two years. The Commission Chair shall designate a
Vice-Chair whom shall serve as Chair in case of the unavailability of the
Commission Chair. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011; amd. Ord. 13-27, 2-13-2013; Ord.
14-12, 1-14, 2014; Ord. 14-168, 5-13-2014; Ord. 20-296, 9-8-2020)
2-292: DEPARTMENTS:
The Commission shall make decisions for the County regarding capital purchases
in technology for the judiciary and public safety departments of the County.
These departments shall include but are not limited to the Judiciary, the
State's Attorney's Office, the Public Defender's Office, the Sheriff's Office,
and the Circuit Clerk's Office. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011)
2-293: BUDGET:
The Commission shall, upon receipt of a report developed by the firm of URL
Integration outlining proposed standards and budgets for the acquisition of new
Case Management Systems ("CMSs") for the Circuit Clerk, Judiciary, States
Attorney and Public Defender for judicial and public safety departments of the
County, propose a budget for the development and purchase of new CMSs.
Thereafter, the Commission shall forward its proposed CMS budget to the County
Board for approval. If the proposed budget is acceptable to the County Board,
the County Board shall pass a resolution formally approving the budget for the
CMSs, and establishing the method by which the budget shall be funded, the
source of such funds, and the allocation of such funds between County
departments ("CMS Process Resolution"). The budget so proposed and approved
shall include both a proposed CMS budget, and a sub-budget for each department
that shall seek to participate in CMS acquisition and integration. (Ord. 11-
400, 12-13-2011)
2-294: CONSULTANTS:
In addition to proposing budgets for the development and purchase of new CMSs,
any time the County wishes to expend funds to be used for capital technology,
the Commission shall make recommendations to the County Board regarding that
capital technology, and regarding the selection of consultants for capital
technology purposes. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011)
2-295: PROPOSALS:
Upon the County Board's adoption of the CMS Process Resolution, any office
holder or department head, in consultation with the Chief Judge of the
Sixteenth Judicial Circuit ("Chief Judge"), the Circuit Clerk, and the Kane
County Information Technology Director ("IT Director"), shall be responsible
for writing a Request for Proposals ("RFP") for that department or office
holder's office, which RFP shall be consistent with the URL report and the
budget approved by the County Board. Once completed, that CMS RFP shall be
submitted to the Commission for review and approval. If a CMS RFP is approved
by the Commission, the CMS RFP shall be formally issued by the County
Purchasing Department to solicit responses. The CMS RFP shall be subject to all
applicable County purchasing regulations and ordinances not in contradiction
with the Settlement Agreement. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011)
2-296: RECOMMENDATIONS:
Any responses to a department's CMS RFP shall be submitted to the department
head or office holder, the Circuit Clerk, the Chief Judge, and the IT Director.
Any responses to a CMS RFP shall also be submitted to any of the following not
already given the responses, for informational purposes: the Kane County
State's Attorney, the Kane County Public Defender, the Kane County Court
Services Director, the Kane County Sheriff, and to the chairperson of the
Commission. The department head, the Circuit Clerk, the Chief Judge and the IT
Director shall jointly make a recommendation to the Commission as to the
respondent of the department's CMS RFP which they believe should be selected as
the approved vendor, within the confines of the approved budget (or any
amendment thereto). In formulating a recommendation, these parties will also
consult with any of the following parties not already among them, who will
serve in an advisory role, with no decision making authority: the Kane County
State's Attorney, the Kane County Public Defender, the Kane County Court
Services Director, and the Kane County Sheriff. At any time prior to the
Commission's approval of the recommended respondent, the department head may
meet with any respondent to the department's CMS RFP for purposes of
discussing, detailing or negotiating any of the terms of any submitted response
to the departments CMS RFP. At all stages from RFP development to selection of
the CMS, the department head and Chief Judge will retain approval over the CMS
and other systems applicable to the department's office. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-
2011)
2-297: REVIEW:
The Commission shall review the recommendation of the department head, the
Circuit Clerk, the Chief Judge, and IT Director as to which respondent to the
department's CMS RFP should be selected, and shall approve or reject the
recommendation. The Commission shall not have the authority to recommend
approval of an alternate respondent. If the Commission determines to approve of
the RFP/respondent selected by the department head, Circuit Clerk, Chief Judge
and IT Director, the Commission shall do so by formal motion, and shall forward
that recommendation to the County Board. The County Board shall thereafter
consider the recommendation and, if it determines that it is appropriate to do
so, shall undertake such action as shall be necessary to approve of the
selected RFP/respondent, to fund out of the aforementioned budget and to
implement the department's CMS project. If the County Board fails to approve
the recommendation of the Commission, no CMS acquisition shall be undertaken as
a component of this process. (Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011)
2-298: EVALUATION:
The Commission shall evaluate the CMS needs of each department on a case-by-
case basis. Should the County Board, by passage of an appropriate resolution,
approve a budget for a change to the CMS of any County department, then for
each such department, the process outlined above shall generally be followed.
(Ord. 11-400, 12-13-2011)
2-299: CENTRALIZATION:
The Commission shall evaluate the long term steps necessary for the efficient
centralization of Kane County government services on the Judicial Center
Campus, and advise the Kane County Board regarding the steps necessary to
effectuate the future build-out of the Judicial Center Campus, Third Street
Courthouse, and the Kane Branch Court building. (Ord. 14-12, 1-14-2014)
2-299-1: GOVERNING ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE
The Commission hereby adopts the Governing Electronic Attendance at Meetings to
permit any member of the Commission to attend any of its meetings via
electronic means as follows:
   A.   In accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 120/7, a member of the
Judicial Public Safety Strategic Planning and Technology Commission may attend
a Commission meeting by video or audio conference, or other remote
participation using electronic contemporaneous interactive communication,
provided:
      1.   A quorum of the corporate authority is physically present for the
meeting.
      2.   Any member who desires to attend a meeting by remote electronic
participation has given the Recording Secretary at least four (4) hours advance
notice via email or phone that they are unable to physically attend the meeting
due to:
         a.   Personal illness;
         b.   Employment purpose or the business of the Commission; and
         c.   A family or other emergency.
      3.   Members should use all means necessary to be physically present for
all meetings.
      4.   The Commission may revoke the right to attend a meeting by remote
electronic participation if a member is abusing or frequently not attending
meetings in person.
      5.   When a member of the Commission is attending a meeting
electronically, the Recording Secretary shall announce to the public that the
member is present electronically and has notified the Recording Secretary in
accordance with this policy, unless a motion objecting to the member's
electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by a majority of the
Commission physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and
seconded, or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by members
of the Commission physically present at the meeting, then the request by the
member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved and the
requesting member noted as being electronically present.
      6.   Any member attending electronically shall be counted as present and
the minutes shall reflect that a member was attending by remote electronic
participation.
      7.   The electronic equipment used for remote participation shall be of
such quality that the members present and the public shall be able to hear the
comments of the member participating.
      8.   The member attending electronically shall have the same rights to
participate in discussions and vote as if the member were physically present. A
member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case
of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his
or her leaving and returning. (Ord. 18-419, 11-13-2018)
DIVISION 7. LABOR MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
2-300: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this division the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them below:
ACT: 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes, section 315/1 et seq., as amended.
COMMITTEE: The Kane County labor management committee.
STATE BOARD: The Illinois state labor relations board.
Definitions of other terms are the same as are contained in the act. (Ord. 84-
56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-301: ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES GENERALLY, COMPOSITION:
There shall be established a labor management committee. This committee, in
addition to duties assigned elsewhere in this code, shall have charge of all
matters arising under 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes, section 315/1 et seq., as
amended. This committee shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and three
(3) other members all selected by and serving at the pleasure of the chairman
of the county board. The chairman may select no more than four (4) persons from
one political party. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-302: PROCEEDINGS INVOLVING STATE BOARD:
The committee shall direct the conduct on behalf of the county board of all
proceedings involving the state board relative to the election, certification,
and decertification of collective bargaining units, including proceedings for
the determination of the number of employees, type of bargaining unit and
eligibility of employees in the classified service, to participate in such
elections and relative to fact finding proceedings and mediation; and shall
also direct all the proceedings before courts or other governmental agencies
involving matters coming under the scope of the act. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-
1984)
2-303: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING:
Collective bargaining with certified bargaining units shall be carried on by or
at the direction of the committee which shall adopt, and thereafter may amend
rules and procedures governing the conduct of such bargaining. Department heads
and supervisory personnel shall not distribute to any county employees any
written communication bearing upon the subject matter or program of such
collective bargaining or other employment relations matters unless such
communication shall have the prior approval of the counselor or labor
negotiator designated by the committee. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-304: AGREEMENTS:
The agreements reached at the conclusion of such collective bargaining shall be
reduced to writing by the committee and submitted with the committee's
recommendation and/or comments in the form of a proposed resolution to the
county board for its approval or rejection. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-305: ENFORCEMENT:
The committee and/or its legal counsel is authorized to institute legal
proceedings to prevent employees from continuing to engage in practices
prohibited by or in violation of the act and to enforce any ordinance or
resolution by the county board relative to agreements reached at the conclusion
of collective bargaining procedures as provided for in sections
2-302,
2-303 and
2-304 of this chapter. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-306: PUBLIC HEARING:
Recognized county employees' organizations shall submit their requests to the
county board which shall refer these matters to the committee. The committee
may then conduct a public hearing on the requests and all interested persons
may appear and state their views thereon. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-307: EMPLOYEES EXCLUDED FROM RECOGNIZED BARGAINING UNITS:
The committee shall annually review the wages, hours, and conditions of
employment of all employees not represented by recognized county employee
organization and submit their recommendations to the county board each year for
the following year. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-308: NEGOTIATING TEAM:
   A.   The committee is authorized to appoint a negotiating team to conduct
labor negotiations or other duties assigned by the committee. This team may
consist of county employees. If said employee(s) works in an elected official's
department, this may not be done without the elected official's consent. The
committee may compensate said employees if service goes beyond the normal
activities of said employee as well as pay benefits according to section
2-72 of this chapter.
   B.   The committee may also hire and/or contract for the services of an
independent negotiator(s) to be compensated as agreed by the committee. Said
negotiators shall serve at the pleasure of the committee.
   C.   The committee and the appointed negotiating team shall be covered under
the provisions of section
2-71 of this chapter, as amended. (Ord. 84-56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
2-309: MEMORANDUMS OF UNDERSTANDING:
The committee is authorized on behalf of the county board to enter into
memorandums of understanding with the elected officials relating to all
activities under the act in order to promote harmony and uniformity among all
employees of the county and/or elected or appointed officials. (Ord. 84-56, §
3, 5-8-1984)
2-310: AUTHORIZED ACTS AND STATEMENTS:
No individual member of the county board or any employee, officer, or agent
thereof or any elected or appointed official or employee, officer or agent
thereof shall speak or act for the county of Kane or the county board, or
pursuant to memorandums of understanding, for any elected or appointed official
thereof, without the express written consent of the committee or negotiating
team. However, this is not meant in any way to restrict individuals from
expressing their own opinions or beliefs, or to apply to counsel's
representations made during administrative or judicial proceedings. (Ord. 84-
56, § 3, 5-8-1984)
ARTICLE VIII. COUNTY FACILITIES
SECTION:
2-311: Intent
2-312: Definitions
2-313: Use Of Auditorium
2-314 - 2-319: Reserved
2-311: INTENT:
   A.   It is the intent of this article to designate the auditorium in
building A of the Kane County Government Center as a facility to be used by the
general public for public purposes, unrelated to the operation of county
government and to establish rules and procedures to regulate the use thereof.
   B.   It is not the intent of this article to:
      1.   Regulate the content of any form of speech;
      2.   Violate the constitutional requirement of separation of church and
state;
      3.   Deny equal protection under the laws;
      4.   Interfere with the operation of county government in its
administration, provision of services, or exercise of authority for the health,
safety and welfare of the general public;
      5.   Interfere with the policy of an elected or appointed county official
regarding the use of county facilities;
      6.   Change the policy established regarding the use of the courthouse;
or
      7.   Provide public property for private use. (Ord. 92-2, 1-14-1992; Ord.
92-18, 2-11-1992)
2-312: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: For making any gift to the general public for the benefit
of an indefinite number of persons and designed to benefit those persons from
an economic, physical, or social standpoint.
CIVIC OR PATRIOTIC PURPOSE: For contributing to the general welfare of the
community and the betterment of life for the citizenry of the community or the
enhancement of facilities.
EDUCATIONAL PURPOSE: For intellectual, physical, or ethical instruction.
OPEN USE: The use of a portion of the auditorium by residents of Kane County
for gatherings or meetings for civic, patriotic, educational, charitable, or
political purposes.
PATRIOTIC PURPOSE: To honor or to support the interests and welfare of the
nation.
POLITICAL PURPOSE: For an incorporated, voluntary associate of persons
sponsoring certain ideas of government or maintaining certain political
principles or beliefs in public policies of government. (Res. 92-2, 1-14-1992;
Ord. 92-18, 12-11-1992)
2-313: USE OF AUDITORIUM:
   A.   The auditorium shall be available for open use for such defined public
purposes under the following conditions:
      1.   Any resident of Kane County or any organization located within Kane
County seeking to use the auditorium must make a reservation by submitting an
application to the director of central services no later than fifteen (15) days
in advance of the date sought to be reserved for use. Applications shall be
considered in the order in which they are received. Official use shall have
priority over open use at all times, provided that a county official,
department head, or employee shall advise the director of central services of
the date and time of official use at least fifteen (15) days in advance. There
are no other restrictions applicable to official use.
      2.   The auditorium will normally be available for open use Monday
through Thursday from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to nine thirty o'clock (9:30)
P.M.
      3.   Snacks and nonalcoholic beverages allowed; smoking is not permitted.
      4.   A refundable security deposit in the amount of twenty five dollars
($25.00) shall be imposed and required at time of application.
      5.   User shall indemnify and hold harmless the county of Kane from and
against any claim of any kind arising out of or due to the acts of the user,
its agents, employees or officers in connection with the use or occupancy of
the premises herein. Such indemnity shall extend to all costs, awards, attorney
fees and other related expenses incurred by the county arising out of such
claims. (Res. 92-2, 1-14-1992; Ord. 92-18, 2-11-1992)
2-314 - 2-319:   RESERVED:
ARTICLE IX. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
SECTION:
2-320: Adoption Of System Of Administrative Adjudication
2-321: Procedures Not Exclusive
2-322: Definitions
2-323: Code Hearing Unit
2-324: Procedure For Instituting Proceedings
2-325: Notice Of Hearing; Subpoenas; Default
2-326: Representation At Hearings
2-327: Conduct Of Hearings
2-328: Findings, Determination, And Order
2-329: Administrative Review
2-330: Transfer Or Conveyance Of Property
2-331: Collection Of Unpaid Fines Or Other Sanctions
2-332: Severability
2-333: Effective Date
2-334: Hearing Costs
2-335 - 2-339: Reserved
2-320: ADOPTION OF SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
The county of Kane ("county") hereby adopts division
5-41 of the counties code, as amended, 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-41005
et seq., in its current form and as it may be amended from time to time, for
the adjudication of violations of county ordinances regulating animal control;
the definition, identification, and abatement of public nuisances; the
accumulation, disposal, and transportation of garbage, refuse, and other forms
of solid waste; the construction and maintenance of buildings and structures;
sanitation practices; stormwater management; and zoning, to the extent
permitted by the Illinois constitution. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-321: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The adoption by the county of a system of administrative adjudications does not
preclude the county from using other methods to enforce county ordinances,
including, but not limited to, relief in the circuit court for the 16th
judicial circuit, Kane County, Illinois. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-322: DEFINITIONS:
In this article, unless the context requires otherwise:
CODE: Any county ordinance that pertains to or regulates any of the following:
animal control; the definition, identification, and abatement of public
nuisances; the accumulation, disposal, and transportation of garbage, refuse,
and other forms of solid waste; the construction and maintenance of buildings
and structures; sanitation practices; stormwater management; and zoning.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A county employee authorized to issue citations for
county code violations and to conduct inspections of public or private real
property to determine whether code violations exist. However, nothing shall be
construed to allow for administrative adjudication of an ordinance violation in
the case where a state statute or administrative rule provides for a specific
method or procedure to be followed, other than administrative adjudication, in
enforcing a county ordinance.
HEARING OFFICER: A person other than a code enforcement officer or law
enforcement officer, who is appointed by the chairman of the county board, with
the consent of the board, to preside over administrative hearings. Every
hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of
Illinois for at least three (3) years. Prior to conducting administrative
adjudication proceedings, hearing officers shall have successfully completed a
formal training program which includes the following:
   A.   Instruction on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which
they will conduct;
   B.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations they will
adjudicate;
   C.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
   D.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and
issuing final orders.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of an improved or unimproved
parcel of real estate.
RESPONDENT: A property owner, waste hauler, or other person charged with
liability for an alleged code violation and the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed.
SOLID WASTE: Demolition materials, food and industrial processing wastes,
garden trash, land cleaning waste, mixed refuse, noncombustible refuse, and
trash as defined in the solid waste disposal district act 1 .
WASTE HAULER: Any person owning or controlling any vehicle used to carry or
transport garbage, refuse, or other forms of solid waste. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-
2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 3105/1 et seq.
2-323: CODE HEARING UNIT:
   A.   There is hereby established a code hearing unit in the county
government. The code hearing unit shall consist of a hearing officer,
administrative assistant, and recording secretary. The function of the code
hearing unit shall be to expedite the prosecution and correction of violations
of county ordinances ("code violation") regulating animal control; the
definition, identification, and abatement of public nuisances; the
accumulation, disposal, and transportation of garbage, refuse, and other forms
of solid waste; the construction and maintenance of buildings and structures;
sanitation practices; and zoning. Charges of code violations are to be heard
and adjudicated by a hearing officer appointed by the Kane County board
chairman, with the consent of the county board.
   B.   Hearing officers shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   To preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
a code violation exists.
      2.   To hear testimony and accept evidence from the code enforcement
officer, the respondent, and all interested parties relevant to the existence
of a code violation.
      3.   To preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.
      4.   To issue and sign written findings and a decision and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
      5.   To issue subpoenas as allowed by section
2-325 of this chapter.
      6.   To impose penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and
to assess costs reasonably related to instituting the proceedings upon finding
the respondent liable for the charged violation. In no event, however, shall
the hearing officer have the authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
(Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-324: PROCEDURE FOR INSTITUTING PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   When a code enforcement officer observes a code violation, the officer
shall note, or in the case of an animal control violation, the code enforcement
officer may respond to the filing of a formal complaint by noting the violation
on a violation notice and report form, indicating the following: the name and
address of the respondent, if known; the name, address, and vehicle
registration number of the waste hauler who deposited the waste, if applicable;
the type and nature of the violation; the date and time the violation was
observed; the names of witnesses to the violation; and the address of the
location or property where the violation is observed.
   B.   The violation notice and report form shall contain a file number and a
hearing date noted by the code enforcement officer in the spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The violation notice and report form shall state that
failure to appear at the hearing on the date indicated may result in a
determination of liability for the cited violation and the imposition of fines
and assessment of costs as provided by the applicable county ordinance. The
violation notice and report form shall also state that upon a determination of
liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust procedures for judicial
review, any unpaid fines or costs imposed will constitute a debt due and owed
to the county.
   C.   The code enforcement officer shall certify the correctness of the
information required by subsection A of this section by signing his name to the
violation notice and report form, and indicate the date on which this was done.
Failure to certify does not invalidate the violation notice, but will not
establish a prima facie case at trial.
   D.   A copy of the violation notice and report form shall be filed with the
code hearing unit and served on the respondent either personally or by first
class mail, postage prepaid, sent to the address of the respondent. If the name
of the respondent property owner cannot be ascertained or if the service on the
respondent cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the respondent
property owner by posting, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled, a copy of the violation notice and report form in a prominent place
on the property where the violation was found. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-325: NOTICE OF HEARING; SUBPOENAS; DEFAULT:
   A.   The respondent shall have at least twenty (20) days after service of
the violation notice and report form to prepare for the hearing, unless the
violation is deemed by the code enforcement officer to be an immediate threat
to the public health, safety, or welfare, at which time the hearing date may be
expedited as necessary.
   B.   All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for
hearing. For good cause shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion
of the hearing officer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Continuances shall not exceed twenty eight (28) days.
   C.   At any time prior to the hearing date, at the request of the code
enforcement officer, the attorney for the county, the respondent, or the
attorney for the respondent, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may
issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the
hearing.
   D.   If, at the time set for hearing, the respondent or his attorney fails
to appear, the hearing officer shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relating to the existence of a code violation. At the close of the
hearing, upon sufficient evidence of a violation, the hearing officer may enter
a default judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines and
assess costs. A copy of the order of default shall be served promptly in any
manner for service of a notice of violation permitted by this article and
applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which is a final
determination, shall apprise the respondent of the procedure for setting aside
the default judgment and also shall apprise the respondent of the availability
of an appeal of the default judgment to the circuit court of Kane County.
   E.   A respondent against whom a default judgment has been entered may file
a motion with the code enforcement unit to set aside the default judgment and
for a new hearing. A motion to set aside a default judgment may be filed within
twenty eight (28) days of entry of the default judgment. A motion to set aside
a default judgment shall set forth the reason(s) the respondent failed to
appear on the original hearing date. The motion will be heard and ruled upon by
the code hearing officer. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-326: REPRESENTATION AT HEARINGS:
The case for the county may be presented by the code enforcement officer or by
the state's attorney. In no event, however, may the case for the county be
presented by an employee of the code hearing unit. The case for the respondent
may be presented by the respondent or the respondent's attorney. If the
respondent is a corporation, it may appear through any officer, director,
manager, or supervisor of the corporation. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-327: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
The hearing officer shall preside at the hearing, shall hear testimony, and
shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation on the property indicated. The code enforcement officer's signed
violation notice and report form shall be prima facie evidence of the existence
of the code violation described in the form. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings do not apply to hearings authorized under
this article. The burden of proof is a preponderance of the evidence. Once a
prima facie case is established by the county, the burden of proof then shifts
to the respondent. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-328: FINDINGS, DETERMINATION, AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and
shall be designated as the hearing officer's findings, decision, and order. The
findings, decision, and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of
fact, a determination of whether a code violation exists based on the findings
of fact, and an order imposing a fine or other penalty, directing the
respondent to correct the violation, or dismissing the case if the violation is
not proved. If the hearing officer determines that the respondent is liable for
the cited violation, the hearing officer shall enter an order imposing
sanctions that are provided in the code for the violations proved, including
the imposition of fines and the recovery of the costs of the proceedings. Costs
may be recovered in the same manner as fines and penalties. A copy of the
findings, decision, and order shall be served by personal service or by any
method provided for service of the violation notice and report form under
section 2-324 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-329: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Kane County. The administrative review law 1
and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to and govern every action
for the judicial review of the final findings, decision, and order of a hearing
officer under this section. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
2-330: TRANSFER OR CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the county
against a respondent property owner as the result of a finding of a code
violation under this article shall attach to the property, subject to the
interests of all lienholders of record, as well as to the owner of the
property, so that the owner cannot avoid the finding of a code violation
against the owner by conveying or transferring the property to another. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of property takes the property subject to the
findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under this article if a
notice consisting of a copy of the order to correct a code violation and
imposing any sanctions and costs, if applicable, and a description of the real
estate affected that is sufficient to identify the real estate has been filed
in the office of the Kane County recorder by the county prior to the transfer
or conveyance to the subsequent transferee or owner. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-331: COLLECTION OF UNPAID FINES OR OTHER SANCTIONS:
   A.   Any fine or other sanction or costs imposed, or any part of any fine or
other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or
failure to exhaust procedures for judicial review under the administrative
review law 1  is a debt due and owed to Kane County and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. Any subsequent owner or transferee
of property takes subject to this debt if a notice has been filed pursuant to
section 2-330 of this chapter.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the county may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Kane
County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the hearing officer's findings,
decision, and order, by filing a petition. Nothing in this article prevents the
county from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a
person or property in such a proceeding.
   C.   Upon commencement of the action, the county shall file a certified copy
of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision, and order were issued in accordance with this article and 55 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-41 et seq. Service of the summons and a copy of the
petition may be by any method provided by section 2-203 of the code of civil
procedure 2  or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the
total amount of fines or other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings,
decision, and order does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
   D.   If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order were
entered within the requirements of 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-41 et
seq., and this article, and that the respondent had an opportunity for a
hearing under and for judicial review as provided in 55 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/5-41 et seq.:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the county and against
the respondent for the amount indicated in the findings, decision, and order
plus court costs. The judgment has the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
      2.   The court may issue other orders or injunctions, or both, requested
by the county to enforce the order of the hearing officer or to correct a code
violation. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
2 2. 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
2-332: SEVERABILITY:
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that one or more sections or
subsections of this article is or are invalid, the remaining sections or
subsections hereof shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-
2015)
2-333: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall become effective ten (10) days after passage and publication
in pamphlet form if required by law. (Ord. 15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-334: HEARING COSTS:
In the event of a determination that a violation has occurred, or if the
complaint is dismissed or withdrawn based upon compliance prior to the hearing
date the hearing costs shall be recovered in the amount of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) or the actual costs of the hearing, whichever shall
be greater. The hearing officer, may, in an appropriate case, and for good
cause shown, waive or reduce costs. The county, by separate ordinance or
resolution may provide for additional or increased costs to be recovered. (Ord.
15-159, 6-9-2015)
2-335 - 2-339: RESERVED:
ARTICLE X. ELECTRICAL POWER AGGREGATION PLAN OF OPERATION AND GOVERNANCE
SECTION:
2-340: Introduction
2-341: Process
2-342: Definitions
2-343: Operational Plan
2-344: Miscellaneous Governance Guidelines
2-345: Liability
2-346: Information And Complaint Numbers
2-347: Severability
2-340: INTRODUCTION:
Public act 096-0176 amended the Illinois power agreement act by adding section
1-92 to 20 Illinois Compiled Statutes 3855 ("the act") and allowed the
corporate authorities of a county to adopt an ordinance in accordance with the
act to aggregate electrical loads for residential and small commercial retail
customers within the corporate limits of the county on an opt-out or opt-in
program. The act further authorized a county to select suppliers of retail
electric supply, solicit bids and enter into service agreements to facilitate
the sale and purchase of electricity and related services. The legislation
authorized the Illinois power agency to assist a county in developing a plan of
operation and governance.
Large industrial and commercial consumers with sophisticated electric
operations use their size and expertise to obtain lower electric power rates.
Individual residential and small commercial retail consumers are typically
unable to obtain significant price reductions since they lack the same
bargaining power, expertise and the economies of scale enjoyed by larger
consumers. Aggregation, the combining of multiple electric loads, provides the
benefits of retail electric competition for consumers with lower electric
usage.
Municipal aggregation, the combining of multiple retail electric loads of
customers by a county, provides the means through which municipal residential
and small commercial retail customers may obtain economic benefits of Illinois'
competitive retail electric market. The Kane County aggregation program
combines the electric loads of residential and small commercial retail
customers to form a buying group ("aggregation group"). Kane County ("county"
or "Kane County") will act as purchasing agent for the aggregation group.
Therefore, Kane County will be a municipal or governmental aggregator, as
described by Illinois law and the rules established by authorized agencies, and
shall act on behalf of Commonwealth Edison Company, an affiliate of Exelon
Corporation (herein referred to as "ComEd" or "Commonwealth Edison") in the
county to obtain the best aggregation program for the members of the
aggregation group. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
2-341: PROCESS:
On March 18, 2014, in accordance with the requirements of the act,
unincorporated Kane County voters (exception of the residents in Aurora and
Dundee Townships) approved a referendum to operate an aggregation program as an
"opt-out" program. Under the opt-out program, all ComEd residential and small
commercial retail customers in the county are automatically included as
participants in the program unless they opt out of the program by providing
written notice of their intention not to participate as a part of the
aggregation group. As required by state law, the corporate authorities ("Kane
County board" or "county board") of the county of Kane, Illinois ("county or
"Kane County"), duly passed an ordinance which authorized submitting to the
county's electorate the determination whether or not the aggregation program
shall operate as an opt-out program. Following the approval of the referendum
by the electorate, the county passed ordinance 2014-234 on August 12, 2014,
authorizing the county to aggregate electric loads for residential and small
commercial retail customers in unincorporated Kane County and implement an opt-
out program.
In addition to passing the required ordinances by the county board, the county
may also be required to comply with various rules and regulations established
by authorized agencies of the state of Illinois. The county will promptly file
any application and comply with any applicable rules and regulations that may
be required by Illinois law for certification as a municipal aggregator and to
operate the aggregation program under the act. As required by the act, the
county board developed and approved this aggregation plan of operation and
governance ("plan"). Before adopting this plan and as required by the act, the
county board duly published a notice of two (2) public hearings in the Kane
County Chronicle, a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The first
public hearing was held on Tuesday, June 24, 2014, at five fifteen o'clock (5:
15) P.M. at the Kane County Government Center, Kane County board room (719 S.
Batavia Avenue, Geneva, IL 60134) and the second public hearing was held on
Wednesday, June 25, 2014, at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at Fishermen's Inn
(43W901 Main Street Road, Elburn, IL 60119). The public hearings were held by
the county board and provided the residents of the county a meaningful
opportunity to be heard regarding the aggregation program and this plan. The
county board considered the concerns of the residents and information disclosed
at the hearings in the development of this plan. The opt-out notice for the
aggregation program shall be provided in advance to all eligible electric
customers in the county upon approval of this plan according to the opt-out
disclosure program developed by the county. The opt-out notice and disclosures
shall comply with the act and all applicable rules and regulations of any
authorized agency in the state of Illinois and shall fully inform such
customers in advance that they have the right to opt out of the aggregation
program. The opt-out notice shall disclose all required information including,
but not limited to, the rates, terms and conditions of the program and the
specific method to opt out of the program.
By majority vote of the county board, the county may select a retail electric
supplier ("RES" or "provider") to provide the electric power for the Kane
County aggregation program according to the terms of a written service
agreement entered into by and between the provider and the county. By majority
vote of the county board, the county may determine not to enter into a service
agreement with any provider and in such event the aggregation group shall
continue to purchase electric power through Commonwealth Edison. If the county
board enters into a service agreement with a provider, Commonwealth Edison will
continue to provide and service delivery of the electricity purchased from the
provider, and metering, repairs and emergency service will continue to be
provided by Commonwealth Edison. The county board has determined that each
participant in the aggregation group shall receive a single monthly bill from
Commonwealth Edison under applicable tariffs. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
2-342: DEFINITIONS:
In order to clarify certain terminology, the following terms as used in this
plan shall have the meanings set forth below:
AGGREGATION GROUP: All the residential and small commercial retail customers of
ComEd in the corporate limits of the county that have not opted out of the
program and are permitted under the terms of the act to participate in the
program.
AGGREGATION PROGRAM OR PROGRAM: The program developed and implemented by Kane
County, as a municipal aggregator under the act, to provide ComEd residential
and small commercial retail customers in the county with retail electric
generation services.
MEMBER: A person or legal entity enrolled in the Kane County municipal
aggregation program for competitive retail electric services and a member of
the aggregation group.
MUNICIPAL AGGREGATOR: The county operating an aggregation program under the
legislative authority granted the county to act as an aggregator to provide a
competitive retail electric service to residential and small commercial retail
customers of ComEd in the county. Pursuant to the act, an aggregator is not a
public utility or an alternative retail electric supplier.
RETAIL ELECTRIC SUPPLIER (RES OR PROVIDER): An entity certified by all required
authorities of the state of Illinois to provide competitive retail electric
supply service(s), and which is duly selected by the county to be the entity
responsible to provide the required retail electrical supply service related to
an aggregation program as defined in the act, county ordinances and applicable
rules and regulations of any authorized agency of the state of Illinois and has
duly executed a power supply agreement with the county. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-
2014)
2-343: OPERATIONAL PLAN:
   A.   Aggregation Services:
      1.   Provider: Kane County will use a competent entity as a provider to
perform and manage aggregation services for members of the aggregation program.
The provider shall provide adequate, accurate, and understandable pricing,
terms and conditions of service, including, but not limited to, no switching
fees and the conditions under which a member may opt out without penalty. The
provider must provide the county, upon request, an electronic file containing
the members' usage, charges for retail supply service and such other
information reasonably requested by the county.
      2.   Database: The retail electric supplier shall create and maintain a
secure database of all members. The database will include the name, address,
Commonwealth Edison account number, and retail electric suppliers' account
number of each active member, and other pertinent information such as rate
code, rider code (if applicable), most recent twelve (12) months of usage and
demand, and meter reading cycle. The database will be updated at least
quarterly. Accordingly, the provider will develop and implement a program to
accommodate members who: a) leave the aggregation group due to relocation,
opting out, etc.; b) decide to join the aggregation group; c) relocate anywhere
within the corporate limits of the county; or d) move into the county and elect
to join the aggregation group. This database shall also be capable of removing
a member from the aggregation group who has duly opted out of the program. The
provider will use this database to perform audits for clerical and mathematical
accuracy of member electric supply bills. The provider will make the database
available to the county at any time the county requests it.
      3.   Member Education: The provider shall develop and implement, with the
assistance of the county, as the county may determine in its sole discretion,
an educational program that generally explains the aggregation program to all
residential and small commercial retail customers in the county and the
aggregation group, provides updates and disclosures mandated by Illinois law
and applicable rules and regulations, and implements a process to allow any
member the opportunity to opt out of the aggregation program according to the
terms of the power supply agreement. See appendix A below for further details.
         a.   Appendix A -- Education Process: The provider shall develop the
educational program in conjunction with the county. Its purpose will be to
explain the aggregation program to its members, provide updates and disclosures
as mandated by state law and the rules and regulations of any applicable
Illinois agency, and provide the opportunity for the members to opt out of the
aggregation program. The following are components of the education program:
            (1)   Each residential and small commercial retail customer of
ComEd within the corporate limits of the county will receive notification by
U.S. mail stating: what the municipal aggregation program means, the procedure
which must be followed to opt out of the aggregation program, the estimated
price of electricity for members of the aggregation program, and the deadline
for returning the opt-out form. See "draft sample letter" below.
   "DRAFT SAMPLE LETTER"
Dear Unincorporated Kane County Resident,
County of Kane is providing you the opportunity to join other residents to save
money on the electricity you use. Savings are possible through governmental
aggregation, where County officials bring together citizens to gain group
buying power for the purchase of electricity from a retail electric generation
provider certified by the Public Illinois Utilities Commission. County of Kane
voters approved this program on March 18, 2014.
After researching competitive electricity pricing options for you, we have
chosen                    , to provide you with savings on your electric
generation through August 1, 2015. There is no cost for enrollment and you will
not be charged a switching fee. You do not need to do anything to participate.
As a member of this aggregation, you are guaranteed to save     percent off
your Price to Compare. Your Price to Compare is essentially the price you pay
for electric generation from the utility and consists of generation and
transmission related components, which are the costs associated with generating
the power and delivering it through the transmission system.
To estimate what your savings per kilowatt-hour (KWH) will be through this
program, locate your Price to Compare on your electric bill. Divide your Price
to Compare by 100, then multiply by 0.0   (    %) to determine your savings per
KWH. Multiply that number by your total monthly usage. The final number is how
much you can expect to save each month you use the same amount of electricity.
You will see your electric savings from                  after your enrollment
has been completed and your switch has been finalized - approximately 30 - 45
days, depending upon your meter read date. Of course, you are not obligated to
participate in the County of Kane's electric governmental aggregation program.
If you wish to be excluded from the program and remain a full-service customer
of your local electric utility - Commonwealth Edison - you have until         ,
2014 to return the attached "opt-out" form. If you do not opt out at this time,
you will receive a notice at least every            asking if you wish to
remain in the program. If you leave the program at any other time, you could be
subject to a cancellation fee from                   - and you might not be
served under the same rates, terms and conditions that apply to other customers
served by Commonwealth Edison.
After you become a participant in this governmental aggregation program,
Commonwealth Edison will send you a letter confirming your selection of
           as your electric generation provider. As required by law, this
letter will inform you of your option to rescind your enrollment with
             with adequate notice prior to the scheduled switch. To remain in
the County's governmental aggregation program, you don't need to take any
action when this letter arrives.
Commonwealth Edison will continue to maintain the system that delivers power to
your home - no new poles or wires will be built by                . You will
continue to receive a single, easy-to-read bill from your local electric
utility with your                 charges included. The only thing you'll
notice is savings.
If you have any questions, please call                toll-free at           ,
Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Please do not call the County of Kane with aggregation program questions.
Sincerely,
County of Kane               
P.S. To receive these savings, you should not respond. Return the opt-out form
only if you do not want to participate in the County's electric governmental
aggregation program.
 
Option 1: Do nothing and save. If you OR Option 2: Opt out by returning this
want to participate in this program     form. If you do not want to
and save, you do not need to return     participate in this program, you must
this form. Your enrollment is           return this form before the due date.
automatic.
 
      Service Address (City, State and Zip):
         
      Telephone Number:
         
      Account Holder's Signature:
            Date:   
            (2)   The provider shall cooperate with the county to provide
opportunities for educating residential and small commercial retail CE
customers in the county about the program and their rights under the applicable
law and rules and regulations. In addition, the provider and county will
cooperate to provide education about opportunities for energy efficiency
measures to help members reduce energy consumption.
            (3)   The provider will provide updates and disclosures to the
county and members as mandated by state law and applicable rules and
regulations as amended from time to time.
      4.   Customer Service: Provider shall hire and maintain an adequate
customer service staff and develop and administer a written customer service
process that will accommodate member inquiries and complaints about billing and
answer questions regarding the aggregation program in general. This process
will include a description of how telephone inquiries will be handled, either
internally or externally, how invoices will be prepared, how members may remit
remittance payment, and how collection of delinquent accounts will be
addressed. The provider and the county will enter into a separate customer
service plan agreement or the terms shall be included in the power supply
agreement.
      5.   Billing: Commonwealth Edison will provide a monthly billing
statement to each member which shall include the charges of the provider, and
the provider will not charge any additional administrative fee.
      6.   Compliance Process: The provider shall develop internal controls and
processes to ensure that the county remains in good standing as a municipal
aggregator and ensure that the county and the program complies with the act and
all applicable laws, rules and regulations, as they may be amended from time to
time. It will be the provider's responsibility to timely deliver reports at the
request of the county that will include: a) the number of members participating
in the program; b) a savings estimate or increase from the previous year's
baseline; c) such other information reasonably requested by the county; d)
comparison of the members' charge for the supply of electricity from one
designated period to another identified by the county. The provider shall also
develop a process to monitor and shall promptly notify the county in writing of
any changes or amendments to the act or any laws, rules or regulations
applicable to the aggregation program.
      7.   Notification To Commonwealth Edison: The residential and small
commercial retail customers of ComEd in the county that do not opt out of the
aggregation program will be enrolled automatically in the aggregation program
by a provider. Members of the aggregation group will not be asked to take
affirmative steps to be included in the aggregation group. To the extent that
ComEd requires notification of participation, the provider shall provide such
notice to ComEd. The provider will inform ComEd from time to time through
electronic means any new members that it is enrolling into the aggregation
group.
      8.   Plan Requirements: Pursuant to the act, the provider selected by the
county and the county shall:
         a.   Provide for universal access to all applicable residential
customers and equitable treatment of applicable residential customers;
         b.   Describe demand management and energy efficiency services to be
provided to each class of customers;
         c.   Meet any requirements established by law concerning aggregated
service offered pursuant to the act.
      9.   Solicitation Of Bids: Pursuant to the requirements of the act, the
process of soliciting bids for electricity and related services and awarding
power supply agreements for the purchase of electricity and other related
services by the county, shall be conducted in the following manner:
         a.   The county board of Kane County may solicit bids for electricity
and other related services.
         b.   Notwithstanding section 16-122 of the public utilities act and
section 2HH of the consumer fraud and deceptive business practices act, an
electric utility that provides residential and small commercial retail electric
service in the county must, upon request of the corporate authorities of the
county, submit to the requesting party, in an electronic format, those names
and addresses of residential and small commercial retail electrical customers
in the county that are reflected in the electrical utilities records at the
time of the request and such other information required by the act or any
applicable rule or regulation of an authorized Illinois agency.
         c.   The county, upon receiving customer information from an electric
utility shall be subject to the limitations on the disclosure of that
information described in section 16-122 of the public utilities act and section
2HH of the consumer fraud and deceptive business practices act, and an electric
utility providing such information shall not be held liable for any claims
arising out of the provision of information pursuant to this section and the
act.
   B.   Power Supply Agreement: The county board of Kane County and the
provider shall duly execute and enter into a power supply agreement to serve
the aggregation group.
   C.   Kane County's Retail Electric Supplier: The county may require the
provider to satisfy each of the following requirements in the power supply
agreement:
      1.   Have sufficient sources of power to provide retail firm power to the
aggregation group.
      2.   Maintain a license as a federal power marketer with the federal
energy regulatory commission.
      3.   Maintain a certification from the state of Illinois as a certified
retail electric supplier and any and all other licenses or certifications
required by Illinois law.
      4.   Register as a retail electric supplier with ComEd.
      5.   Maintain a service agreement for network integration transmission
service under open access transmission tariff.
      6.   Maintain a service agreement as required under all applicable rate
tariffs of the state of Illinois.
      7.   Maintain the necessary corporate structure to sell retail firm power
to the ComEd residential and small commercial retail customers in the county
and the aggregation group.
      8.   Maintain an electronic data interchange computer network that is
fully functional at all times and capable of handling the ComEd residential and
small commercial retail electric customers in the county and the aggregation
group.
      9.   Maintain the marketing ability to reach all ComEd residential and
small commercial retail customers in the county to educate them on the terms of
the aggregation program and the act.
      10.   Maintain a call center capable of handling calls from members of
the aggregation group.
      11.   Maintain a local or toll free telephone number for customer service
and complaints related to the county's aggregation program.
      12.   Agree in a binding written agreement between the county and the
provider to hold the county financially harmless and fully indemnifying the
county from any and all financial obligations arising from supplying power to
the aggregation group.
      13.   Satisfy the credit requirements of the state of Illinois and the
county.
      14.   Have the binding authority (to the satisfaction of legal counsel
for the county) to execute the power supply agreement with the county and be
fully bound by all of its terms and conditions.
      15.   Assist the county in filing all reports required by the act and any
applicable law, rule or regulation, as may be amended from time to time.
      16.   Assist the county in developing a consumer education plan.
      17.   Assist the county in developing a smart-meter program.
      18.   Comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the state of
Illinois.
   D.   Activation Of Service: After a notice is mailed to all residential and
small commercial retail electric customers in the county providing an
opportunity to opt out of the program within a specific period of time, all
customers who do not opt out in writing will be automatically enrolled in the
program. Customer enrollment with the provider will occur thereafter without
further action by the customer on terms set forth in the power supply agreement
and according to the retail tariffs of Commonwealth Edison.
   E.   Changes, Extension Or Renewal Of Service: The power supply agreement
with the provider will provide when service shall begin and end. If the power
supply agreement is extended or renewed, members will be notified as to any
change in rates or service conditions and other information required by law.
The power supply agreement shall describe the terms upon which a member or
nonmember will be given an opportunity to opt into or out of the program, and
reasonable notice will be provided as required by the act or any applicable
law. Members who opt out will also be notified of their right to select an
alternate retail electric supplier and of their ability to return to ComEd
provided supply service.
   F.   Termination Of Service: In the event that any power supply agreement is
terminated for any reason prior to the end of the scheduled term, each member
of the aggregation group will receive prompt written notification of
termination of the program at least sixty (60) days prior to termination of
service under the agreement. If the agreement is not extended or renewed,
members will be notified in a manner determined by the county and any
applicable law, prior to the end of any service. Members will also be notified
of their right to select an alternate retail electric supplier and of their
ability to return to ComEd provided supply service upon termination of the
agreement.
   G.   Opt-In Procedures: ComEd residential and small commercial retail
customers will be automatically enrolled in the aggregation program after any
opt-out period has expired, unless they timely call the provider's 800 number
and/or return in writing a form to be provided notifying the provider that they
do not want to participate in the aggregation program. The provider may provide
special notice directly to categories of ComEd customers as the county may
direct, and inform such customers of specific potential consequences of their
change from existing service from ComEd to the program, including, but not
limited to: 1) space heating customers, 2) real time (hourly) pricing
customers, 3) customers using an electrical supplier other than ComEd or the
provider. ComEd residential and small commercial retail customers in the county
may request to join the aggregation group after the expiration of any
enrollment period by contacting the provider, who shall accept them into the
aggregation program, subject to written policies mutually agreed upon between
the county and the provider in the power supply agreement. The agreed upon
policy shall be consistent with ComEd's supplier enrollment requirements.
Members of the aggregation group who move from one location to another within
the unincorporated limits of the county shall continue as a member of the
aggregation group.
   H.   Opt-Out Procedures: ComEd residential and small commercial retail
customers in the county may opt out of the aggregation program at any time
during the opt-out period without additional fees charged by the provider or
the county. The provider may not charge an early termination fee. Members of
the aggregation group will be allowed to switch to a different electric
supplier after the expiration of the opt-out period on the terms set forth in
the power supply agreement but at least shall be allowed to opt out every three
(3) years. Requirements for notification of intent to opt out of the
aggregation group shall be set forth in the power supply agreement. Consumers
who opt out of the aggregation group will not be switched from their current
supplier or their applicable provider to ComEd's standard service offer, until
the consumer selects an alternate generation supplier. As required by the act,
it shall be the duty of the county or the provider if so provided in the power
supply agreement, to fully inform residential and small commercial retail
customers in the county in advance that they have the right to opt out of the
aggregation program. Such disclosure shall prominently state any charges to be
made and shall include full disclosure of the cost to obtain service pursuant
to section 16-103 of the public utilities act, how to access it, and the fact
that it is available to them without penalty, if they are currently receiving
services under that section. As further required by the act, the Illinois power
agency shall furnish, without charge, to any resident of the county, a list of
all supply options available to them in a format that allows comparison of
prices and products.
   I.   Bid Process: The county may elect to hold an individual bid or
participate in a group bid. If the county elects to participate in a group bid,
the county may use an energy aggregation consultant to assist with the group
bid. The county will not delegate any signing authority to the energy
aggregation consultant or other entity, but will make its own decision to
accept or reject their individual bid resulting from the group bid. Suppliers
will present individual bids to each community participating in the bid group.
The county may create an advisory group, representing and consisting of those
communities participating in the bid, to determine the bid winner(s) on the day
of the bid. The energy aggregation consultant working with the Kane County
purchasing department will then recommend accepting or rejecting the bid
winner's individual bid for the county. The county will then decide to accept
or reject their individual bid. Whether or not each community participating in
the bid accepts or rejects their individual bid will have no impact upon the
individual bids of the other communities. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
2-344: MISCELLANEOUS GOVERNANCE GUIDELINES:
   A.   The county board of Kane County shall approve by an ordinance passed by
majority vote of the county board this plan of operation and governance for the
aggregation program and any amendments thereto.
   B.   The county board of Kane County shall contract with a provider
certified by the Illinois commerce commission for the provision of competitive
retail electric service to the aggregation group.
   C.   The county board of Kane County will require any provider to disclose
any subcontractors that it uses in fulfillment of the services described above
in the power supply agreement.
   D.   The county board of Kane County will require the provider to maintain
either a toll free telephone number, or a telephone number that is local to the
members. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
2-345: LIABILITY:
The county shall not be liable to participants in or members of the aggregation
group for any claims, however styled, arising out of the aggregation program or
the provision of aggregation services by the county or the provider.
Participants or members in the aggregation group shall assert any such claims
solely against the provider pursuant to the power supply agreement, under which
such participants are express third party beneficiaries. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-
2014)
2-346: INFORMATION AND COMPLAINT NUMBERS:
Copies of this plan shall be available from Kane County free of charge. Members
and residential and small commercial retail customers of ComEd may call the
Kane County clerk at 630-232-5950 for a copy of the plan or for more
information. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
2-347: SEVERABILITY:
This electrical power aggregation plan of operation and governance is subject
to amendment pursuant to all state and federal statutes and regulations. If any
section or portion of this electrical power aggregation plan of operation and
governance shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any other section, clause,
provision or portion of this agreement. The remaining provisions of this
electrical power aggregation plan of operation and governance shall remain in
full force and effect. (Ord. 14-234, 8-12-2014)
CHAPTER 2.5
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
2.5-0: Purpose
2.5-1: Definitions
2.5-2: Alarm Permit
2.5-3: Duties Of The Alarm User
2.5-4: Duties Of The Alarm Company
2.5-5: Alarm Fees And Fines
2.5-6: Prohibited Acts
2.5-7: Enforcement Of Provisions
2.5-8: Administrative Review Authority
2.5-9: Confidentiality
2.5-10: Government Immunity
2.5-11: Disposition Of Fees And Fines
2.5-12: Disclaimer
2.5-0: PURPOSE:
The County of Kane hereby declares false alarms to be a public nuisance
prejudicial to the general health, safety, and welfare of the public. The Kane
County Sheriff's Office responds to numerous false alarms each year. Many of
these false alarms are from repeat offenders. Responding to such alarms exposes
the officers and public to the dangers associated with emergency responses and
wastes valuable resources of the Kane County Sheriff's Office. The purpose of
this chapter is to ensure that citizens residing in unincorporated Kane County
register their alarm systems and take necessary measures to prevent false
alarms. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADJUDICATION OFFICER: An attorney, appointed by the Sheriff and approved by the
County Board that conducts adjudication hearings for the purpose of collecting
outstanding fees and/or fines relating to this chapter.
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: A person or persons designated by the Kane County Sheriff,
or his designee, to administer, control, and review false alarm reduction
efforts and administer the provisions of this chapter.
ALARM COMPANY: Any person subject to licensing requirements, or a company
engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing, or monitoring alarm
systems. This person shall be licensed and in compliance with State, County,
and city laws.
ALARM PERMIT APPLICATION: Authorization or consent by the Kane County Sheriff's
Office for the installation of an alarm system.
ALARM PERMIT NUMBER: An alarm permit number or authorization code may be issued
during the application permit process by the Sheriff's Office allowing for the
operation of an alarm system within the County of Kane.
ALARM SIGNAL: A detectable signal; audible or visual, generated by an alarm
system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any signal device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the
occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring
immediate attention to which law enforcement is requested to respond.
ALARM USER: Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental,
or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing, or operating an
alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the
protection of such premises.
AUDIBLE ALARMS: An alarm system or device that generates an audible sound.
AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE: An automatic dialing device or an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system, which upon being
activated automatically initiates to the Sheriff's Office a recorded message or
code indicating a need for law enforcement response.
CANCELLATION: The process when response is terminated, and the alarm company
(designated by the alarm user) notifies the Sheriff's Office that there is no
existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm
dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene,
this is not a false alarm for the purpose of a fine, and no penalty will be
assessed.
COUNTY: The County of Kane, Illinois, or its agent.
CYCLE RENEWAL, PERMIT: The permit application is valid for a period of one year
beginning January 1, and ending on December 31.
FALSE ALARM: The activation or transmission of an alarm signal through
mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the
negligence of the alarm user, his or her employee(s) or agent(s), or signal
activated to summon law enforcement personnel, unless law enforcement response
was cancelled by the alarm user's alarm company before law enforcement
personnel arrive at the alarm location. An alarm is false within the meaning of
this definition when, upon inspection by the Sheriff's Office and/or deputy,
that evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such
crime was committed or attempted in or on the premises, which would have
activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
false alarm will not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to
have been caused, or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor
does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
control by the alarm user.
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION: An alarm notification to central station/dispatch
when the responding Kane County Sheriff's Deputy finds, through inspection of
the interior and/or exterior of the alarm site, no evidence of an attempted or
actual unauthorized intrusion, burglary, robbery, or hostage taking, and the
deputy(ies) has responded.
HEARING OFFICER: A person or persons designated by the Kane County Sheriff, or
his designee, to administer, control, and review false alarm reduction efforts,
and administer the provisions of this chapter, as well as schedule, coordinate,
and take minutes at the adjudication hearings.
PERMIT YEAR: A twelve (12) month period beginning on the first day of the
calendar year (January 1).
RUNAWAY ALARM: An alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not
appear to be caused by separate human action. The Sheriff's Office may in its
discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to
be a runaway alarm. The Alarm Administrator may consider all false alarm
dispatches within a twenty four (24) hour period as one false alarm and invoice
the alarm user accordingly.
SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01: The American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel
Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design
features for security system control panels and their associated arming and
disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to
this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization, will be marked
to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard
Features for False Alarm Reduction."
SHERIFF: The Sheriff of Kane County, Illinois.
VERIFY: An attempt by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the
alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means,
whether or not actual contact with a person is made, in attempt to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in
an attempt to avoid unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this
chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call
also known as enhanced call verification, be made to a different number if the
first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves
to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law
enforcement dispatch. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-2: ALARM PERMIT:
   A.   Permit:
      1.   Permit Established: No person shall use an alarm system without
first obtaining an alarm permit for said alarm system from the Kane County
Sheriff's Office. An alarm permit application fee of seventy five dollars
($75.00) is required during the initial registration period. No fee is required
for the yearly renewal. Each alarm permit is assigned a unique permit number,
and the alarm user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to
facilitate law enforcement dispatch.
      2.   Application: The permit number will be issued to the alarm user
within five (5) business days of completion and payment of the online alarm
permit application form made available by the Kane County Sheriff's Office. An
alarm user has the duty to complete an alarm permit application and/or renewal
from the Kane County Sheriff's Office.
      3.   Transfer Of Possession: When possession of the premises at which an
alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (alarm user) obtaining
possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within
thirty (30) days of the transfer date. Alarm permits are not transferrable. A
new application shall be placed on file with the Kane County Sheriff's Office.
      4.   Reporting Updated Information: Whenever information provided on the
alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct
information to the Sheriff's Office within thirty (30) days of the change. In
addition, each year after the issuance of the alarm permit, the Kane County
Sheriff's Office will send an email to the alarm user to renew their alarm
permit application. If an alarm user is unable to complete the renewal online,
a paper alarm permit application form will be provided upon request.
      5.   Multiple Alarm Systems: If an alarm user has one or more alarm
system(s) protecting two (2) or more separate structures, having different
addresses and/or tenants, a separate alarm permit shall be required for each
structure and/or tenant.
   B.   Permit Application: Each alarm user's alarm permit application shall be
held on file at the Kane County Sheriff's Office and contain the following
information:
      1.   Alarm user's legal name, address, and telephone number;
      2.   Name, address, and telephone number of the premises where the alarm
system is located;
      3.   Type of alarm system at the premises location;
      4.   Minimum of two (2) individuals, including their addresses and
telephone numbers, who can be contacted and will respond to the premises in the
event of an emergency, or can reset, or deactivate the alarm system, or who
could contact the alarm user if the alarm user is not at the protected
premises;
      5.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person or company that
installed the alarm system;
      6.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person or company
that is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system, if
applicable.
An alarm permit number will not be issued until the completed application is
received and approval of the permit application has been granted by the Kane
County Sheriff's Office.
   C.   Permit Denial: An alarm permit number may be denied if outstanding
alarm fees and/or fines are due at another structure and/or premises (see
subsection A5, "Multiple Alarm Systems", of this section). (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-
2017)
2.5-3: DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER:
   A.   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce
or eliminate false alarms;
   B.   Provide the alarm company the alarm permit number (the number must be
provided to the central dispatch and/or the communications center by the alarm
company to ensure dispatch);
   C.   Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system
location when notified by the Kane County Sheriff's Office;
   D.   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence
of an event that the alarm system was intended to report;
   E.   An alarm user must obtain a new alarm permit number and pay any
associated fees if there is a change of ownership of a business or residence;
and
   F.   Adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted, so that an
alarm signal audible on the exterior of the alarm site shall sound for no
longer than fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-4: DUTIES OF THE ALARM COMPANY:
   A.   Any person engaged in the alarm business in the County of Kane, shall
comply with the following:
      1.   Obtain and maintain the required State, County, and city licenses;
      2.   Provide current name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm
company license holder or a designee, who can be called in an emergency, twenty
four (24) hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified;
      3.   Be able to provide the most current contact information for the
alarm user;
   B.   Effective January 1, 2017, shall, on all new and upgraded
installations, use only alarm control panel(s), which meet SIA Control Panel
Standard CP-01;
   C.   Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide
written and oral instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm
system to the alarm user;
   D.   Provide the alarm user written information on how to obtain service
from the alarm company for the alarm system;
   E.   Inform the alarm user of this chapter, and assist the alarm user with
registering their alarm system(s). The alarm company (installer) shall provide
new customers with a Kane County alarm permit application at the time of the
sale and/or prior to installation. Said application should be completed by the
alarm user; and, contain all of the pertinent information required in section
2.5-2 of this chapter;
   F.   The alarm permit application and applicable fee(s) shall be returned to
the Kane County Sheriff's Office (Kane County Sheriff's Office, Attn: Alarm
Administrator, 37W755 Illinois Route 38, Suite A, St. Charles, IL 60175) within
ten (10) business days;
   G.   An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:
      1.   Attempt to verify by calling the alarm site and alarm user by
telephone to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting
dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second
call, known as an enhanced call verification, be made to a different number if
the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
themselves in attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, or except
in the case of a panic or crime-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-
in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means;
      2.   Provide the alarm permit registration number to the central
dispatch/radio dispatch center;
      3.   Communicate any available information about the location of the
alarm; and,
      4.   Communicate a cancellation to central dispatch/radio dispatch and/or
the Sheriff's Office as soon as possible following a determination that a
response is not necessary. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-5: ALARM FEES AND FINES:
The Kane County Sheriff's Office will charge and collect fees and/or fines
based upon the following schedule.
   A.   Fee And Fine Schedule:
      1.   Any alarm user who has more than one false alarm within a calendar
year at a single protected location will be assessed fines according to the
following schedule, and the alarm user will be issued a fine. False alarm
response fines will be charged in the following manner:
Residence/Business False Alarm
                   Fees And Fines
Residence/Business                                              False Alarm
                                                                Fees And Fines
Alarm permit registration fee                                   $ 75.00
Failure to register alarm system:
 First offense                                                 150.00
 Second offense                                                300.00
False alarm fine:                                                
 First and/or second                                           Waived/$0.00
 Third                                                         $ 75.00
 Fourth and each subsequent false alarm thereafter             150.00
 Multiple false alarms, in 1 calendar day, may be counted as 1
  alarm incident at the discretion of the Alarm Administrator
 
      2.   If a false alarm is caused by technical and/or a system maintenance
issue, then the false alarm event may be waived by the Alarm Administrator,
upon evidentiary proof, provided by the alarm user, that the alarm system has
been maintained and/or repaired within thirty (30) days of the date of the
false alarm event. The alarm user will be responsible for submitting written
documentation as supplied by the alarm company warranting and/or documenting
the repair within the thirty (30) day grace period. Send repair documentation
to: Kane County Sheriff's Office, Attn: Alarm Administrator, 37W755 Illinois
Route 38, Suite A, St. Charles, IL 60175.
      3.   The Kane County Sheriff's Office will notify the alarm user, in
writing, or via best method of contact, of each instance wherein the Sheriff's
Office has recorded a false alarm. The alarm user will have the opportunity
within thirty (30) days from the date of notification to submit a report and/or
speak with the Alarm Administrator, or their designee, for the purpose of
showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false
alarm recordation. The Alarm Administrator, or their designee, shall review the
alarm user's report and/or speak with the alarm user and issue a written
finding to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm recorded will be
voided.
      4.   No person will install, cause to be installed, maintain, or cause to
be maintained, any automatic voice tape dialer service that dials a central
dispatch/radio dispatch telephone line. The caller, a natural person, must be
able to convey the nature of the call. Prerecorded voice messages are
prohibited by the nature of this chapter. It is unlawful for an individual to
allow an automatic alarm, automatic dialing device, or automatic alerting
device which causes a central dispatch telephone to be activated; and, whose
purpose is to establish an open telephone line with the specific intent that a
conversation between parties not actively speaking into the telephone
instrument be heard by central dispatch in order to directly access emergency
services based on an overheard conversation or lack of conversation. (Ord. 17-
226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of
summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous
to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or
otherwise to cause a false alarm.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm
system, which can sound continually for more than fifteen (15) minutes.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain or use an automatic dial
protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message
to the Sheriff's Office. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-7: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Enforcement Provisions: The following will be determined a finable
offense: failure to obtain a permit application for an alarm system and failure
to comply with appropriate maintenance and education so that three (3) or more
false alarms within a permit year have taken place.
   B.   Alarm Not False: An alarm is not false when the alarm user proves that:
      1.   An individual activated the alarm based upon reasonable belief that
an emergency, or actual, or threatened criminal activity requiring immediate
response existed;
      2.   The alarm system was activated by lightning or an electrical surge
that caused physical damage to the system, as evidenced by the testimony of a
licensed alarm system contractor who conducted an on site inspection and
personally documented the damage to the system;
      3.   The alarm user experienced a power outage of four (4) or more hours,
causing the alarm system to activate upon restoration of power, as evidenced by
written documentation by their provider;
      4.   An alarm dispatch request, that is cancelled by the alarm company,
prior to the arrival of an officer(s), is not considered a false alarm.
   C.   Classification: If a Kane County Sheriff's Officer(s) responds and
finds no evidence of criminal activity or medical need, the alarm will be
classified as a false alarm.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Law Enforcement Response: Failure to make payment of
applicable fees and/or fines, assessed under this chapter, within thirty (30)
days from the date of the invoice, shall result in suspension of law
enforcement response to alarm signals that may occur at the premises described
in the alarm user's permit application until payment is received. In addition,
failure to register and obtain or renew a permit application may result in no
law enforcement response to an unregistered alarm site.
   E.   Written Notice Of Suspension: A written notice of suspension of law
enforcement response will be mailed via U.S. registered postal mail to the
alarm user, suspending service effective thirty (30) days after payment was
due.
   F.   Reinstatement: Sheriff's Office response will be reinstated if the
alarm user:
      1.   Pays or otherwise resolves to the satisfaction of the Alarm
Administrator all fees and/or fines. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-8: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AUTHORITY:
   A.   Responsibilities: The Sheriff's Office administrative review shall
review cases where a fine is in question. The Office of Administrative Review
shall provide a consistent appeal process, administer hearing and judgements,
and manage financial aspects of disputed cases.
   B.   Composition: The administrative review is an adjudication process to
recover outstanding fees and/or fines associated with this chapter, as well as
hear evidence of the law enforcement officer's finding(s) and the Alarm
Administrators' program findings. The administrative review authority is
comprised of the following:
      1.   Alarm Administrator: Provides general support and oversees the
computerized tracking, hearing, scheduling, and case system management.
      2.   Records Division: Registers alarm permit applications, burglary and
robbery alarm reports, and supports enforcement provisions of this chapter and
assorted other County laws.
      3.   Hearing Officer: A person or persons designated by the Kane County
Sheriff and assigned to his executive team, or his designee, to administer,
control, and review false alarm reduction efforts, and administer the
provisions of this chapter, as well as schedules, coordinates, and takes
minutes at the adjudication hearings. For the purpose of this chapter and on
behalf of business with the Kane County Sheriff's Office, conducts adjudication
hearings for matters under fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
      4.   Adjudication Officer: An attorney, other than the Alarm
Administrator or law enforcement officer, who is appointed by the Kane County
Sheriff, with the consent of the County Board, to preside over adjudication
hearings. The Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years. Prior to conducting
administrative adjudication proceedings, Hearing Officers, shall have
successfully completed a formal training program which includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
         a.   Instruction on rules of procedures of the administrative hearings
which they will conduct;
         b.   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations they will
adjudicate;
         c.   Observation of administration hearings; and,
         d.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   C.   Hearing Costs: In the event of a determination that a violation has
occurred, or if the complaint is dismissed or withdrawn based upon compliance
prior to the hearing date the hearing costs shall be recovered in the amount of
not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or the actual cost of the
hearing, whichever is greater. The Hearing Officer may, in an appropriate case,
and for good cause shown, waive, or reduce costs. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-9: CONFIDENTIALITY:
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered
through the alarm permit application, no response records, applications for
appeals, and any other alarm records, are exempt from public access or
disclosure; and, will be held in confidence by all employees and/or
representatives of the Kane County Sheriff's Office. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-10: GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY:
Alarm permit registration is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract,
duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all
liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to
notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law
is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that
the Kane County Sheriff's Office response may be influenced by factors such as:
the availability of patrol units; priority of calls; weather conditions;
traffic conditions; emergency conditions; staffing levels; and, prior response
history.
In the event that the County Kane or its officers, agents, or employees find it
necessary to disconnect a defective automatic voice tape dialer service or
signaling device, pursuant to this chapter, the County of Kane or its officers,
agents or employees shall incur no liability by such action. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-
2017)
2.5-11: DISPOSITION OF FEES AND FINES:
Fees and/or fines collected by the Sheriff of Kane County pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited by the Sheriff into a Kane County Board General
Revenue Fund to be utilized exclusively for the operation and/or administration
of this chapter. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
2.5-12: DISCLAIMER:
If any portion, clause, phrase, sentence or classification of this chapter is
held or declared to be either unconstitutional, invalid, inapplicable,
inoperative, or void, then such declaration shall not be construed to affect
other portions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the express opinion
of the County of Kane that any unconstitutional, invalid, inapplicable,
inoperative, or void portion or portions of this chapter do not induce its
passage and that without the inclusion of any such portion or portions of this
chapter, the County of Kane, would have enacted the valid constitutional
portions thereof. (Ord. 17-226, 8-8-2017)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
ARTICLE I. CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
3-1: Name Of Act
3-2: Definitions
3-3: Adoption And Applicability Of State Law
3-4: Interpretation
3-1: NAME OF ACT:
Whenever reference herein is made to the Illinois liquor control law, it shall
mean and refer to "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 31,
1934, in force February 1, 1934, as amended. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but not alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress
and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing
one-half of one percent, or less, of alcohol by volume and synonymous with the
phrase "alcoholic liquor" as defined by and used in "an act relating to
alcoholic liquors".
BAR: An additional facility for serving liquor, located on premises which have
a valid retail liquor license in effect under this chapter, or its amendment,
or located within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed
premises is located in effect under this chapter, or its amendment.
BEER: Beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like
synonymous with the phrase "beer" as defined by and used in "an act relating to
alcoholic liquors".
BEVERAGE CART: A motorized or nonmotorized portable cart with or without wheels
used for the purpose of dispensing beverages, snacks, and alcoholic liquor.
BREWPUB: A person who manufactures beer only at a designated premises to make
sales to importing distributors, distributors, and to nonlicensees for use and
consumption only, who stores beer at the designated premises, and who is
allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises, provided that a brewpub
licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption more than fifty thousand
(50,000) gallons per year synonymous with the phrase "brewpub" as defined by
and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
CATERER: A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either on site
or off site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental
part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a
package price agreed upon under contract synonymous with the phrase "caterer
retailer" as defined by and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of Illinois, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor
commissioner at the time of its application a list of names and residences of
its members, and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any
additional member his or her name and address; and, provided further, that its
affairs and management are conducted by a board of directors, executive
committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and
that no member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or
directly profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club
or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the
amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the
members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the general
revenue of the club synonymous with the phrase "club" as defined by and used in
"an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
DISTILLED SPIRITS: A beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation,
mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum,
whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise, mixed with alcohol or other substances.
GOLF COURSE: A public, quasi-public, or private recreational outdoor facility
designed and developed for golf activities consisting of nine (9) or more
standard golf holes which may include a driving range, clubhouses, pro shops,
restaurants, and other similar buildings associated with a golf course which
are generally used by the public and/or by members and guests, and which does
not include a novelty putting facility more commonly referred to as miniature
golf or minigolf.
HOMEMADE BREWED BEVERAGE: Beer or any other beverage obtained by the process of
alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of grains, sugars, or both
in water and includes, but is not limited to, beer, mead, and cider made by a
person twenty one (21) years of age or older through their own efforts
fermented at their place of residence, at another place of residence of a
homemade brewed beverage brewer, or at a premises of a commercial enterprise
engaged primarily in selling supplies and equipment for use by homebrewers and
not for a commercial purpose but for consumption by that person, their family,
neighbors, guests, and friends or for use at an exhibition, demonstration,
judging, tasting, or sampling with sampling size being subject to the
requirements of this code or as part of a contest or competition authorized by
the laws governing the state of Illinois and Kane County.
INN: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is served and consumed and
sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests,
whether transient, permanent or residential, in which rooms are used for the
sleeping accommodation of such guests and having one or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and
dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection
therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity commonly identified as a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, lodge or
resort.
MULTIUSE SITE: The existence of multiple purposes or activities for which the
land or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is
occupied or maintained which may or may not include one or more tenants.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor synonymous with the phrase "original package" as defined by
and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
OUTDOOR SERVICE: Any service of alcoholic liquor occurring outside of the
premises within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed
premises is located.
PACKAGE STORE: A public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail in the
original package not for consumption on the premises where sold.
PREMISES: Any permanent physical structure(s) or building(s) from which
alcoholic liquors are sold.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served on
the premises or within the property lines of the premises designated and used
exclusively for the private party, function, or event synonymous with the
phrase "private function" as defined by and used in "an act relating to
alcoholic liquors".
RESTAURANT: An establishment wherein food is prepared and served in ready to
eat form to the public for human consumption. "Restaurant" includes cafe,
cafeteria, grill, pizza parlor, diner, snack shop, hamburger shop and
steakhouse.
SELL AT RETAIL: Sell at retail and sale at retail refer to and mean sales for
use or consumption and not for resale in any form synonymous with the phrase
"sell at retail" as defined by and used in "an act relating to alcoholic
liquors".
SINGLE USE SITE: The existence of a single purpose or activity for which the
land or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and under the
legal and physical control of a single owner or lessee.
SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER: An educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious,
or nonprofit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or wine, or both,
only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special
event retail license synonymous with the phrase "special event retailer" as
defined by and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits synonymous with the phrase
"wine" as defined by and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
WINEMAKER: A person engaged in the making of wine synonymous with the phrase
"winemaker" as defined by and used in "an act relating to alcoholic liquors".
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-3: ADOPTION AND APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW:
All other words and phrases used herein shall have the same meaning as the same
or similar words or phrases defined by and used in "an act relating to
alcoholic liquors". (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-4: INTERPRETATION:
The articles, provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable
and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity
of any article, provision or section of the remainder. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
ARTICLE II. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION
SECTION:
3-5: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-6: Powers And Duties
3-7: Adoption Of State Law
3-8: Appointments
3-9: Filing Of Appointments
3-10: Rulemaking Power
3-11: Meetings
3-5: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The chairman of the Kane County board, state of Illinois, shall be the local
liquor control commissioner in and for that area in the county and state which
lies inside the corporate limits of said county, and he may appoint a person or
persons to assist him in the exercise of the powers and the performance of his
duties as such commissioner; such commissioner shall be known as the local
liquor control commissioner of Kane County, and such person or persons shall be
appointed by said commissioner and together with said local liquor control
commissioner, shall constitute the local liquor control commission. (Ord. 15-
105, 4-14-2015)
3-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Said local liquor control commissioner and said local liquor control
commission, in addition to the powers and duties herein given and provided,
shall have all the powers and duties as provided for in the Illinois liquor
control law. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-7: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
Any and all sections of the Illinois liquor control law and any amendments
thereto applicable to local liquor control commissions, or to local liquor
control commissioners in counties, be and are the same hereby adopted and made
a part of this chapter. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-8: APPOINTMENTS:
The local liquor control commissioner and the local liquor control commission
shall serve until their successors are respectively elected and appointed.
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-9: FILING OF APPOINTMENTS:
The local liquor control commissioner shall file a copy of the appointment of
the members of the local liquor control commission with the office of the
county clerk within five (5) days after their respective appointments. (Ord.
15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-10: RULEMAKING POWER:
The local liquor control commission is hereby authorized and empowered to make
such reasonable rules as may be necessary in the performance of their duties
and may prescribe the form of application which each prospective licensee shall
sign prior to receiving the license. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-11: MEETINGS:
A meeting of the local liquor control commission may be called by the local
liquor control commissioner or by the secretary of the local liquor control
commission at the direction and the authority of the local liquor control
commissioner by giving notice as required by the open meetings act. (Ord. 15-
105, 4-14-2015)
ARTICLE III. LICENSE CLASSIFICATION, FEES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-12: Requirement Of Retail Liquor License
3-12-1: Requirements For Bring Your Own Bottle (BYOB) Establishments
3-13: Granting Of Retail Liquor License
3-14: Place Of Business; Change Of Location
3-15: Classification Of Retail Liquor Licenses
3-16: Reserved
3-17: Fees For Licenses And Renewal Fees
3-18: Transfer Of Licenses, Death Of Licensee, Or Change Of Ownership
3-19: Departments' Certification
3-20: Investigative Report
3-21: Lapse Of License For Merger Into Another Liquor Jurisdiction
3-22: Prohibited Liquor License Holders
3-23: Licenses Subject To Changes By Liquor Commission
3-24: Surety Bond (Rep. by Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-25: Insurance Requirements
3-12: REQUIREMENT OF RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE:
   A.   No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive
orders for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail, in any of the
territory lying outside of the corporate limits of any city, village or town,
and lying within the corporate limits of said county and the state, without
first having a valid retail liquor license issued by the local liquor control
commission of Kane County.
   B.   All original or renewal applications for class AR, AP, AW, C, D, E, G,
H, I, N and O licenses, liquor applications shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic
liquor, all management personnel working on the premises, and anyone whose job
description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of
alcoholic liquor, pursuant to that license. Class F and I licensees must have a
BASSET trained person on the premises during an event and must provide the name
and proof of BASSET training for that person when applying for a class F or I
license.
   C.   A "state certified BASSET program" shall be defined as a BASSET program
licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission as required by 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1). All licensed BASSET providers shall be
required to have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current
qualifications and provide a certificate of course completion and a card to
participants as proof of completion. A photocopy of certificates of completion
for all owners, managers, employees, or agents required to have BASSET training
shall be maintained on the premises in a manner that will allow inspection,
upon demand, by any designee of the state of Illinois or Kane County.
   D.   Any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET training,
shall within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with that
licensee, complete an Illinois liquor control commission BASSET approved
seller/server training program and shall until completion of the BASSET program
work under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training. (Ord.
15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-12-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR BRING YOUR OWN BOTTLE (BYOB) ESTABLISHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any restaurant establishment without a liquor license
to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the premises without a
corkage license. A corkage license issued pursuant to this section authorizes
restaurants, without liquor licenses, to permit consumption of "wine", as
defined in this code, on the premises upon the conditions set forth herein.
   A.   No more than seven hundred fifty milliliters (750 ml) of wine per
patron over the age of twenty one (21) shall be permitted to be uncorked.
   B.   Only patrons seated at tables or booths shall be permitted to consume
wine that has been provided by the patron.
   C.   Wine may only be consumed by individuals who order and are served a
meal by the licensee.
   D.   Every container of wine brought onto the premises by a patron must be
opened by restaurant personnel, and it shall be unlawful for any patron to
leave the premises with a partially consumed container of wine unless it is
securely sealed by restaurant personnel prior to removal from the premises and
placed in a transparent onetime use tamperproof bag, as required by State law.
   E.   Wine may only be uncorked by restaurant personnel between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
   F.   Possession and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under
age twenty one (21) is prohibited.
   G.   Restaurants may at their discretion charge corkage fees.
   H.   BASSET training shall be required of all persons who serve alcoholic
liquor, all management personnel working on the premises, and anyone whose job
description entails the checking of identification. A "state certified BASSET
Program" shall be defined as a BASSET Program licensed by the State of Illinois
Liquor Control Commission as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12
(11.1). All licensed BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all
licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a
certificate of course completion and a card to participants as proof of
completion. A photocopy of certificates of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required to have BASSET training shall be maintained on
the premises in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any
designee, of the State of Illinois or Kane County. Any new owner, manager,
employee, or agent requiring BASSET training shall within ninety (90) days from
the beginning of their employment with that licensee, complete an Illinois
Liquor Control Commission BASSET approved seller/server training program and
shall until completion of the BASSET Program work under the supervision of a
person who has completed BASSET training.
   I.   All of the other provisions under this chapter, rules pertaining to
alcoholic liquor, shall be included for the purposes of issuing corkage
licenses with the exception of sections
3-12, "Requirement Of Retail Liquor License";
3-20, "Investigative Report";
3-22, "Prohibited Liquor License Holders";
3-26, "Application Requirements";
3-34-5, "Designated Dancing Area";
3-35, "Prohibited Hours Of Sale"; and
3-36, "Prohibition Of Occupancy During Prohibited Hours Of Sale", of this
chapter. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-13: GRANTING OF RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSE:
No retail liquor license shall at any time after the effective date hereof be
granted by said Local Liquor Control Commission except as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-14: PLACE OF BUSINESS; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   Any license issued hereunder shall embrace only one (1) place of
business.
   B.   A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only within the premises described in the application or within the property
lines of the property upon which a licensed premises is located. Such location
may be changed only upon approval of the Local Liquor Control Commission after
submission of a liquor license application for the new premises. No application
involving a change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-15: CLASSIFICATION OF RETAIL LIQUOR LICENSES:
The Local Liquor Control Commission shall have the right to grant retail liquor
licenses for the selling at retail of alcoholic liquor and not for resale in
any form for the period beginning on April 1 of any year, and ending on March
31 of the next or succeeding year. The maximum number of allowable class
licenses for each township is set forth in chapter 26 of this Code as shall be
determined from time to time by the Kane County Board. License classifications
shall be as follows:
   A.   Class AR Licenses; Restaurants/Inns: Such licenses shall authorize the
retail sale, within the premises specified, of all kinds of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises and retail sales of alcoholic liquors by
original package for consumption off the premises by restaurants and/or inns.
   B.   Class AP Licenses; Package Store: Such license shall authorize the
retail sale, on the premises specified by original package for consumption off
the premises by package stores as defined herein and shall not authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
   C.   Class AW Licenses; Brewpub/Winemaker: Such license shall authorize the
retail sale of beer, within the premises specified, for consumption on the
premises and retail sales of beer by original package for consumption off the
premises provided, however, that a brewpub licensee shall not sell for off
premises consumption more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per year. Such
license shall also authorize the retail sale of wine by a "winemaker" as
defined previously, within the premises specified, for consumption on the
premises and retail sales of wine by a "winemaker" as defined previously in
original package for consumption off the premises. If product sampling will be
conducted on the premises or within the property lines of the property upon
which the premises is located, licensee must obtain an additional class P and/
or a class Q-1 or class Q-2 license.
   D.   Class C Licenses; Clubs: Such license shall authorize the retail sale,
on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises,
and retail sales of alcoholic liquors by original package for consumption off
the premises. This license shall be issued only to "clubs", as defined in state
law.
   E.   Class C-1 Licenses; Small Clubs: Such license shall authorize the
retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises, and shall be issued only to those clubs otherwise eligible for a
class C liquor license but whose membership does not exceed one hundred (100)
paid members as substantiated by a complete list of names and addresses of said
members, which list shall be sworn and attested to by licensee under penalties
of perjury; and provided further that if at any time the membership exceeds one
hundred (100) in number, the licensee must immediately advise the local liquor
control commissioner.
   F.   Class D And D-1 Licenses:
      1.   Class D Licenses; Alcoholic Liquor/Frozen Margaritas Stadium - Kane
County Forest Preserve: Such license shall authorize the retail sale in the
stadium area, on the premises specified, for consumption on the premises of
alcoholic liquor. Such license shall also authorize the retail sale of frozen,
premixed margaritas from kiosks located adjacent to concession stands within
the building for consumption within the stadium. "Margarita" is defined as a
cocktail consisting of tequila, fruit flavored liqueur, and fruit juice.
Further, a class D license shall be limited to those premises owned by the Kane
County forest preserve district.
      2.   Class D-1 Licenses; Alcoholic Liquor Suites Level - Kane County
Forest Preserve: Such license shall authorize the retail sale, within the
building, for consumption of alcoholic liquor in the suites area only. Further,
a class D-1 license shall be limited to those premises owned by the Kane County
forest preserve district.
   G.   Class E Licenses; Bars: Such license shall authorize the retail sale,
within the premises specified, of all kinds of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises only by bars as defined herein.
   H.   Class F Licenses; Twenty Four Hour Special Event: Such license shall
authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises, and which are subject to the following conditions,
notwithstanding provisions pertaining to other classes of license:
      1.   Shall be issued only to established clubs and organizations.
      2.   Shall be valid for a twenty four (24) hour period as specified on
the license, which shall not commence more than fourteen (14) days subsequent
to the date the license is issued.
      3.   Are not renewable.
      4.   No more than seven (7) class F licenses shall be issued to the same
applicant in any one calendar year.
   I.   Sunday Endorsement: Class AR, AP, AW, C, C-1, E, and G licensees, as
defined in this code may be issued a Sunday endorsement.
   J.   Class G Licenses; Golf Course: Such licenses shall authorize the retail
sale, within the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises and retail sale of alcohol by original package for consumption beyond
the confines of the premises but within the property lines of the property upon
which the premises is located. Such license shall also authorize the retail
sale by original package for consumption from an additional bar(s) or a
beverage cart when the golf course is open and in use. A separate class J
license must be obtained for each beverage cart and additional bar(s) but a
separate class P license does not have to be obtained.
   K.   Class H Licenses; Beer/Wine - Kane County Events Center: Such license
shall authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, for consumption on
the premises during a specifically scheduled professional sporting event or
professional concert or other entertainment event, beer and wine only. Further,
a class H license shall be limited to the premises of the Kane County Events
Center. Such license shall be subject to the following conditions,
notwithstanding provisions pertaining to other classes of license:
      1.   Shall be issued only within the limits of 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-15.
      2.   Subject to any ordinances, rules, regulations and conditions of the
Kane County forest preserve.
      3.   Shall be valid for a period up to five (5) days (120 hours) as
specified on the license.
      4.   Are not renewable.
      5.   Class H licensees are required to fulfill all requirements of those
receiving licenses for the period from April 1 to March 31 the following year.
      6.   Licensee must display a written lease or agreement with the Kane
County forest preserve providing for licensee's use of the Kane County Events
Center during the entire period of this license for a specified event.
      7.   The licensee's use of the premises shall comply with any gathering
permit ordinance where applicable and the cost of required security shall be
the sole responsibility of the licensee.
      8.   No more than seven (7) class H licenses shall be issued to the same
applicant in any one calendar year.
   L.   Class I Licenses; Homebrewer Special Event Permit: Class I licenses
shall authorize product sampling for consumption of alcoholic liquor within the
licensed premises of no more than two (2) ounces to a consumer over the age of
twenty one (21) for a twenty four (24) hour period per location to persons who
produce homemade brewed beverages as defined herein. A separate license shall
be required for each twenty four (24) hour period and for each location.
   M.   Class J Licenses; Additional Bar: Such license shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption within the premises or
within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed premises is
located from an additional bar or beverage cart for class G licensees located
on the premises or within the property lines of the property upon which a
licensed premises is located. Said class J license shall be available as
determined by the local liquor control commission only to class AR, AW, C, C-1,
E or G licensees. Said class J license shall be issued on the same
qualifications and terms and conditions required for the original license under
which the class AR, AW, C, C-1, E or G license was granted. A separate class J
license must be obtained for each additional bar or beverage cart and each bar
or beverage cart must be designated as a bar on the diagram of the premises
submitted with the application.
   N.   Class K Licenses; Mail Order, Catalog, Internet Sales: Class K licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of beer to be sold exclusively by an
establishment in which said retail sale of beer is done by means of mail order,
telephone, and internet orders for shipment of beer through catalog
advertisements to members of the general public of the age of twenty one (21)
years or more.
      1.   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, a class K license
shall only be issued to persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a
bona fide mail order, telephone order, internet order, or catalog business for
retail distribution of beer products with no sale at the facility.
      2.   Beer shall be sold in sealed packages only and not for sale,
consumption or gift upon the premises of the licensee, but only for shipment to
various locations or destinations away from the premises of the licensee.
      3.   It is a condition of class K licenses that, at no time, will retail
sales, gift or consumption of beer be made to the general public on the
premises of the licensee and, further, that only sales of beer by licensee
shall be that of mail order, telephone sales, or internet orders to be
delivered by United Parcel Service shipment or other authorized carrier,
pursuant to the regulations adopted by the Illinois state liquor commission, to
locations and destinations away from the premises of licensee.
   O.   Class L Licenses; Gift Baskets: Class L licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of wine or champagne to be sold exclusively as part of an
arrangement in a gift basket by an establishment in which the retail sale of
bottled wine and champagne is not the primary and principal business thereof.
      1.   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, a Class L license
shall be only issued to persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a
bona fide business in which the wine/champagne gift basket business is
incidental to the sale of other products.
      2.   Wine and champagne shall be sold in sealed packages only and
consumption on the premises where sold is not permitted.
      3.   For purposes of this license classification, a "basket" shall be
defined as a decorative gift container which may be constructed of wood, metal,
plastic, woven rope, decorative paper or plastic bag or such similar material,
the purpose of which is to hold the gift bottle arrangement.
      4.   No more than two (2) bottles of wine or champagne shall be included
in any basket.
   P.   Class N Licenses; Special Use: Such license shall authorize an Illinois
licensed retailer doing business in Kane County to transfer a portion of its
alcoholic liquor inventory from its licensed retail premises to the premises
specified in the license hereby created and to sell or offer for sale at retail
the transferred alcoholic liquor for use or consumption for a twenty four (24)
hour period provided the licensee submits proof of general and liquor liability
insurance for said special use for the premises specified. No more than three
(3) special use licenses shall be issued to the same applicant in any one (1)
calendar year.
   Q.   Class O Licenses; Caterer: Such license shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor for a twenty four (24) hour period within the County on the
premises specified on the license for a "caterer" as defined previously for
consumption within the property lines of the premises only as an incidental
part of food service that serves prepared meals which excludes the serving of
snacks as the primary meal for private and public functions. Licensee shall
provide proof of general and liquor liability insurance. Sale of alcoholic
liquor to the licensee shall only be made at the registered office of the
licensee.
   R.   Class P Licenses; Outside Service:
      1.   Single Use Sites: Such license shall authorize the retail sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor within the property lines of the property upon
which the premises is located on a patio, beer garden, cabana, or other outside
area specifically designated as an outside service area on the diagram of the
premises submitted with the application to Class AR, AW, C, C-1, and G
licensees. Class E licensees may obtain a single use site Class P license if
the property line of a residentially zoned parcel is more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from the outside service area and if there have been no
incidents at the premises during the past two (2) years as reported by the Kane
County Sheriff regardless if the incident occurred under the current or a
previous licensee. Outside amplified music is not permitted for Class E
licensees having a Class P license. Alcohol consumption will not be permitted
in any parking area. Any licensee having a zoning designation for adult use or
operating as an adult use will not be permitted to obtain a Class P license.
      2.   Multiuse Sites: Such license shall authorize the retail sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor within the property lines of the property upon
which the premises is located on a patio, beer garden, cabana or other outside
area specifically designated as an outside service area on the diagram of the
premises submitted with the application to Class AR, AW, C, C-1 and G
licensees. Such areas must be enclosed with a fence, wall, or other physical
barrier so as to provide visual and physical separation to delineate, prevent,
hinder, separate, and otherwise restrict access to areas that have not been
designated for outside service. Class E licensees may not obtain a multiuse
site Class P license. Alcohol consumption will not be permitted in any parking
area or other outside location. Any licensee having a zoning designation for
adult use will not be permitted to obtain a Class P license.
   S.   Class Q-1 Licenses; Annual Product Sampling And Tasting Event: Such
license shall authorize product sampling for consumption of beer and wine only
within the premises and/or within the property lines of the property upon which
the premises is located of up to three (3) samples of no more than one (1)
ounce of wine or two (2) ounces of beer per consumer per day. A Class Q-
1 licensee may offer for sale and serve more than one (1) drink per person for
sampling purposes provided the total quantity of the sampling package
regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is served
does not exceed four (4) ounces of wine or sixteen (16) ounces of beer and
shall be available only to Class AR and AW licensees. A separate Class P
license must be obtained for outside service.
   T.   Class Q-2 Licenses; Temporary Product Sampling And Tasting Event: Such
license shall authorize product sampling for consumption of alcoholic liquor
within the premises only of up to three (3) samples of no more than one-fourth
(1/4) ounce of distilled spirits, one (1) ounce of wine, or two (2) ounces of
beer per consumer per day. A Class Q-2 licensee may offer for sale and serve
more than one (1) drink per person for sampling purposes provided the total
quantity of the sampling package regardless of the number of containers in
which the alcoholic liquor is served does not exceed one (1) ounce of distilled
spirits, four (4) ounces of wine, or sixteen (16) ounces of beer and shall be
available only to Class AR, AW, AP, C, or C-1 licensees. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-
2015; Ord. 16-421, 12-13-2016; Ord. 17-143, 5-9-2017)
3-16: RESERVED:
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-17: FEES FOR LICENSES AND RENEWAL FEES:
   A.   The fee for any of the licenses hereinafter set forth shall accompany
such application for such license. No license, or renewal of any license, may
be issued until the fee therefor has been paid.
   B.   The license fees for each classification of license herein authorized
shall be fixed in the amounts as follows:
License Fee Terms
License            Fee       Terms
Class AR           $2,500.00 Per year
Class AP           2,500.00  Per year
Class AW           2,500.00  Per year
Class C            2,500.00  Per year
Class C-1          500.00    Per year
Class D            2,500.00  Per year
Class D-1          2,500.00  Per year
Class E            2,500.00  Per year
Class F            75.00     Per 24 hour period
Sunday endorsement 150.00    Per year
Class G            2,500.00  Per year
                             Per license, for period up to first 24 hours with
Class H            250.00    $125.00 for each additional consecutive period of
                             up to 24 hours
Class I            100.00    Per 24 hour period
Class J            200.00    Per year
Class K            2,500.00  Per year
Class L            500.00    Per year
Class N            100.00    Per 24 hour period
Class O            250.00    Per license
Class P            100.00    Per year
Class Q-1          250.00    Per year
Class Q-2          75.00     Per license
Corkage license    250.00    Per year
 
   C.   If an application is made for an annual license and a license is
granted one (1) or more months after the beginning of each license year, the
license fee for such period shall be reduced by eight percent (8%) for each
full month after the beginning of said license year but never less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   D.   The required fee shall be deposited with the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner at the time of application for the license. This shall be by
certified check, cashier's check, money order made payable to the Local Liquor
Control Commission or by credit card or electronic payment processing. Such fee
shall be returned to such applicant if his application is denied.
   E.   In case of dissolution of any municipality located within the County,
wherein said municipality has issued a liquor license, the following shall
apply:
      1.   The annual fee due to the County under subsection B of this section
shall be waived in those cases where the fee paid by such municipal licensee
equals or exceeds the County fee.
      2.   Said municipal licensee shall pay to the county the difference, if
any, between the fee paid by the municipal licensee and the annual fee due to
the county under subsection B of this section, if the county fee exceeds the
amount collected by the municipality.
      3.   If the effective date of the dissolution of said municipality falls
between October 1 and April 1, then said licensee shall be liable for one-half
(1/2) of any sum determined to be due under subsection E2 of this section.
      4.   The county shall give the municipal licensee credit for any fees
received by the county, or refunds received by the municipality. Said credit
shall apply only to county liquor license fees due during the current license
years. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-18: TRANSFER OF LICENSES, DEATH OF LICENSEE, OR CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
   A.   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable in any
manner whatsoever.
   B.   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not descend by the laws
of testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license but not longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee, unless said executors,
administrators or trustee files a new application with the liquor control
commission. A copy of the court order must be provided to the liquor control
commission.
   C.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate effective on the date of
the change. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in the officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than five
percent (5%) of the stock resulting in the holding of office or such shares by
one who is not eligible, the license shall terminate effective on the date of
the change. If there are any changes in ownership of the establishment licensed
under this chapter or a change of managers, and the licensee does not contact
the liquor control commission within thirty (30) days of the change, said
license shall terminate effective on the date of the change. A license will not
terminate if the liquor control commission has been notified of the change
within thirty (30) days and all necessary background checks and BASSET
requirements are pending. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-19: DEPARTMENTS' CERTIFICATION:
At the time of the application for license or renewal and/or during seasonal or
normal operations, certification from the Kane County health department, from
the Kane County zoning department, and from the Kane County building department
shall be provided indicating that the proposed licensed premises and the
property upon which a licensed premises is located are in conformity with all
of the regulations and ordinances of Kane County. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-20: INVESTIGATIVE REPORT:
No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant shall have been
investigated by the local liquor control commission and a report filed in the
records of said commission approving the issuance of such license. As a part of
this investigation, the local liquor control commission shall require
fingerprints of all new applicants and shall have the right to require
fingerprints of any applicant for renewal thereof. As used in this section the
term "applicant" or "applicants" shall mean any individual who applies for a
liquor license, a sole proprietor, all partners and officers of any partnership
which applies for a liquor license, all corporate officers or directors
(whether or not they own any stock), all shareholders and all members of a
limited liability company with a membership or ownership interest of five
percent (5%) or more, and/or manager or agent conducting the business which
applies for a liquor license. For purposes of obtaining fingerprints under this
section, the local liquor control commission shall collect a fee and forward
the fee to the Illinois department of state police and federal bureau of
investigation. The local liquor control commission may accept a current or
recent investigative report and/or fingerprint report of any state,
municipality or local unit of government in lieu of a report or reports from
the Illinois department of state police and federal bureau of investigation. A
copy of fingerprints shall be held on record by the county in compliance with
the prohibitions as stated in subsections 3-22D, E and F of this chapter. (Ord.
15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-21: LAPSE OF LICENSE FOR MERGER INTO ANOTHER LIQUOR JURISDICTION:
If the premises for which a retail liquor license has been issued by the local
liquor control commission by reason of annexation or otherwise comes within the
jurisdiction of any other liquor control commissioner or commission and a
license issued from said other jurisdiction to the holder of the Kane County
license in effect hereunder, then the said county license shall automatically
become null and void. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-22: PROHIBITED LIQUOR LICENSE HOLDERS:
No retail liquor license shall be issued to or held by:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the county.
   B.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States Of America.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony, or who has been convicted
of two (2) or more criminal misdemeanors other than for a traffic violation
within the two (2) years next preceding his application.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of, or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality.
   F.   A person whose license, issued under this chapter or under the state
liquor control act, has been revoked for cause.
   G.   A copartnership, unless all the persons forming a part of such
copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a license, except that only one
partner shall be required to be a resident of Kane County.
   H.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the stock of
such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any
reason other than citizenship and residence within Kane County.
   I.   A corporation, unless its place of business is supervised by a manager
or agent, who is present on the premises at least forty (40) hours per week, at
least fifty (50) weeks per year.
   J.   A person whose place of business is supervised by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   K.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or
does not have a lease thereof for the full period for which the license is to
be issued.
   L.   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license.
   M.   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, alderman, or member of
the city council or commission, any president of a village board of trustees,
any member of a village board of trustees, or any president or member of a
county board.
   N.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years. In addition, no
corporation or other entity that is controlled by, directly or indirectly, any
person or persons under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-
2015)
3-23: LICENSES SUBJECT TO CHANGES BY LIQUOR COMMISSION:
Any and all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any
and all changes or amendments which may be hereafter made, and any and all
rules adopted by the local liquor control commissioner or local liquor control
commission. Any and all licenses shall be subject to any restrictions or
conditions deemed desirable by the local liquor control commission or the local
liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-24: SURETY BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-25: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No license shall be issued to any person or entity that cannot produce
a policy of insurance by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do
business in the state insuring said person or entity against liability for any
injury or death which said parties may incur while operating under the
provisions of the Illinois liquor control act as follows:
      1.   In the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for
bodily injury liability; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of
means of support; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property
damage liability; or
      2.   A three hundred thousand dollar ($300,000.00) single limit dramshop
policy.
   B.   No license shall be issued to any person or entity that cannot produce
a policy of insurance by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do
business in the state insuring said person or entity against general liability
in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
   C.   Each applicant shall show by evidence satisfactory to the local liquor
control commission, the issuance of a policy of liquor liability insurance, and
in the event he is not the owner of the premises described in said application,
that he has a lawful right to possession of the same until the expiration of
the term of license for which application is made. In the event of
cancellation, the local liquor control commission shall be notified immediately
of such cancellation. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
ARTICLE IV. APPLICATION
SECTION:
3-26: Application Requirements
3-26-1: Application Requirements For BYOB Establishments
3-27: Signature Of Corporation (Rep. by Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-28: Lease Of Premises
3-29: Application For Renewal
3-26: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Application for such licenses shall be filed with the local liquor control
commissioner. Said application may be submitted in writing or electronically as
provided by the county of Kane to receive electronic information, and shall
contain the following statements and information. Such information shall be
updated within thirty (30) days if any of said statements or information
changes during the term of any license issued.
   A.   The name, birth date and social security number and address of the
applicant in the case of an individual; the name, birth date and social
security number and address of the sole proprietor in the case of a
proprietorship; in the case of copartnership, name, birth date, and social
security number and address of each partner; and, in the case of a corporation,
the objects for which organized, the names, birth date and social security
number and address of the officers and directors and each shareholder owning in
the aggregate stock equal to or more than five percent (5%); and, in the case
of a limited liability company the operating agreement, certification of
admission to transact business within the state, the articles of organization,
the names, birth dates, addresses and social security numbers of all members of
the limited liability company and the name and address of the limited liability
company's registered agent.
   B.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
   C.   The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   D.   The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was
issued.
   E.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
   F.   The location and legal description of the premises or place of business
and the property upon which a licensed premises is located which is to be
operated under such license. Each application shall contain a diagram of the
premises which depicts the location of any service bars, outside service areas,
and the location of one designated dancing area.
   G.   A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or
other license on premises other than described in the application, and the
disposition of such application.
   H.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this article, laws of the state, or the ordinances of the county.
   I.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons thereof.
   J.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state, or of the United States, or any ordinance, rule or resolution of the
county in the conduct of his place of business.
   K.   The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, and citizenship or
immigration status of any supervising manager or agent required pursuant to
subsection
3-22I of this chapter. Proof that the resident manager is a United States
citizen or legal resident alien must be submitted at the time of the
application. All information regarding the resident manager shall be updated so
that the Kane County liquor control commission has, at all times, current
information regarding the supervising manager or agent.
   L.   Proof of completion of an Illinois certified BASSET program for all
persons who sell or serve alcoholic liquor, all management personnel working on
the premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchase of alcoholic liquor shall be provided with the
application. If a person has not completed the Illinois certified BASSET
program at the time of submission of the liquor license application, applicant
must provide the name of said applicant with the application and provide proof
of completion of said program within ninety (90) days of the application.
   M.   Said application, fees, supporting documentation, and all required
information shall be delivered to the office of the liquor control commission
on or before the last day of February of the year for which such licenses are
to be issued. A license may only be renewed by payment of the original fee plus
a fifty dollar ($50.00) a day penalty starting March 1 through March 31 and
shall accrue until the liquor control commission office has actual receipt of
the required application, fees, supporting documentation, and all required
information unless said penalty is reduced or waived for good cause by the Kane
County liquor control commission. If an application, fees, supporting
documentation, and all required information have not been received on or before
March 31, said liquor license for the prior year will expire and the renewal
application must be submitted as if the application were for a new licensee
including background checks, inspections, and any other requirements. Receipt
of a liquor license renewal application during the penalty period is not a
guarantee that the license can be issued prior to the expiration of the prior
license.
   N.   Said application shall be signed by the owner, if a proprietorship, by
all of the partners of a partnership or limited liability partnership, by the
president and secretary of a corporation, or members of a limited liability
company if submitted in writing. If said application is filed electronically,
the persons required to sign the application must provide authorization for a
designated individual or individuals to submit electronic documents to the
county on behalf of the applicant. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-26-1: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR BYOB ESTABLISHMENTS:
Application for such licenses shall be filed with the local liquor control
commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a
duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information. Such
information shall be updated within thirty (30) days if any of said statements
or information changes during the term of any license issued.
   A.   The name, birth date, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the name, birth date of each
partner; and in the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the
names, birth dates, and addresses of the officers and directors.
   B.   The location and legal description of the premises or place of business
and the property upon which the premises is located and is to be operated. If
the property is leased, a copy of the lease covering the license year shall be
submitted with the application which shall state that the consumption of
alcohol is permitted on the premises.
   C.   Proof of completion of an Illinois certified BASSET program for all
persons who serve alcoholic liquor, all management personnel working on the
premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification of patrons consuming alcoholic liquor. If a person has not
completed the Illinois certified BASSET program at the time of submission of
the liquor license application, applicant must provide the name of said
applicant with the application and provide proof of completion of said program
within ninety (90) days of the application.
   D.   Said application, fees, supporting documentation, and all required
information shall be delivered to the office of the liquor control commission
on or before the last day of February of the year for which such licenses are
to be issued. A license may only be renewed by payment of the original fee plus
a fifty dollar ($50.00) a day penalty starting March 1 through March 31 and
shall accrue until the liquor control commission office has actual receipt of
the required application, fees, supporting documentation, and all required
information unless said penalty is reduced or waived for good cause by the Kane
County liquor control commission. If an application, fees, supporting
documentation, and all required information have not been received on or before
March 31, said corkage license for the prior year will expire and the renewal
application must be submitted as if the application were for a new licensee.
Receipt of a corkage license application during the penalty period is not a
guarantee that the license can be issued prior to the expiration of the prior
license.
   E.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance, rule or
resolution of the county in the conduct of the place of business. (Ord. 15-105,
4-14-2015)
3-27: SIGNATURE OF CORPORATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-28: LEASE OF PREMISES:
Each applicant for a license must submit a copy of a fully executed lease of
premises whenever the applicant is not the property owner of the premises for
which he is seeking a license and such lease must have coverage period equal
to, or longer than, the duration of the applicant's liquor license. Said lease
must name the applicant as lessee. This section shall not apply to class H
licenses. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-29: APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL:
All applications for renewal of any license shall be made on or before thirty
(30) days prior to expiration thereof. Failure to make timely application shall
cause the license not to reissue or to renew. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
ARTICLE V. REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FINE
SECTION:
3-30: Revocation
3-31: Suspension
3-32: Fine
3-33: Revocation For Criminal Conviction
3-34: Revocation For False, Fraudulent Statement
3-34-5: Designated Dancing Area
3-35: Prohibited Hours Of Sale
3-36: Prohibition Of Occupancy During Prohibited Hours Of Sale
3-37: Prohibition Of Sound Amplification
3-38: Prohibition Of Harboring Criminals
3-39: Prohibition Of Free Dispensing
3-40: Prohibition Of Resale
3-41: Prohibition Of Prostitution And Lewdness
3-42: Prohibition Of Disturbance Of The Peace
3-43: Prohibition Of Sale Of Liquor To Minors, Drunkards Or Mentally Deficient
Persons
3-44: Prohibition Of The Employment Of Minors; Exceptions
3-45: Prohibition Of Gambling
3-46: Type Of Notice Required
3-47: Hearings
3-48: Decisions
3-49: Entry Onto Premises
3-50: Waiver
3-51: Continuances For Hearings
3-52: Appeal On The Record
3-30: REVOCATION:
Licenses granted hereunder may be revoked by the local liquor control
commissioner for the violation of any part or portion of this chapter, or of
the Illinois liquor control act, or of any valid resolution or ordinance
enacted by the county board, or of any applicable rule or regulation
established by the local liquor control commissioner or any violation of the
criminal code of the state which occurs on the licensed premises or any
violation of the criminal code of the state which occurs off the licensed
premises where said violation involves or relates to the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-31: SUSPENSION:
Licenses granted hereunder may be suspended by the local liquor control
commissioner for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days for the violation
of any part or portion of this chapter, or of the Illinois liquor control act,
or of any valid resolution or ordinance enacted by the county board, or of any
applicable rule or regulation established by the local liquor control
commissioner or by the state liquor commission or any violation of the state
criminal code which occurs on the licensed premises or any violation of the
criminal code of the state which occurs off the licensed premises where said
violation involves or relates to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages
on the licensed premises. During such period of suspension, no alcoholic liquor
shall be sold on said licensed premises. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-32: FINE:
In lieu of revocation or suspension of the liquor license by the local liquor
control commissioner, the local liquor control commissioner may fine any
licensee up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the violation of any part
or portion of this chapter, or of the Illinois liquor control act, or of any
valid resolution or ordinance enacted by the county board, or of any applicable
rule or regulation established by the local liquor control commissioner or by
the state liquor commission or any violation of the state criminal code which
occurs on the licensed premises or any violation of the criminal code of the
state which occurs off the licensed premises where said violation involves or
relates to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-33: REVOCATION FOR CRIMINAL CONVICTION:
Licenses granted hereunder may be revoked upon the conviction of licensee under
the criminal code of the state. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-34: REVOCATION FOR FALSE, FRAUDULENT STATEMENT:
Should any applicant for license make a false or fraudulent statement in such
application, the same shall be cause for revocation by the local liquor control
commissioner of such license. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-34-5: DESIGNATED DANCING AREA:
Dancing shall be limited to one area designated for such purposes in the
diagram which accompanies the application for a liquor license. Licensee shall
not permit dancing other than in the area so designated. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-
2015)
3-35: PROHIBITED HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to sell or offer for sale at
retail any alcoholic liquor or furnish or give away or allow to permit the same
to be consumed on the licensed premises or any other premises under the
control, directly or indirectly, of the licensee, during the following hours:
   A.   Except on January 1, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and
Fridays.
   B.   Except on January 1, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturdays; and between the hours of two o'clock (2:
00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
   C.   On January 1, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless January 1 is a Sunday, and then between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
   D.   The prohibitions in subsections B and C of this section shall not
apply:
      1.   During the hours specified on the Sunday endorsement granted the
licensee; or
      2.   Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Sundays, if no hours are specified on the Sunday endorsement.
      3.   For class D licensees who operate concessions for the Kane County
Cougars baseball partnership in Elfstrom Stadium during the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays provided that
if there is a change to the lease agreement with the Cougars baseball
partnership and the Kane County forest preserve regarding the sale of alcohol
after the eighth inning, that this exception shall become null and void. (Ord.
15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-36: PROHIBITION OF OCCUPANCY DURING PROHIBITED HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, or to admit persons to any
premises licensed under these rules for the retail sale of alcoholic liquors
during the hours within which sale of alcoholic liquors is prohibited or to
permit or allow persons to remain in or about the licensed premises either
before or after the hours designated within which the sale and consumption of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited on the licensed premises; provided, however,
that restaurants, clubs, drugstores and hotels may keep their place of business
open, subject only to the provisions that no sale at retail of alcoholic
liquors or the consumption by persons of alcoholic liquors shall be permitted
or allowed on said licensed premises during the hours prohibited. (Ord. 15-105,
4-14-2015)
3-37: PROHIBITION OF SOUND AMPLIFICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow amplified sound on the
premises where the sound level exceeds an average conversational level measured
seventy-five (75) feet from the property line of the premises from which the
sound is being generated. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015; Ord. 19-243, 7-9-2019)
3-38: PROHIBITION OF HARBORING CRIMINALS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to harbor, conceal, aid or assist any
fugitive from justice. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-39: PROHIBITION OF FREE DISPENSING:
Free dispensing of alcoholic liquor by licensees engaged in the retail sale of
alcohol is prohibited, except that product sampling may be conducted by a
licensee with a class Q-1 or Q-2 license only. Free dispensing of wine by
restaurants when the wine has been provided by restaurant patrons whether or
not a corkage fee has been imposed is prohibited unless said restaurant has
been issued a corkage license. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-40: PROHIBITION OF RESALE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell at retail, alcoholic liquor for
resale. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-41: PROHIBITION OF PROSTITUTION AND LEWDNESS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to allow or permit any
soliciting for prostitution or lewdness on the licensed premises.
   B.   The following kinds of conduct are prohibited:
      1.   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts.
      2.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals.
      3.   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks, pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals. The aforesaid body parts shall be covered by
opaque material which does not permit viewing of said body parts.
      4.   The permitting, by a licensee, of any person to remain in or upon
the licensed premises who exposes to public view his or her entire breasts or
genitals, vulva or anus.
      5.   The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide
presentations depicting acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
act.
      6.   Employees shall not have bodily contact with patrons and patrons
shall not be permitted to purchase beverages for employees. For purposes of
this section the term "employees" shall include independent contractors
performing services on the licensed premises and employees of any independent
contractors performing services on the licensed premises. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-
2015)
3-42: PROHIBITION OF DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, individually or through his agents or
employees, to allow intoxicated persons to loiter on or about that part of the
premises described in the license and the property upon which a licensed
premises is located which part is in use by or in view of the general public,
or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the people or quiet of the
neighborhood or the premises. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-43: PROHIBITION OF SALE OF LIQUOR TO MINORS, DRUNKARDS OR MENTALLY DEFICIENT
PERSONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, individually or
through his agents or employees, to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person
or to any person known by him or her to be under legal disability or to be in
need of mental treatment.
   B.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-44: PROHIBITION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as enumerated herein, no licensee shall employ any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years to sell, handle, draw, serve, pour, or mix any
alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine, or to tend bar, on the licensed premises.
Where the principal business of the licensee is the sale of food, food servers
who are eighteen (18) years of age or older may serve alcoholic beverages. For
purposes of this section, a licensee has as its principal business the sale of
food when the gross annual receipts of such sales exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the licensee's total gross income from business conducted on the licensed
premises. Where the principal business of the licensee is the sale of alcoholic
liquor, beer, or wine no such licensee shall employ, engage or permit any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not related to the licensee
by blood or marriage to work, entertain, or to act as host or hostess in any
public area on the licensed premises while such premises are open for the sale
at retail of alcoholic liquor. For purposes of this section, a licensee has as
its principal business the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine when the
gross receipts of such sales exceed fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's total
gross income from business conducted on the licensed premises. It shall be the
duty of all licensees to keep and maintain records of persons performing
services within the licensed premises to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-45: PROHIBITION OF GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or allow any gambling
or betting of any money in or about the licensed premises or to permit or allow
any slot machines or any vending machines on or about the licensed premises
which slot machines or vending machines either directly or indirectly involve
the element of chance except for those establishments licensed by the state of
Illinois to have video gaming devices. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-46: TYPE OF NOTICE REQUIRED:
Whenever this chapter requires a hearing before the local liquor control
commission or said commission acts affirmatively concerning a license or
licensee, the licensee shall be afforded reasonable notice of such hearing.
Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
personal delivery to the address of the licensee contained on the application
for liquor license and shall state:
   A.   The time, place, and nature of the hearing.
   B.   A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held.
   C.   A reference to the particular sections of the ordinances or statute(s)
involved.
   D.   A statement informing the licensee of his ability to respond by
presenting evidence and argument. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-47: HEARINGS:
   A.   A hearing required under this chapter shall be held in accordance with
the following rules:
      1.   A hearing shall be held at a reasonable time, date and place.
      2.   No cause shall be heard earlier than three (3) days after receipt by
a licensee of the notice required under this article.
      3.   A licensee may present evidence and argument.
      4.   The local liquor control commission or local liquor control
commissioner may limit, but not prohibit, the presentation of evidence and
argument.
   B.   Where a licensee has received the requisite notice under this article
and fails to appear at a hearing, the local liquor control commission or local
liquor control commissioner may act ex parte. The local liquor control
commissioner may also have an informal hearing where the liquor license will
not be affirmatively acted on at such hearing. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-48: DECISIONS:
Any decision, order, or determination rendered by the local liquor control
commission or local liquor control commissioner which affects the rights,
duties, or privileges of a licensee, shall be in writing and shall notify the
licensee personally or by certified mail of the decision. Any such decision,
order, or determination may include assessment of all costs, fees and expenses
as determined by the local liquor control commission. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-49: ENTRY ONTO PREMISES:
Any entry authorized by this chapter onto premises licensed under this chapter
shall be accomplished without a breach of the peace. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-50: WAIVER:
Compliance with any or all of the provisions of this article concerning
procedure may be waived by written stipulation of all parties. (Ord. 15-105, 4-
14-2015)
3-51: CONTINUANCES FOR HEARINGS:
   A.   A request for a continuance of any hearing in any matter before the
local liquor control commission will not be allowed by the said commission
unless for good and valid reason in writing and unless made at least two (2)
days prior to the date set for hearing.
   B.   The local liquor control commission may, in its discretion, grant a
continuance if extenuating and unusual circumstances are presented in support
of the request for continuance.
   C.   Any continuances requested by the licensee shall be contingent upon
payment by the licensee of all costs, fees, and expenses as determined by the
local liquor control commission. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-52: APPEAL ON THE RECORD:
Any appeal taken from a decision of the local liquor control commission shall
be reviewed on the record taken by and prepared by a certified court reporter
or certified shorthand reporter. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
ARTICLE VI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-53: Sale Of Liquor; Specific Hours
3-54: Display Of Liquor License
3-55: Nondiscrimination In The Issuance/Renewal Of Liquor License
3-56: Minimum Drinking Age
3-57: Severability
3-53: SALE OF LIQUOR; SPECIFIC HOURS:
The hours mentioned herein shall be Central Standard Time except when daylight
saving time is in effect, and then said hours shall be Central Daylight Saving
Time. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-54: DISPLAY OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
The county certificate of license issued in conformity with the provisions of
this act shall be displayed in a prominent place in the said licensed
establishment. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-55: NONDISCRIMINATION IN THE ISSUANCE/RENEWAL OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
The local liquor control commission shall not issue nor renew a liquor license
of any category to any person which discriminates in its service to individuals
on the basis of race, color, gender, ethnic origin, national origin, or
ancestry. Except "club(s)" as defined in the Illinois liquor control law are
exempt from this provision. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-56: MINIMUM DRINKING AGE:
Any person less than twenty one (21) years of age shall not purchase, or accept
a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic
liquor in violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
person less than twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden. The possession and
dispensing, or consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct
supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in
loco parentis of such person under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy
of a home, is not prohibited by this section. Violation of this section shall
be punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
15-105, 4-14-2015)
3-57: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, portion or provision of this chapter is construed to be invalid
or void it shall not affect the remaining sections, portions or provisions
which shall remain in full force and effect thereafter. (Ord. 15-105, 4-14-
2015)
CHAPTER 3.5
MINORS
SECTION:
3.5-1: Curfew For Minors
3.5-2: Tobacco Prohibited
3.5-1: CURFEW FOR MINORS 1 :
   A.   It is unlawful for a person more than fifteen (15) years of age but
less than eighteen (18) years of age to be present at or upon any public
assembly, building, place, street or highway in unincorporated Kane County at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one (21) years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than eighteen
(18) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Sunday;
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   B.   It is unlawful for a person less than sixteen (16) years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one (21) years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than sixteen
(16) years of age to perform or unless in attendance at, or while traveling
directly home from, a school, church or a tax code section 501(c)(3) not for
profit community organization sponsored activity:
      Between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the
following day, seven (7) days a week.
   C.   It is unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her care, custody or control to violate
this section.
   D.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an ordinance violation. (Ord. 95-111, 4-11-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-1078.
3.5-2: TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use
any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years to possess or use any tobacco products. Violation of this section shall
be punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
04-250, 6-8-2004)
CHAPTER 3.75
TRUANCY
SECTION:
3.75-1: Truancy Prohibited
3.75-2: Parental Responsibility
3.75-3: Contributing To Truancy
3.75-4: Defenses To Truancy
3.75-5: Penalties
3.75-6: Severability
3.75-1: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or younger who
is required by law to attend school and who is subject to the compulsory
attendance requirements of the Illinois school code and/or enrolled in a
public, private (including a home school) or parochial school within the
unincorporated areas of the county of Kane, to absent himself or herself from
attendance at school during the hours in which he or she is enrolled without
parental or school permission. Any person who shall so absent himself or
herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the
penalties hereinafter set forth in this chapter. Emergency or unforeseen
absences due to illness or other causes beyond the control of the person so
absenting himself or herself from school without parental permission shall not
constitute truancy if permission for such absence has been obtained from the
parent and such permission is submitted in writing to the proper school
authorities within twenty four (24) hours of such absence. (Ord. 00-330, 11-14-
2000)
3.75-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person to permit a
person in his or her custody or control to commit the offense of truancy. (Ord.
00-330, 11-14-2000)
3.75-3: CONTRIBUTING TO TRUANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any act of commission or
omission which act or omission encourages or contributes to the truancy of any
person. (Ord. 00-330, 11-14-2000)
3.75-4: DEFENSES TO TRUANCY:
Those defenses and/or exceptions as set forth in the Illinois school code for
compulsory attendance or enrollment in school shall apply as defenses to this
chapter. (Ord. 00-330, 11-14-2000)
3.75-5: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating section
3.75-1 of this chapter shall be sentenced to performing not less than ten (10)
community service hours for a first offense, not less than twenty five (25)
community service hours for a second offense or more than fifty (50) community
service hours for each offense thereafter.
   B.   Any person violating section
3.75-2 or
3.75-3 of this chapter may be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a
first offense, not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second offense
or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense thereafter. In
addition to or in lieu of the penalties set forth hereinabove, the parent of a
truant person and/or the truant may be required to participate in a "parenting"
or other truancy oriented program, a list of which available programs will be
maintained by the county. (Ord. 00-330, 11-14-2000)
3.75-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, portion or provision of this chapter is construed to be invalid
or void it shall not affect the remaining sections, portions or provisions
which shall remain in full force and effect thereafter. (Ord. 00-330, 11-14-
2000)
CHAPTER 4
AMBULANCES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
4-1: Emergency Ambulance Service Authorized
4-2: Fees For Ambulance Service
4-3 - 4-15: Reserved
4-1: EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE AUTHORIZED:
The county is authorized to provide and establish emergency ambulance service
for the citizens of the county or any part thereof, and to pay the expenses of
such service as authorized by law. (Ord. 77-116, 9-13-1977)
4-2: FEES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE:
   A.   There shall be a basic fee for ambulance calls made to residents within
special service area no. one of fifty dollars ($50.00); and a basic fee for
ambulance calls made to nonresidents of special service area no. one of one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   The mileage shall be fixed at three dollars ($3.00) per mile for all
ambulance calls with point of destination any facility other than the
following:
      Copley Memorial Hospital, Aurora, Illinois
      Mercy Center For Health Care Services, Aurora, Illinois
      Community Hospital, Geneva, Illinois
      Delnor Hospital, St. Charles, Illinois
      Sherman Hospital, Elgin, Illinois
      St. Joseph Hospital, Elgin, Illinois
      Central DuPage Hospitals, Winfield, Illinois (Ord. 78-167, 11-14-1978;
Ord. 82-181, 11-30-1982)
4-3 - 4-15: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. SPECIAL SERVICE AREA NO. ONE
SECTION:
4-16: Established
4-17: Special Service Area Committee
4-18: Tri-City Ambulance Advisory Council
4-19: County Board Expenses
4-16: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established special service area no. one with which shall
consist of the following:
Batavia Township and Countryside fire protection district lying within Batavia
and Blackberry Townships; city of Batavia lying within Batavia Township; all of
Geneva Township; St. Charles Township fire protection district lying within St.
Charles and Campton Townships; city of St. Charles lying within St. Charles
Township, Kane County, Illinois, less and except the territory deannexed from
the St. Charles fire protection district and annexed to the South Elgin fire
protection district, as described in circuit court case no. 78MC6504.
(Res. 77-134, 11-8-1977; Res. 80-5, 1-8-1980)
4-17: SPECIAL SERVICE AREA COMMITTEE:
There is hereby created the special service area committee, which shall consist
of five (5) members of the county board whose districts fall either wholly or
partly within the boundaries of special service area no. one. Said members
shall be appointed by the chairman, with the consent of the county board
membership, after the adoption of this resolution and hereafter at the January
meeting of the county board each to serve to the next January meeting of the
county board and until their respective successors be appointed. The committee,
in addition, shall have as voting members of the tri-city ambulance advisory
council. The committee shall have jurisdiction over matters pertaining to the
operation of such special service area, and shall submit to the county board
recommendations regarding approval of payments of expenses; budgets; contracts;
rates and charges. (Res. 78-64, § 8, 5-9-1978; Res. 78-122, 9-12-1978)
4-18: TRI-CITY AMBULANCE ADVISORY COUNCIL:
There is created the tri-city ambulance advisory council. Each of the mayors of
Batavia, Geneva, and St. Charles, and such others as may seem desirable by
special service area no. one committee shall be entitled to appoint a member to
such council. Said council shall consist of residents of the special service
area no. one as now or hereafter constituted. The purpose of said council shall
be to furnish advice and counsel to the committee, in the interests of
maintaining and improving the ambulance service provided within special service
area no. one. (Res. 78-22, § 4, 5-9-1978)
4-19: COUNTY BOARD EXPENSES:
All expenses incurred by the county board on behalf of special service area no.
one shall be reimbursed by the special service area committee on behalf of
special service area no. one. (Res. 78-64, § 9, 5-9-1978)
CHAPTER 5
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I. GENERAL; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-1: Short Title
5-2: Definitions
5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified in this section have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ADMINISTRATOR: A veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois and appointed
pursuant to this chapter, or in the event a veterinarian cannot be found and
appointed pursuant to this chapter, a nonveterinarian may serve as
administrator under this chapter. In the event the administrator is not a
veterinarian, the administrator shall defer to a veterinarian regarding all
medical decisions.
ANIMAL: Any living vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than man.
ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN: Any person appointed by the administrator to perform
duties as assigned by the administrator to effectuate this chapter.
BITCH IN SEASON: Any female dog that is in estrous or a period of reproductive
fertility so as to be attractive to male dogs.
BOARD: The Kane County board.
BUSINESS DAY: Any day including holidays that the animal control facility or
other contracted pounds are open to the public for animal reclaims.
CAT: All members of the family Felidae.
COMPANION ANIMAL: Any animal commonly considered to be, or to be used as a pet.
"Companion animal" includes, but is not limited to, canines, felines, and
equines.
CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his agent, to
an escape proof building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals and
the public.
CONTROL: Any animal that is either secured by a leash or within the property of
its owner, or confined within a cage or crate, or confined within a vehicle, or
on the property of another person with the consent of that property owner.
"Voice control" means the immediate recall of a dog or other animal at the
sound of the owner's voice.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a public place.
DEPARTMENT: The Kane County animal control department.
DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR: A veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois,
appointed by the administrator.
DOG: All members of the family Canidae.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a
room within a residence, the door must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed
to move about freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times.
FERAL CAT: A cat that: a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned
or feral cat and is not socialized, or b) is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized or lives on a farm.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or
animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
HUMANE SOCIETY: Any chartered, not for profit organization authorized to do
business in this state and organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to
animals and promoting humane care and treatment of animals.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of a public animal control facility in Kane
County.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved by
the Illinois department of agriculture and administered by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for the
vaccine used.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of sufficient strength
to keep such dog or other animal under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A veterinarian licensed by the state in which he/she
engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.
LIVESTOCK MANAGEMENT FACILITY: Any on farm animal feeding operation, on farm
livestock shelter, or on farm milking and accompanying milk handling area.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits a domestic, wild or exotic animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by that person. Owners must be eighteen (18) years of age or
older.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society, association or
other legal entity, any public or private institution, the state of Illinois,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or any other
business unit.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
POUND OR ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: May be used interchangeably and mean any
facility approved by the administrator for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted dogs or other animals.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A printed form prescribed by the department for the
purpose of recording pertinent information as required by the department under
this chapter.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious protracted disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or
plastic surgery.
STRAY OR STRAYING ANIMAL: A dog or other animal not on the property of the
owner or not confined or under control by a leash or other recognized control
measures.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES
SECTION:
5-3: Appointment Of Administrator; Appointment Of Deputy Administrators And
Animal Control Wardens; Compensation; Removal; Personnel And Facilities
5-4: Reserved
5-5: Duties Of Administrator; Police Powers; Cooperation Of Sheriff And Police
5-6: Reserved
5-3: APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY ADMINISTRATORS AND
ANIMAL CONTROL WARDENS; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL; PERSONNEL AND FACILITIES:
The county board chairman with the consent of the county board shall appoint an
administrator. Appointments shall be made as necessary to keep this position
filled at all times. The administrator may appoint as many deputy
administrators and animal control wardens to aid him or her as authorized by
the board. The compensation for the administrator, deputy administrators, and
animal control wardens shall be fixed by the board. The administrator may be
removed from office by the county board chairman with the consent of the county
board. In the event the administrator is not a licensed veterinarian, the
administrator shall appoint a veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois as
a deputy administrator, who shall also be known as the county veterinarian.
The board shall provide necessary personnel, training, equipment, supplies, and
facilities, and shall operate pounds or contract for their operation as
necessary to effectuate the program. The board may enter into contracts or
agreements with persons to assist in the operation of the program.
The board shall be empowered to utilize monies from their general corporate
fund to effectuate the intent of this chapter.
The board is authorized by ordinance to require the registration of dogs, cats,
and other animals and shall impose an individual animal and litter tag fee. All
persons selling animals or keeping registries of animals shall cooperate and
provide information to the administrator, as required by board ordinance,
including sales, number of litters, and ownership of said animals. (Ord. 04-83,
2-10-2004; Ord. 06-155, § 1, 4-11-2006)
5-4: RESERVED:
5-5: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR; POLICE POWERS; COOPERATION OF SHERIFF AND POLICE:
It shall be the duty of the administrator, or the deputy administrator, through
humane education, rabies inoculation, stray control, surgical sterilization of
animals, impoundment, quarantine, and any other means deemed necessary, to
control and prevent the spread of rabies, to exercise dog and cat
overpopulation control in Kane County, and to effectuate and enforce all other
provisions of this chapter. It shall also be the duty of the administrator to
investigate and substantiate all claims made under section 5-21 of this
chapter.
The administrator, deputy administrators, and animal control wardens are, for
the purpose of enforcing this chapter, clothed with power of police officers in
Kane County and within the county are peace officers in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including issuance and service of citations and
orders, and, as such peace officers have the power to make arrests on view or
warrants for violation of this chapter and to execute and serve all warrants
and processes issued by any circuit court; however, such peace officers are
prohibited from carrying concealed weapons. The sheriff and his deputies and
municipal police officers shall cooperate with the administrator and his or her
representatives in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of
making inspections hereunder, the administrator, or his authorized
representative, or any law enforcement officer may enter upon private premises,
provided the entry shall not be made into any building that is a person's
residence, to apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous or vicious
animal or an animal thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request
thereof, the owner of the animal shall refuse to deliver the animal to the
officer, the owner shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-
2004)
5-6: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. ANIMAL CONTROL FUND
SECTION:
5-7: Remittance Of Fees; Animal Control Fund; Use Of Fund
5-7: REMITTANCE OF FEES; ANIMAL CONTROL FUND; USE OF FUND:
All tag fees collected shall be remitted to the county treasurer, who shall
place the monies in the animal control fund. This fund shall be set up by him
for the purpose of paying costs of the animal control program. All fees
collected shall be used for the purpose of paying claims for loss of livestock
or poultry as set forth in section 5-21 of this chapter and for the following
purposes as established by ordinance of the county board: For paying the cost
of stray dog control, impoundment, education on animal control and rabies, and
other costs incurred in carrying out the provisions of this chapter concurred
on by the county board relating to animal control, except as set forth in
section 5-21 of this chapter. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004; Ord. 06-155, § 1, 4-11-
2006)
ARTICLE IV. RABIES CONTROL AND STRAY DOG CONTROL; ANIMALS AS PUBLIC NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-8: Registration And Inoculation Against Rabies Required; Rabies Inoculation
Tags; Sale And Distribution Of Vaccine
5-8-1: Change Of Pet Ownership
5-9: Dogs Running At Large; Public Nuisance; Impoundment
5-9A: Invisible Fencing
5-9-1: Nuisance Animals
5-9-2: Bitch In Heat; Unlawful To Leave Tied Or Unattended Outdoors
5-9-3: Dog Barking Or Other Animals Emitting Loud Noises; Provisions For
Abatement
5-9-4: Nuisance Feeding Prohibited
5-10: Notice Of Impoundment; Service Of Notice; Redemption Of Impounded Dog;
Conditions
5-11: Dogs Not Redeemed; Humane Dispatch; Release Without Spaying Or Neutering
Prohibited; Adoption
5-12: Animals Exhibiting Signs Of Rabies; Notice To Administrator; Confinement
Of Animal; Animals Exposed; Confinement
5-13: Report Of Bite By An Animal; Confinement; Report; Notification By
Administrator; Report At End Of Confinement; Confinement In Owner's House;
Reduction Of Period; Violations; Expense
5-14: Prevention Of Spread Of Rabies; Powers
5-8: REGISTRATION AND INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES REQUIRED; RABIES INOCULATION
TAGS; SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF VACCINE:
   A.   Registration: Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months or more of
age shall cause such dog or cat to be registered with, and shall pay a
registration fee to, Kane County animal control. Upon payment of the required
registration fee and compliance with the rabies inoculation requirement set
forth in subsection B of this section, a registration tag shall be issued and
will be valid for one year. Every dog or cat shall be registered annually,
unless a licensed veterinarian has issued a certificate indicating that a three
(3) year rabies vaccine has been administered to the dog or cat, in which case,
registration shall be once every three (3) years. This requirement of
registration may be satisfied through the inoculation and tag purchase
described in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Inoculation: Every owner of a dog or cat four (4) months or more of age
shall cause such dog or cat to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian. Every dog or cat shall have a second rabies vaccination within
one year of the first vaccination and every year thereafter. However, if the
vaccine used is one recognized by the Illinois department of agriculture for a
three (3) year period of immunity, and the dog or cat is over twelve (12)
months of age at the time of inoculation, the interval between inoculations may
be extended to three (3) years. Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be
entered on a certificate, the form of which shall be approved by the Kane
County board and which shall contain the microchip number of the animal, if it
has one, and which shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering
the vaccine. Veterinarians who inoculate a dog or cat shall procure from Kane
County animal control serially numbered tags, one to be issued with each
inoculation certificate. Only one dog or cat shall be included on each
certificate. The veterinarian immunizing or microchipping an animal in Kane
County shall provide the administrator of Kane County animal control with a
certificate of immunization and microchip number, and a tag shall be issued, at
a fee established by the Kane County board for each dog or cat inoculated
against rabies. Such tags shall also serve as the registration tag for purposes
of this chapter. Tags shall be worn on the collar or harness of the animal for
which the tag and rabies inoculation certificate was issued, except when the
animal is confined.
If a tag is not issued at the time a dog or cat is inoculated against rabies
(for example, if the owner refuses to obtain the tag from the veterinarian or
if the veterinarian is located outside Kane County), the owner must register
the dog or cat with Kane County animal control within thirty (30) days of
inoculation. In which case, the owner must present an inoculation certificate
issued by the veterinarian that administered such inoculation. Kane County
animal control will then furnish the owner with a tag, upon payment of the
registration fee.
   C.   Registration Fee: The fee for a registration tag shall be assessed at a
rate set forth by Kane County animal control and approved by the county board
and shall include a minimum ten dollar ($10.00) differential in the fee for
dogs or cats that have not been spayed or neutered.
   D.   Sale And Distribution Of Vaccine: Rabies vaccine for use on animals
shall be sold or distributed only to and used only by licensed veterinarians.
Such rabies vaccine shall be licensed by the United States department of
agriculture and approved by the Illinois department of agriculture.
   E.   Exemptions: If a licensed veterinarian determines in writing that a
rabies inoculation would compromise an animal's health, then the animal shall
be exempt from the rabies shot requirement, but the owner must register the dog
or cat as medically exempt within thirty (30) days after such determination.
(Ord. 12-288, 9-11-2012)
5-8-1: CHANGE OF PET OWNERSHIP:
If the ownership of a pet changes, the following apply:
   A.   Pets shall be registered anew within thirty (30) days of a change in
ownership.
   B.   No additional fee shall be charged to a new owner for the registration
of a dog or cat, which has been previously registered with Kane County during
the course of the same calendar year.
   C.   Change of ownership may be proven by a bill of sale, evidence of the
previous registration and/or letter from the previous owner relinquishing
ownership of the pet. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-9: DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE; PUBLIC NUISANCE; IMPOUNDMENT:
Any dog not under the immediate control of its owner or the owner's agent found
straying or running at large within the corporate limits of the county of Kane
shall be deemed and considered to be a public nuisance. Any dog found running
at large or straying in any incorporated or unincorporated area of Kane County
contrary to provisions of this chapter may be apprehended and impounded. It
shall be the duty of the Kane County animal control administrator to impound
any dog not under immediate control of its owner, or the owner's agent, found
straying or running at large within the corporate limits of the county of Kane,
but outside the limits of any municipality. Upon a written report, owners of
dogs found running at large shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of
this section. For this purpose, the administrator shall utilize any existing or
available animal control facility. (Ord. 12-398, 12-11-2012)
5-9A: INVISIBLE FENCING:
Persons who utilize "invisible fencing" to contain any animal must display
prominently on their property immediately adjacent to the public right of way a
sign which indicates that any animal located thereon is contained by way of
"invisible fencing". Invisible fencing installed after March 31, 2000, must be
set back from the public right of way a minimum of four feet (4'). (Ord. 04-83,
2-10-2004)
5-9-1: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
An animal shall be classed as a nuisance, and its owner held in violation of
this chapter when such animal shall commit and repeat any of the following
acts:
   A.   Molesting persons or moving vehicles by chasing or otherwise
encumbering them;
   B.   Attacking other animals that are being maintained in a lawful and
otherwise proper way on the premises of their owner(s) or that are in the
ordinance prescribed control of their owners away from their home premises;
   C.   Damaging property other than that of the owner. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-9-2: BITCH IN HEAT; UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE TIED OR UNATTENDED OUTDOORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stake out unattended, or leave
unrestrained outside and unattended any female dog in season. (Ord. 04-83, 2-
10-2004)
5-9-3: DOG BARKING OR OTHER ANIMALS EMITTING LOUD NOISES; PROVISIONS FOR
ABATEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to allow their dog or other
animal to bark, howl, cry, whine, or otherwise emit loud noises day or night so
as to disturb the peace or quiet of any person, place or neighborhood or family
in any incorporated or unincorporated area of Kane County while said dog or
other animal is not within the confines of the owner's residence or other
enclosed building upon the owner's property. Any dog or other animal emitting
such noises shall be deemed and considered to be a public nuisance. Any person
who shall fail, neglect or refuse to abate such nuisance after notice thereof,
shall, for each twenty four (24) hours thereafter during which said nuisance
continues, be deemed to have committed a separate violation of this section and
be subject to like penalty as that originally incurred.
Any county law enforcement officer or designated deputy enforcing officer, upon
observing any violation of this section, shall issue a notice directed to the
owner of the animal, which said notice shall describe the violation and shall
establish a reasonable time limit for the abatement thereof by such owner,
which time shall be not less than one day nor more than ten (10) days after
service of such notice.
Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice for the
abatement of such nuisance, the law enforcement officer or deputy enforcing
officer who served such notice or any other law enforcement officer who shall
be assigned by the animal control administrator or sheriff shall investigate to
determine whether or not such nuisance has been abated.
In the event the owner of the animal has failed within the prescribed time to
abate such nuisance, the citizen of the county of Kane who filed the original
affidavit may file a complaint with the circuit court, charging violation of
this section and demanding that the owner be punished as herein provided.
The court may, at its discretion, use whatever means that are necessary to
abate the nuisance including, but not limited to, ordering the humane
destruction of said animal causing the nuisance. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-9-4: NUISANCE FEEDING PROHIBITED:
The feeding of any cat, or other wildlife except birds, including hand feeding
or the placing or setting out of food to be left attended or unattended, which
creates or has the potential to create a hazard to public health or safety is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and to be unlawful. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-
2004)
5-10: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICE; REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOG;
CONDITIONS:
When dogs or cats or other animals are apprehended and impounded by the
administrator, they must be scanned for the presence of a microchip. The
department shall give notice of not less than seven (7) business days to the
owner, if known, prior to disposal of the animal. Such notice shall be phoned
to the owner or mailed or delivered to the last known address of the owner. An
affidavit or testimony of the administrator, or his authorized agent, who
phones, mails or delivers such notice shall be prima facie evidence of the
receipt of such notice by the owner of such animal. In case the owner of any
impounded animal desires to make redemption thereof, he or she may do so on the
following conditions:
   A.   Present proof of current rabies inoculation, and registration, if
applicable, or
   B.   Pay for the rabies inoculation of the dog or cat, and registration, if
applicable, and
   C.   Pay for dog to be microchipped. If not redeemed by owner, dog must be
microchipped before adoption, and
   D.   Pay the pound for the board of the dog or cat or other animal for the
period it was impounded, and
   E.   Pay into the animal control fund an additional impoundment fee as
prescribed by the board as a penalty for the first offense and for each
subsequent offense.
This shall be in addition to any other penalties invoked under this chapter. If
the owner is not known because the animal has no means of identification
readily and easily recognizable by the department, the impounded animal shall
be held for five (5) business days. In any case where said animal is injured or
sick, whether the owner is known or not, the licensed veterinarian examining
said animal shall have the right to shorten the period of impoundment to
whatever period he shall deem necessary in order to alleviate the animal's
suffering or to prevent the spread of contagious disease. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-
2004; Ord. 04-251, 6-8-2004)
5-11: DOGS NOT REDEEMED; HUMANE DISPATCH; RELEASE WITHOUT SPAYING OR NEUTERING
PROHIBITED; ADOPTION:
When not redeemed by the owner, a dog or cat or other animal which has been
impounded for straying, failure to be inoculated and registered, or for any
other reason, if applicable, in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall be humanely dispatched, offered for adoption, or otherwise disposed of by
the pound as a stray animal in accordance with laws that exist or may hereafter
exist. An animal pound or animal shelter shall not release any dog or cat when
not redeemed by the owner unless the animal has been surgically rendered
incapable of reproduction by spaying or neutering and microchipped, or the
person wishing to adopt an animal prior to the surgical procedure and
microchipping having been performed shall have executed a written agreement
promising to have such service performed within thirty (30) days. Failure to
fulfill the terms of the agreement shall result in seizure and impoundment of
the animal by the animal pound or shelter, and any monies which have been
deposited shall be forfeited. This section shall not prevent humane societies
from engaging in activities set forth by their charters; provided, they are not
inconsistent with provisions of this chapter and other existing laws. No animal
shelter or pound shall release dogs or cats to an individual representing a
rescue group unless the group has been licensed by the Illinois department of
agriculture. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-12: ANIMALS EXHIBITING SIGNS OF RABIES; NOTICE TO ADMINISTRATOR; CONFINEMENT
OF ANIMAL; ANIMALS EXPOSED; CONFINEMENT:
The owner of any animal which exhibits clinical signs of rabies, whether or not
such animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall immediately notify the
administrator, and shall promptly confine such animal under the direct
supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of at least ten (10) days.
Any animal in direct contact with such animal, whether or not the exposed
animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall be confined as ordered by the
administrator. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-13: REPORT OF BITE BY AN ANIMAL; CONFINEMENT; REPORT; NOTIFICATION BY
ADMINISTRATOR; REPORT AT END OF CONFINEMENT; CONFINEMENT IN OWNER'S HOUSE;
REDUCTION OF PERIOD; VIOLATIONS; EXPENSE:
When the administrator receives information that any person has been bitten by
an animal, the administrator, or his authorized representative, shall have such
animal confined under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period
of ten (10) days. Such veterinarian shall report the clinical condition of the
animal immediately, with confirmation in writing to the administrator within
twenty four (24) hours after the animal is presented for examination, giving
the owner's name, address, the date of confinement, the breed, description,
age, and sex of such animal, on appropriate forms approved by the department.
The administrator shall notify the attending physician or responsible health
agency if the biting animal has not been presented for confinement. At the end
of the confinement period, the veterinarian shall submit a written report to
the administrator advising him of the final disposition of such animal on
appropriate forms approved by the department. When evidence is presented that
such animal was inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law, it
may be confined in the house of its owner, or in a manner which will prohibit
it from biting any person for a period of ten (10) days, if the administrator,
or other licensed veterinarian, adjudges such confinement satisfactory. At the
end of the confinement period, such animal shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian.
It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten
by an animal to refuse to notify the administrator promptly. It is unlawful for
the owner of such animal to euthanize, sell, give away, or otherwise dispose of
any such animal known to have bitten a person, until it is released by the
administrator, or his authorized representative. It is unlawful for the owner
of such animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or printed
instructions made by the administrator, or his authorized representative. If
such instructions cannot be delivered in person, they shall be mailed to the
owner of such animal by regular mail, postage prepaid. The affidavit or
testimony of the administrator, or his authorized representative, delivering or
mailing such instructions is prima facie evidence that the owner of such animal
was notified of his or her responsibilities. Any expense incurred in the
handling of an animal under this section and section 5-12 of this chapter shall
be borne by the owner. For the purpose of this section, the word "immediately"
means by telephone, in person, or by other than use of the mail.
When a person has been bitten by a police dog, the police dog may continue to
perform its duties for the peace officer or law enforcement agency and any
period of observation of the police dog may be under the supervision of a peace
officer. However, the police dog must remain under the constant supervision of
its police handler. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-14: PREVENTION OF SPREAD OF RABIES; POWERS:
Whenever a case of rabies has occurred in a locality, or when the proper
officials of a government unit are apprehensive of the spread of rabies, the
department shall act to prevent its spread among dogs, cats, and other animals.
The department may order:
   A.   That all dogs, cats, or other animals in the locality be:
      1.   Kept confined within an enclosure, or
      2.   Kept muzzled and restrained by leash.
   B.   That all owners or keepers of dogs, cats, or other animals take
prophylactic measures as it deems necessary to prevent the spread of rabies.
   C.   Other measures as may be necessary to control the spread of rabies.
The department may determine the area of the locality in which, and the period
of time during which, such orders shall be effective. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE V. VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
SECTION:
Division 1. Vicious Animals
5-15: Enclosure For Vicious Dog Or Other Animal; Leash For Dangerous Dog Or
Other Animal; Exemptions; Injunction; Nuisance
Division 2. Prohibited Animals
5-16: Prohibited Animals; Exceptions
5-16-1: Definitions
5-16-2: Permits
DIVISION 1. VICIOUS ANIMALS
5-15: ENCLOSURE FOR VICIOUS DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL; LEASH FOR DANGEROUS DOG OR
OTHER ANIMAL; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTION; NUISANCE:
In order for a dog or other animal to be deemed "vicious", the administrator,
deputy administrator, animal control warden, or law enforcement officer must
give notice of the infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the
owner, conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the
owner, gather any existing medical records, veterinary medical records or
behavioral evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the
dog or other animal is a vicious animal and give the report to the state's
attorney's office and the owner. The administrator, state's attorney, or any
other citizen of Kane County may file a complaint in the circuit court in the
name of the people of the state of Illinois to deem a dog or other animal to be
a vicious animal. Testimony of a certified animal behaviorist may be relevant
to the court's determination of whether the dog's or other animal's behavior
was justified. The petitioner must prove the animal is a vicious animal by
clear and convincing evidence. The administrator shall determine where the
animal shall be confined during the pendency of the case.
A dog or other animal shall not be declared vicious if the court determines the
conduct of the dog or other animal was justified because:
   A.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the time
was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or
other animal, or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog or
other animal;
   B.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting, abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatened the dog or other animal or its offspring;
or
   C.   The dog or other animal was responding to pain or injury, or was
protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or
offspring.
No dog shall be deemed vicious if it is a professionally trained dog for law
enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner
that is specific as to breed.
If the burden of proof has been met, the court shall deem the dog or other
animal to be a vicious animal.
If a dog or other animal is found to be a vicious animal, the animal shall be
spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of the
owner and microchipped, if not already, and is subject to enclosure. A dog or
other animal found to be a vicious animal shall not be released to the owner
until the administrator or an animal control warden approves the enclosure. No
owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall sell or give away the vicious animal
without court approval. Whenever an owner of a vicious animal relocates, he or
she shall notify the administrator. The only times that a vicious animal is
allowed out of the enclosure are: a) if it is necessary for the owner or keeper
to obtain veterinary care for the dog, b) in case of an emergency or natural
disaster where the animal's life is threatened, or c) to comply with the order
of the court, provided the animal is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the animal or muzzled in its
owner's residence.
Any dog or other animal that has been found to be a vicious animal and is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the administrator, an animal
control warden, or the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in that
area.
If the owner of the vicious animal has not appealed the impoundment order to
the circuit court within fifteen (15) working days, the animal may be
euthanized.
Upon filing a notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be automatically
stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear all costs
associated with the impoundment and the burden of timely notification to the
administrator in writing.
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically
handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and registered with
the department for its specific duties. It shall be the duty of the owner of
such exempted dog to notify the administrator of changes of address. In the
case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the administrator advised
of the location where such dog will be stationed. The administrator shall
provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted
dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes
reported to him.
In order for a dog or other animal to be deemed "dangerous", the administrator,
deputy administrator, animal control warden, or other law enforcement officer
must perform a thorough investigation which must include sending, within three
(3) days of the administrator becoming aware of the alleged infraction,
notification to the owner of the animal alleged to have committed the
infraction, the fact of the initiation of an investigation, and affording the
owner an opportunity to meet with the administrator or his appointee prior to
the making of a determination. The administrator or his appointee shall gather
any medical or veterinary evidence; interview witnesses; and make a detailed
written report with his findings. No dog or other animal shall be deemed a
"dangerous animal" without clear and convincing evidence. The owner of the
dangerous animal shall be sent immediate notification of the determination by
registered or certified mail that shall include a complete description of the
appeal process. Testimony of a certified animal behaviorist may be relevant to
the administrator's determination of whether the dog's or other animal's
behavior was justified pursuant to the provisions of this section.
No dog or other animal shall be declared dangerous if the administrator or his
appointee determines the conduct of the dog or other animal was justified
because:
   A.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the time
was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or
other animal, or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog or
other animal;
   B.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting, abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatened the dog or other animal or its offspring;
or
   C.   The dog or other animal was responding to pain or injury, or was
protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or
offspring.
   D.   The injured, threatened or killed companion animal was attacking or
threatening to attack the dog or other animal or its offspring.
If a dog or other animal is found to be a dangerous animal, the animal shall be
spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense of the
owner and microchipped, if not already, and one or more of the following as
deemed appropriate by the administrator or his appointee:
   A.   Evaluation of the dog or other animal by a board certified veterinary
behaviorist or other recognized expert in the field and completion of training
or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert. The owner of the dog or
other animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with the evaluation
and training ordered under this section.
   B.   Direct supervision and leash control by an adult eighteen (18) years of
age or older when the animal is on public or private property other than the
property of the owner.
   C.   The dog or other animal shall be muzzled when the animal is on public
or private property other than the property of the owner in a manner that will
prevent it from biting any person or other animal.
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically
handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and registered with
the department for its specific duties. It shall be the duty of the owner of
such exempted dog to notify the administrator of changes of address. In the
case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the administrator advised
of the location where such dog will be stationed. The administrator shall
provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted
dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes
reported to him.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any dangerous
dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner when not under the
control by a leash or other recognized control methods.
The owner of a dog or other animal found to be a dangerous animal pursuant to
this section by the administrator or his appointee may file a complaint against
the administrator or his appointee in the circuit court within thirty (30) days
of receipt of the notification of the determination, for a de novo hearing on
the determination. The proceeding shall be conducted as a civil hearing
pursuant to the Illinois rules of evidence and the code of civil procedure,
including the discovery provisions. After hearing both parties' evidence, the
court may make a determination of a dangerous animal if the administrator meets
his burden of proof of clear and convincing evidence. Until the order has been
reviewed and at all times during the appeal process, the owner shall comply
with the requirements set forth by the administrator or his appointee. (Ord.
04-83, 2-10-2004)
DIVISION 2. PROHIBITED ANIMALS
5-16: PROHIBITED ANIMALS; EXCEPTIONS:
Possession of a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain
lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, any hybrid thereof, or any other similar feline
animal, bear, hyena, wolf, coyote, wolf-dog or coyote-dog hybrid, fox or any
member of the vulpes family, any member of the crocodilian family, poisonous
reptile, or any other life threatening reptile shall be prohibited to be kept
except at a properly maintained zoological park, circus, scientific or
educational institution, research laboratory 1  or veterinary hospital in an
escape proof enclosure. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See article XII of this chapter for animal research experimentation
  regulations.
5-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this division, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the meanings assigned to them in this section. The
singular form shall also signify the plural and the masculine form shall also
signify the feminine.
EXHIBITOR: Any person (public or private) exhibiting any animals, which were
purchased in commerce or the intended distribution of which affects the public,
regardless of compensation. This term includes carnivals, circuses, animal
acts, zoos, and educational exhibits, exhibiting such animals whether operated
for profit or not. This term excludes retail pet stores, horse and dog races,
organizations sponsoring and all persons participating in state and county
fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, field trials, coursing events, purebred dog and
cat shows and any other fairs or exhibitions intended to advance agricultural
arts and sciences as may be determined by the Kane County animal control
director.
ZOO OR ZOOLOGICAL PARK: Any park, building, cage, enclosure, or other structure
or premises in which a live animal or animals are kept for public exhibition or
viewing, regardless of compensation. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-16-2: PERMITS:
   A.   All such persons or institutions shall possess state of Illinois,
United States department of agriculture and Kane County permits enabling them
to keep such animals and must be inspected and approved by the Kane County
animal control director prior to bringing such animals into Kane County,
whether on a permanent or temporary basis.
   B.   Any person seeking a permit from Kane County must at a minimum
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the animal control administrator the
following:
      1.   The enclosure in which the animal is confined is both escape proof
and adequate to prohibit members of the public from coming into contact with
the animal.
      2.   There are adequate plans to recapture or euthanize any animal which
does escape and file a copy of said plan with the animal control administrator.
      3.   The person has the education, training, skills and knowledge to
provide adequate care for the animal as well as the safety of the public.
      4.   Provide a certification from a veterinarian that the animal is not
diseased and otherwise in good health and have an attending veterinarian
available to provide care for the animals.
      5.   Provide proof of the public liability insurance in the minimum
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   C.   A person applying for a permit shall pay a permit fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and if reinspection of facilities or plans are required then
an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per reinspection or review of the
plans. Said fee may be waived if the animals will be within Kane County on a
temporary basis (less than 15 days). The permit shall be granted or denied
within fourteen (14) days of receipt by the Kane County animal control
administrator of a completed application and all information or documentation
required by this division. The granting or denial of a permit may be appealed
by any interested person to the chairman of the Kane County board within seven
(7) days of receipt by the applicant of actual notice of the granting or denial
of said application. Appeal shall be to the chairman of the Kane County board,
his designee or anyone sitting in his stead. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE VI. OWNER LIABILITY
SECTION:
5-17: Liability Of Owner Of Dog Or Other Animal Attacking Or Injuring Person
5-18: Reserved
5-17: LIABILITY OF OWNER OF DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL ATTACKING OR INJURING PERSON:
If a dog or other animal, without provocation, attacks or injures any person
who is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be, the
owner of such dog or other animal is liable in damages to such person for the
full amount of the injury sustained. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-18: RESERVED:
ARTICLE VII. DOG KILLING OTHER ANIMALS; ANIMAL OWNER RIGHTS; DOG OWNER
LIABILITY
SECTION:
5-19: Killing Of Dog Seen To Injure, Wound Or Kill Domestic Animals
5-20: Liability Of Dog Owner; Damages Caused To Sheep, Goats, Cattle, Horses,
Mules, Poultry, Or Swine
5-21: Reimbursement Of Owner Of Domestic Animals Killed Or Injured By Dog;
Procedure
5-22: Payment To Owner Of Domestic Animals No Bar To Action For Damages;
Repayment To Animal Control Fund
5-19: KILLING OF DOG SEEN TO INJURE, WOUND OR KILL DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
Any owner seeing his sheep, goats, cattle, horses, mules, swine, ratites, or
poultry being injured, wounded, or killed by a dog or other animal, not
accompanied by or not under the supervision of its owner, may pursue and kill
such dog or other animal. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-20: LIABILITY OF DOG OWNER; DAMAGES CAUSED TO SHEEP, GOATS, CATTLE, HORSES,
MULES, POULTRY, OR SWINE:
The owner or keeper of a dog is liable to a person for all damages caused by
the dog pursuing, chasing, worrying, wounding, injuring, or killing any sheep,
goats, cattle, horses, mules, poultry, ratites, or swine belonging to that
person. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-21: REIMBURSEMENT OF OWNER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS KILLED OR INJURED BY DOG;
PROCEDURE:
Any owner having sheep, goats, cattle, horses, mules, swine, or poultry killed
or injured by a dog shall, according to the provisions of this section, and
upon filing claim and making proper proof, be entitled to receive reimbursement
for such losses from the animal control fund; provided, he or she is a resident
of this county and such injury or killing is reported to the administrator
within twenty four (24) hours after such injury or killing occurs, and he or
she shall have appeared before the administrator or his authorized
representative and makes an affidavit stating the number of such animals or
poultry killed or injured, the amount of damages and the owner of the dog
causing such killing or injury, if known. Members of the department are
authorized to administer oaths in such cases. The damages referred to in this
section shall be substantiated by the administrator through prompt
investigation and by not less than two (2) witnesses. The administrator shall
determine whether the provisions of this section have been met and shall keep a
record in each case of the names of the owners of the animals or poultry, the
amount of damages proven, and the number of animals or poultry killed or
injured.
The administrator shall file a written report with the county treasurer as to
the right of an owner of sheep, goats, cattle, horses, mules, swine, or poultry
to be paid out of the animal control fund, and the amount of such damages
claimed.
The county treasurer shall, on the first Monday in March of each calendar year,
pay to the owner of the animals or poultry the amount of damages to which he is
entitled. Unless the county board, by ordinance, establishes a schedule for
damages reflecting the reasonable market value, the damages allowed for grade
animals or poultry shall not exceed the following amounts:
Type Of Animal    Amount Per Head
Killed Or Injured
Type Of Animal              Amount Per Head
Killed Or Injured
Cattle                      $300.00
Goats                       30.00
Horses or mules             200.00
Poultry, other than turkeys 1.00
Sheep                       30.00
Swine                       50.00
Turkeys                     5.00
 
The maximum amounts hereinabove set forth may be increased fifty percent (50%)
for animals for which the owner can present a certificate of registry of the
appropriate breed association or organization. However, if there is not
sufficient money in the portion of the fund set aside as stated in section 5-
7 of this chapter to pay all claims for damages in full, then the county
treasurer shall pay to such owner of animals or poultry his pro rata share of
the money available.
If there are funds in excess of amounts paid for such claims for damage in that
portion of the animal control fund set aside for this purpose, this excess
shall be used for other costs of the program as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-22: PAYMENT TO OWNER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS NO BAR TO ACTION FOR DAMAGES;
REPAYMENT TO ANIMAL CONTROL FUND:
The payment to any owner of sheep, goats, cattle, horses, mules, swine, or
poultry of monies out of the animal control fund for damages resulting from
loss or injury to any such animals, shall not be a bar to an action by such
owner against the owner of the dog committing such injury or causing such loss
for the recovery of damages therefor. The court or jury, before which such
action is tried, shall ascertain from evidence what portion, if any, of the
damages sought to be recovered in such action has been paid to the plaintiff in
such action by the county treasurer, and in case the plaintiff in such action
recovers damages, the court shall enter judgment against the defendant, in the
name of the plaintiff for the use of the county, for the amount which the
plaintiff has received on account of such damages from the county treasurer, if
such recovery shall equal or exceed the amount so received by such plaintiff
from the county treasurer; and the residue of such recovery, if any there be,
shall be entered in the name of the plaintiff in such action to his own use. If
the amount of the recovery in such action shall not equal the amount previously
paid the plaintiff on account of such damages by the county treasurer, then the
judgment shall be entered as heretofore stated for the use of the animal
control fund, for the full amount of such recovery. The judgment shall show on
its face what portion of the judgment is to be paid to the animal control fund,
and what portion is to be paid to the plaintiff in such action, and the
judgment when collected shall be paid over to the parties entitled thereto in
their proper proportions. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE VIII. ANIMAL CARE
SECTION:
5-23: Owner's Duties
5-24: Cruel Treatment
5-25: Aggravated Cruelty
5-26: Prohibited Acts
5-27: Animals For Use In Entertainment; Prohibited Acts
5-28: Arrests; Possession Of Dogs, Paraphernalia, Implements, Etc.;
Veterinarian's Report
5-29: Teasing, Striking Or Tampering With Police Dogs Prohibited
5-30: Injuring Or Killing Police Dogs Prohibited
5-31: Equidae; Acts Prohibited And Stable Care
5-32: Poisoning Dogs Or Other Domestic Animals Prohibited; Exception
5-33: Transportation Of Animals
5-34: Confinement In Motor Vehicle And Animal Transport
5-35: Downed And Injured Animals
5-36: Injury Or Killing Of Protected Animals
5-37: Animal Excrement; Owner's Obligation For Disposal
5-38: Diseased Animals Prohibited
5-39: Dead Animals
5-40: Trapping Of Animals; Regulations
5-23: OWNER'S DUTIES:
Each owner shall provide for each of his animals:
   A.   Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food and water;
   B.   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
   C.   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
   D.   Humane care and treatment. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-24: CRUEL TREATMENT:
No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment, starve, overwork or
otherwise abuse any animal.
No owner may abandon any animal where it may become a public charge or may
suffer injury, hunger or exposure. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-25: AGGRAVATED CRUELTY:
No person may intentionally commit an act that causes a companion animal to
suffer serious injury or death. Aggravated cruelty does not include euthanasia
of a companion animal through recognized methods approved by the department of
agriculture. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-26: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person may sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away as a pet or a novelty
any rabbit or any baby chick, duckling or other fowl which has been dyed,
colored, or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto. Baby
chicks, ducklings or reptiles shall not be sold, offered for sale, bartered, or
given away as pets or novelties. Rabbits, ducklings, baby chicks or reptiles
shall not be awarded as prizes in any game of chance. No person shall give away
or use any live animal as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest,
game, or other competition or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or
offer such animal as an incentive to enter a business agreement whereby the
offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. No person shall be permitted to
keep animals in violation of the "Illinois humane care for animals act" or the
"Illinois animal welfare act". (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-27: ANIMALS FOR USE IN ENTERTAINMENT; PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   No person may own, capture, breed, train, or lease any animal which he
or she knows or should know is intended for use in any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between
such animal and any other animal or human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purpose of sport, wagering, or entertainment.
   B.   No person shall promote, conduct, carry on, advertise, collect money
for or in any other manner assist or aid in the presentation for purposes of
sport, wagering, or entertainment, any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals or any animal and
human, or the intentional killing of any animal.
   C.   No person shall sell or offer for sale, ship, transport, or otherwise
move, or deliver or receive any animal which he or she knows or should know has
been captured, bred, or trained, or will be used, to fight another animal or
human or be intentionally killed, for the purpose of sport, wagering, or
entertainment.
   D.   No person shall manufacture for sale, shipment, transportation or
delivery any device or equipment which that person knows or should know is
intended for use in any show, exhibition, program, or other activity featuring
or otherwise involving a fight between two (2) or more animals, or any human
and animal, or the intentional killing of any animal for purposes of sport,
wagering or entertainment.
   E.   No person shall own, possess, sell or offer for sale, ship, transport,
or otherwise move any equipment or device which such person knows or should
know is intended for use in connection with any show, exhibition, program, or
activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two (2) or more
animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any animal for
purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
   F.   No person shall make available any site, structure, or facility,
whether enclosed or not, which he or she knows or should know is intended to be
used for the purpose of conducting any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals, or any animal and
human, or the intentional killing of any animal.
   G.   No person shall attend or otherwise patronize any show, exhibition,
program, or other activity featuring or otherwise involving a fight between two
(2) or more animals, or any animal and human, or the intentional killing of any
animal for the purposes of sport, wagering or entertainment.
   H.   No person shall tie or attach or fasten any live animal to any machine
or device propelled by any power for the purpose of causing such animal to be
pursued by a dog or dogs. This subsection shall apply only when such dog is
intended to be used in a dog fight.
   I.   No person shall hold a greased pig contest. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-28: ARRESTS; POSSESSION OF DOGS, PARAPHERNALIA, IMPLEMENTS, ETC.;
VETERINARIAN'S REPORT:
   A.   Any law enforcement officer making an arrest for an offense involving
one or more dogs under section
5-27 of this chapter shall lawfully take possession of all dogs and all
paraphernalia, implements, or other property or things used or employed, or
about to be employed in the violation of any of the provisions of section
5-27 of this chapter. Such officer, after taking possession of such dogs,
paraphernalia, implements or other property or things, shall file with the
court before whom the complaint is made against any person so arrested an
affidavit stating therein the name of the person charged in such complaint, a
description of the property so taken and the time and place of the taking
thereof together with the name of the person from whom the same was taken and
name of the person who claims to own such property, if known, and that the
affiant has reason to believe and does believe, stating the ground of such
belief, that the property so taken was used or employed, or was about to be
used or employed, in such violation of section
5-27 of this chapter. He shall thereupon deliver the property so taken to the
court, which shall, by order, place the same in custody of an officer or other
proper person named and designated in such order, to be kept by him until the
conviction or final discharge of such person complained against, and shall send
a copy of such order without delay to the state's attorney of Kane County and
the department. The officer or person so named and designated in such order
shall immediately thereupon assume the custody of such property and shall
retain the same, subject to the order of the court before which such person so
complained against may be required to appear for trial. Upon the conviction of
the person so charged, all property so seized shall be adjudged by the court to
be forfeited and shall thereupon be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the
court may order. In the event of the acquittal or final discharge without
conviction of the person so charged such court shall, on demand, direct the
delivery of such property so held in custody to the owner thereof.
   B.   Any veterinarian in this county who is presented with an animal for
treatment of injuries or wounds resulting from fighting where there is a
reasonable possibility that the animal was engaged in or utilized for a
fighting event shall file a report with the department and cooperate by
furnishing the owners' names, dates and descriptions of the animal or animals
involved. Any veterinarian who in good faith makes a report, as required by
this subsection, shall have immunity from any liability, civil, criminal or
that otherwise might result by reason of such actions. For the purposes of any
proceedings, civil or criminal, the good faith of any such veterinarian shall
be presumed. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-29: TEASING, STRIKING OR TAMPERING WITH POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously taunt, torment,
tease, beat, strike, or administer or subject any desensitizing drugs,
chemicals or substance to any dog used by a law enforcement officer in the
performance of his functions or duties, or when placed in a kennel off duty; or
to interfere or meddle with any such dog used by a law enforcement department
or agency or any handler thereof in the performance of the functions or duties
of said department or agency. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-30: INJURING OR KILLING POLICE DOGS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture,
mutilate, injure, disable, poison or kill any dog used by a law enforcement
department or agency in the performance of the functions or duties of such
department or when placed in a kennel off duty. However, a police officer or
veterinarian may perform euthanasia in emergency situations when delay would
cause the dog undue suffering and pain. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-31: EQUIDAE; ACTS PROHIBITED AND STABLE CARE:
   A.   No person shall sell, offer to sell, lead, ride, transport, or drive on
any public way any equidae which, because of debility, disease, lameness or any
other cause, could not be worked in this county without violating this chapter,
unless the equidae is being sold, transported, or housed with the intent that
it will be moved in an expeditious and humane manner to an approved
slaughtering establishment. Such equidae may be conveyed to a proper place for
medical or surgical treatment, for humane keeping or euthanasia, or for
slaughter in an approved slaughtering establishment.
   B.   Every person in possession or control of any stable or place open for
public use where animals are kept, shall maintain the stable or place at all
times in a clean, sanitary condition and conform to Illinois and Kane County
fire prevention regulations. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-32: POISONING DOGS OR OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any dog or other
domestic animal. The only exception will be by written permit from the
department for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or
other animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted.
Such a written permit shall name the person or persons conducting the
poisoning, specify the products to be used, give the boundaries of the area
involved, and specify the precautionary measures to be employed to ensure the
safety of humans and other animals. Any drug used for euthanasia shall be by or
under the direction of a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-33: TRANSPORTATION OF ANIMALS:
No owner, railroad or other common carrier may, when transporting any animal,
allow that animal to be confined in any type of conveyance more than twenty
four (24) consecutive hours without being exercised as necessary for that
particular type of animal and without being properly rested, fed and watered;
except that a reasonable extension of this time limit shall be granted when a
storm or accident causes a delay. In the case of default of the owner or
consignee, the company transporting the animal shall exercise the animal, when
necessary for the particular type of animal and for the proper resting,
feeding, watering and sheltering of such animal, and shall have a lien upon the
animal until all expenses resulting therefrom have been paid. (Ord. 04-83, 2-
10-2004)
5-34: CONFINEMENT IN MOTOR VEHICLE AND ANIMAL TRANSPORT:
   A.   No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle or
enclosed trailer in such a manner that places it in a life or health
threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat
(greater than 86 degrees Fahrenheit) or cold (less than 20 degrees Fahrenheit),
without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order
to protect the health and safety of an animal, an animal control officer, law
enforcement officer, or department investigator who has probable cause to
believe that this section is being violated shall have authority to enter such
motor vehicle or trailer by any reasonable means under the circumstances after
making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person.
   B.   No person driving a motor vehicle shall transport any animal in the
back of the vehicle in a space intended for any load on the vehicle unless the
space is enclosed or has side and tail racks to a height of at least forty
eight inches (48") extending vertically from the floor, the vehicle has
installed means of preventing the animal from being discharged, or the animal
is cross tethered to the vehicle, or is protected by a secured container or
cage in a manner which will prevent the animal from being thrown, falling or
jumping from the vehicle. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-35: DOWNED AND INJURED ANIMALS:
   A.   For the purpose of this section a "downed animal" is one incapable of
walking without assistance.
   B.   No downed animal shall be sent to a stockyard, auction, or other
facility where its impaired mobility may result in suffering. An injured animal
may be sent directly to a slaughter facility.
   C.   A downed animal sent to a stockyard, auction, or other facility in
violation of this section shall be humanely euthanized, the disposition of such
animal shall be the responsibility of the owner, and the owner shall be liable
for any expense incurred. If an animal becomes downed in transit it shall be
the responsibility of the carrier.
   D.   A downed animal shall not be transported unless individually
segregated.
   E.   In unincorporated areas of Kane County, any animal which is on any
public way or public place and which appears to be injured or severely diseased
and for which care is not being provided on the scene by the owner or any
injured or severely diseased animal that has strayed unto private property
outside of a structure shall be removed, if possible, by the Kane County animal
control and be transported to the nearest veterinarian or veterinary clinic
willing to accept such animal. If immediate removal shall not appear practical
or possible or if the removed animal is in critical condition, such animal
shall be deprived of life by the most humane method available on the scene
unless the owner shall come forward beforehand and assume responsibility for
immediate removal and care.
   F.   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal
shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible, or shall
immediately report such injury to the animal owner, if known, or to the
appropriate law enforcement agency. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-36: INJURY OR KILLING OF PROTECTED ANIMALS:
No person shall injure or kill, or attempt to injure or kill or disturb the
nest of any bird or other animal that is protected by federal or state law.
(Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-37: ANIMAL EXCREMENT; OWNER'S OBLIGATION FOR DISPOSAL:
No person shall allow cat or dog feces to accumulate in any yard, pen, or
premises in or upon which a cat or dog shall be confined or kept so that it
becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or a health hazard to the
residing cat or dog. No person shall fail to remove feces deposited by his cat
or dog, except guide dogs, upon the public ways or within the public places of
the county or upon the premises of any person other than the owner without the
person's consent. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-38: DISEASED ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall own any animal which is known to be infected with any disease
transmissible to other animals or man, including severe parasitism, unless such
animal shall be confined in such a manner as not to expose other animals or
man. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-39: DEAD ANIMALS:
Any person having a dead animal within his or her possession or control or upon
any premises owned or occupied by such person without the proper permit shall
dispose of the dead animal in compliance with the Illinois dead animal disposal
act. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-40: TRAPPING OF ANIMALS; REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, set, use, or maintain a leghold
or body gripping trap or one of similar construction to capture a dog, cat, any
livestock or other domestic animal.
It shall be unlawful to set these above named types of traps in any of the
following areas:
   A.   Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any dedicated right of way.
   B.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school, public park, library,
museum or public swimming pool.
   C.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential dwelling unless the
trap(s) are set in an area meeting the following conditions:
      1.   The area is enclosed by a fence or other barrier in a sturdy
condition and at least three feet (3') in height.
      2.   The area is posted with warning signs on the fence or barrier
stating: "Warning - Traps In Use" in lettering at least one inch (1") high.
Such signs shall be visible at a distance of fifty feet (50') and shall be
maintained in readable condition.
      3.   Any trap(s) set shall be marked with a red, yellow or orange warning
flag or marker which extends at least one foot (1') above surrounding
vegetation, water or other surrounding ground debris.
All incidents of a human, a dog, cat, any livestock or other domestic animal
being trapped, or injured by one of the aforementioned traps shall be reported
to the Kane County animal control department. All such animals shall be
released and returned to their owners, if known, or brought to the Kane County
animal control department.
The placing, setting, using or maintaining of leghold or body gripping traps
contrary to the above provisions shall only be permitted in writing by the
administrator after he has made the determination that the use of such traps is
necessary to the health and safety of the county's inhabitants and/or domestic
animals or to prevent the spread of rabies. Such written approval shall
designate the location where the trap(s) may be set, the time period during
which the trap(s) will be at the location and the type(s) of trap(s) to be
used. In no case shall the trap(s) remain in one location for more than seven
(7) days without the further approval from the administrator. The trap(s) shall
not be left unattended for periods of time of longer than twenty four (24)
hours. Each such trap shall have a tag attached to it stating the name, address
and phone number of the owner of the trap.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of traps designed to kill pests
or vermin such as mice, rats, gophers or moles when used for their intended
purpose. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE IX. ADMINISTRATIVE RULES
SECTION:
5-41: Administration Of Chapter; Rules And Regulations
5-42: Qualifications For Approved Humane Investigators; Listing Of
Investigators
5-43: Entry Upon Premises For Investigation Of Complaints; Exemption;
Assistance Of State's Attorneys And Law Enforcement Officials
5-44: Notification To Violator; Impoundment Upon Refusal Or Failure To Take
Corrective Action
5-45: Impounding Animals; Notice Of Impoundment; Lien For Expense; Sale Or
Disposition Of Animal
5-46: Normal Husbandry Practices; Construction With Other Acts
5-41: ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The department shall administer this chapter and shall promulgate such rules
and regulations as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
Such rules and regulations are subject to the approval of the Kane County
board.
The administrator may, in formulating rules and regulations pursuant to this
chapter, seek the advice and recommendations of humane societies in this state.
(Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-42: QUALIFICATIONS FOR APPROVED HUMANE INVESTIGATORS; LISTING OF
INVESTIGATORS:
   A.   Humane Investigators; Qualifications: The department shall, by rule or
regulation, establish reasonable qualifications for approved humane
investigators and shall maintain a current listing of all approved humane
investigators which shall be available for public inspection. These
qualifications shall include, but need not be limited to, a knowledge of the
provisions of this chapter and its rules and regulations and expertise in the
investigation of complaints relating to the care and treatment of animals.
Persons designated as humane investigators shall cooperate, when requested, in
completing routine investigations and filing reports of violations of this
chapter received by the department.
Employees of the department may be assigned as department investigators. (Ord.
04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-43: ENTRY UPON PREMISES FOR INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; EXEMPTION;
ASSISTANCE OF STATE'S ATTORNEYS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of this chapter, a
department investigator, any law enforcement official, or an approved humane
investigator may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations of the
complaint, enter during normal business hours upon any premises where the
animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept, provided such
entry shall not be made into any building which is a person's residence, except
by search warrant or court order. Institutions operating under federal license
to conduct laboratory experimentation utilizing animals for research or medical
purposes are, however, exempt from the provisions of this section. The Kane
County state's attorneys and law enforcement officials shall provide such
assistance as may be required in the conduct of such investigations. Any such
investigation requiring legal procedures shall be immediately reported to the
department of agriculture. No employee or representative of the department
shall enter a livestock management facility unless sanitized footwear is used,
or unless the owner or operator of the facility waives this requirement. The
employee or representative must also use any other reasonable disease
prevention procedures or equipment provided by the owner or operator of the
facility. The animal control administrator and animal control wardens appointed
under this chapter shall be authorized to make investigations complying with
this section for alleged violations of sections 5-24 and 5-25 of this chapter
pertaining to small companion animals. If impoundments are made by wardens,
public pounds operated by or contracted by Kane County shall be utilized. The
animals impounded shall remain under the jurisdiction of the animal control
administrator and be held in an animal pound licensed under the animal welfare
act, state of Illinois. All litigation, appeal, and disposition of the animals
so held will remain with Kane County. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-44: NOTIFICATION TO VIOLATOR; IMPOUNDMENT UPON REFUSAL OR FAILURE TO TAKE
CORRECTIVE ACTION:
   A.   If an investigation discloses that a violation of this chapter has been
committed, the approved humane investigator shall furnish the violator, if
known, with a notice of violation, and state what action is necessary to come
into compliance with this chapter and that a maximum of forty eight (48) hours
may be granted in which to take corrective action.
   B.   If the violator fails or refuses to take corrective action necessary
for compliance or if the violator is still unknown after an attempt to identify
ownership, the humane investigator shall contact the Illinois department of
agriculture and request authorization to impound the animal or animals. The
Illinois department of agriculture may authorize impoundment if a review of
facts gathered by the humane investigator indicates a violation of section 5-24
or 5-25 of this chapter has occurred and the violator, if known, has failed or
refused to take corrective action necessary for compliance.
This section shall not apply to violations committed under section 5-27 of this
chapter. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-45: IMPOUNDING ANIMALS; NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; LIEN FOR EXPENSE; SALE OR
DISPOSITION OF ANIMAL:
   A.   When an approved humane investigator, a department investigator or a
veterinarian finds that a violation of this chapter has rendered an animal in
such a condition that no remedy or corrective action by the owner is possible
or the violator fails or refuses to take corrective action necessary for
compliance with this chapter, the department may impound the animal. The animal
shall be impounded in a facility which will provide the elements of good care
as set forth in section
5-23 of this chapter, where such animals shall be examined by a licensed
veterinarian.
   B.   A notice of impoundment shall be given by the investigator to the
violator, if known, in person or sent by certified or registered mail. A copy
of the notice shall be retained by the investigator and a copy forwarded
immediately to the Illinois department of agriculture. The notice of
impoundment shall include the following:
      1.   A number assigned by the Illinois department of agriculture which
will also be given to the impounding facility accepting the responsibility of
the animal or animals.
      2.   Listing of deficiencies noted.
      3.   An accurate description of the animal or animals involved.
      4.   Date on which the animal or animals were impounded.
      5.   Signature of the investigator.
      6.   A statement that: "The violator may request a hearing to appeal the
impoundment. A person desiring a hearing shall contact the Illinois Department
of Agriculture within 7 days from the date of impoundment" and the department
of agriculture will hold an administrative hearing within seven (7) days after
receiving a request to appeal the impoundment. If the hearing cannot be held
prior to the expiration of the seven (7) day impoundment period, the department
of agriculture shall notify the impounding facility that it cannot sell, offer
for adoption or dispose of the animal or animals until a final decision is
rendered and all of the appeal processes have expired.
If a hearing is requested by any owner of impounded animals, the hearing
officer shall have the authority after hearing the testimony of all affected
parties, to render a decision as to the disposition of the impounded animals.
This decision by the hearing officer shall have no effect on the criminal
charges that may be filed with the appropriate authorities.
Any expense incurred in such impoundment becomes a lien on the animal impounded
and must be discharged before the animal is released from the facility. When
the animal is not claimed by its owner and all impoundment costs satisfied
within seven (7) days, it may be sold at public or private sale for fair
consideration to a person capable of providing care consistent with this
chapter, with the proceeds of that sale applied first to discharge the lien and
any balance to be paid over to the owner. If no purchaser is found, the animal
may be offered for adoption or disposed of in a manner not inconsistent with
this or any other ordinance. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-46: NORMAL HUSBANDRY PRACTICES; CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER ACTS:
Nothing in this chapter affects normal, good husbandry practices utilized by
any person in the production of food, companion or work animals, or in the
extermination of undesirable pests. In case of any alleged conflict between
this chapter, or regulations adopted hereunder, and the "wildlife code of
Illinois" or "an act to define and require the use of humane methods in the
handling, preparation for slaughter, and slaughter of livestock for meat or
meat products to be offered for sale", approved July 26, 1967, as amended, the
provisions of those acts shall prevail. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE X. MUNICIPAL POWERS
SECTION:
5-47: Powers Of Municipalities And Other Political Subdivisions To Regulate
Dogs And Other Animals
5-47: POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES AND OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS TO REGULATE
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to limit in any manner the power of any
municipality or other political subdivision to prohibit animals from running at
large, nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to, in any manner, limit
the power of any municipality or other political subdivision to further control
and regulate dogs, cats or other animals in such municipality or other
political subdivision including a requirement of inoculation against rabies.
(Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE XI. INVALID RULE OR REGULATION
SECTION:
5-48: Effect Of Invalid Section, Part Of Section, Rule Or Regulation
5-49: Violations; Punishment
5-49-1: Fees
5-50: Failure, Refusal Or Neglect Of Officer To Carry Out Act; Punishment
5-48: EFFECT OF INVALID SECTION, PART OF SECTION, RULE OR REGULATION:
The invalidity of any section or parts of any section of this chapter, or any
rule or regulation pursuant thereto shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of this chapter, or any rule or regulation. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
5-49: VIOLATIONS; PUNISHMENT:
   A.   Any person violating or aiding in or abetting the violation of any
provision of this chapter, or counterfeiting or forging any certificate,
permit, or tag, or making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter
prescribed by this chapter, or resisting, obstructing, or impeding the
administrator or any authorized officer in enforcing this chapter, or refusing
to produce for inoculation any dog or cat in his possession, or who removes a
tag from a dog or cat for purposes of destroying or concealing its identity, is
guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be fined not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each day a person fails to comply constitutes a separate offense. The Kane
County state's attorney to whom the administrator reports any violation of this
chapter shall cause appropriate proceedings to be instituted in the proper
courts without delay and to be prosecuted in the manner provided by law.
   B.   If the owner of a dog or other animal subject to enclosure:
      1.   Fails to maintain or keep the dog or other animal in an enclosure or
fails to spay, neuter and/or microchip the dog or other animal; and
      2.   The dog or other animal inflicts great bodily harm, permanent
disfigurement, permanent physical disability upon any other person or causes
the death of another person; and
      3.   The attack is unprovoked in a place where such person is peaceably
conducting himself and where such person may lawfully be; the owner shall be
guilty of an ordinance offense. The penalty provided in this section shall be
in addition to any other criminal or civil sanction provided by law. (Ord. 04-
83, 2-10-2004; Ord. 06-155, § 1, 4-11-2006)
5-49-1: FEES:
   A.   Effective May 1, 2013, the fees to municipalities contracting for
animal control services with the county shall be as follows:
Pick up per animal                                                 $ 25.00
Pick up charge group of small animals (excluding ferrets, rabbits, 30.00
exotic birds and reptiles) eviction only
Boarding per animal/per day                                        10.00
Maximum charge $70.00
Vaccination for distemper per animal                               30.00
Euthanasia per dog/cat/animal under 30 pounds                      50.00
Euthanasia per dog/cat/animal over 30 pounds                       75.00
Rabies observation (includes euthanasia fee) under 30 pounds       150.00
Rabies observation (includes euthanasia fee) over 30 pounds        175.00
Specimen pick up                                                   30.00
Specimen prep                                                      50.00
 
No fees shall be charged if the animal is reclaimed by its owner and applicable
fees paid.
   B.   Effective May 14, 2024, the fees to individual owners for animal
control services with the county shall be as follows:
Rabies vaccine                                         $15.00
Boarding charges per day (non-neutered)                $50.00
Boarding charges per day (neutered)                    $25.00
After-hours pick up fee                                $50.00
(Weekdays 8pm-6:59am, weekends/holidays anytime) (this fee is in addition to
pick-up and boarding fee)
Owner surrender fee                                    $50.00
Stray animal pick up, 3rd and subsequent offense       $50.00
Pick up stray or sick or injured animal (non-neutered) $150.00
Pick up stray or sick or injured animal (neutered)     $75.00
Microchip fee, where applicable                        $15.00
 
The animal control administrator shall rebate fifty percent (50%) of the pick
up and boarding charges if the animal is neutered within forty five (45) days
of being reclaimed and evidence provided to the animal control department.
   C.   If in the opinion of the county veterinarian, neutering of an animal is
not appropriate for any reason, the additional fee imposed by subsection B of
this section for nonneutered animals shall not be charged.
   D.   The administrator shall by regulation prescribe circumstances where a
waiver or reduction of fees is appropriate based on financial hardship.
   E.   Any person or agency claiming an animal for adoption purposes shall not
be required to pay any pick up or boarding fees incurred prior to the claim.
(Ord. 06-154 §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 4-11-2006; Ord. 07-254, § 1, 7-10-2007; Ord. 13-
116, 5-14-2013; Ord. 24-193, 5-14-2024)
5-50: FAILURE, REFUSAL OR NEGLECT OF OFFICER TO CARRY OUT ACT; PUNISHMENT:
Any officer failing, refusing, or neglecting to carry out the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 04-83, 2-10-2004)
ARTICLE XII. ANIMAL RESEARCH AND EXPERIMENTATION
SECTION:
5-51: Definition
5-52: Personnel Qualification For Licensing
5-51: DEFINITION:
RESEARCH FACILITY: Any school (except an elementary or secondary school),
institution, organization or person that uses or intends to use live animals in
research, tests, or experiments, and that: a) purchases or transports live
animals in commerce, or b) receives funds under a grant, award, loan, or
instrumentality of the United States for the purpose of carrying out research,
tests, or experiments; provided, that the Kane County animal control director
may exempt any such school, institution, organization, or persons that does not
use or intend to use live dogs and cats, except those schools, institutions,
organizations or persons, which use substantial numbers (as determined by the
Kane County animal control director) of live animals the principal function of
which schools, institutions, organizations, or persons, is biomedical research
or testing, when in the judgment of the Kane County animal control director,
any such exemption does not violate the purpose of this article. (Ord. 04-83,
2-10-2004)
5-52: PERSONNEL QUALIFICATION FOR LICENSING:
   A.   It shall be the responsibility of the research facility to ensure that
all scientists, research technicians, animal technicians and other personnel
involved in animal care, treatment, and use are qualified to perform their
duties. This responsibility shall be fulfilled in part through the provision of
training and instruction to those personnel.
   B.   Training and instruction shall be made available, and the
qualifications of personnel reviewed, with sufficient frequency to fulfill the
research facility's responsibility under this article.
   C.   Training and instruction of personnel must include guidance in at least
one of the following areas:
      1.   Humane methods of animal maintenance and experimentation including:
         a.   The basic needs of each species of animal;
         b.   Proper handling and care for the various species of animals used
by facility;
         c.   Proper preprocedural and postprocedural care of animals;
         d.   Aseptic surgical methods and procedures.
      2.   The concept, availability, and use of research or testing methods
that limit the use of animals or minimize animal distress.
      3.   Proper use of anesthetics, analgesics, and tranquilizers for any
species of animals used by the facility.
      4.   Methods whereby deficiencies in animal care and treatment are
reported, including deficiencies in animal care and treatment reported by any
employee of the facility. No facility employee or laboratory personnel shall be
discriminated or be subject to any reprisal for reporting any violations of any
regulation or standards under this article.
      5.   Utilization of services (i.e., National Agricultural Library,
National Library Of Medicine) available to provide information:
         a.   On appropriate methods of animal care and use;
         b.   On alternatives to the use of live animals in research;
         c.   That could prevent unintended and unnecessary duplication of
research involving animals;
         d.   Regarding the intent and requirements of this article. (Ord. 04-
83, 2-10-2004)
CHAPTER 6
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
Division 1. Administration
6-1: Adoption Of Administrative Procedures
6-2: Amendments To Administrative Procedures
Division 2. One- And Two-Family Residences And Accessory Structures
6-3: Adoption Of Regulations For One- And Two-Family Residences And Accessory
Structures
6-4: Amendments To Residential Code
Division 3. All Other New Construction
6-5: Adoption Of All Other New Construction Codes
6-6: Amendments To The Building Code
Division 4. Existing Buildings
6-7: Adoption Of Existing Building Regulations
6-8: Amendments To Existing Building Code
Division 5. Residential Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs
6-9: Adoption Of Swimming Pool And Spa Code, 2021 International Residential
Code Section 305
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATION
6-1: ADOPTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
Chapter 1, Administration, of the 2021 International Building Code, as
published by the International Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600,
Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401. (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013;
amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
6-2: AMENDMENTS TO ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
The following amendments to Chapter 1 of the 2021 International Building Code
shall apply:
Section 101 General
101.1   Insert "County of Kane" as the name of the jurisdiction.
101.4.3 Plumbing - Delete
101.4.4 Property Maintenance - Delete
101.4.5 Fire Prevention - Delete
Insert the following new sub-section:
101.5 Affect
Nothing in this ordinance or in the Kane County Building Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed by this
ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
Section 103 Department of Building Safety
103.1" Insert "The Building & Community Services Division of the Kane County
Development Department shall act as the Department of Building Safety."
Section 105 Permits
105.2   Work exempt from permit.
Building:
   1.   Delete "tool and storage sheds" and "similar uses".
   2.   Delete entire text and insert "Fences of any height that can be seen
through."
105.5   Expiration.
Insert the following at the end of the text:
“After two (2) years, if the work is not completed, the permit will expire and
a new permit will be required for all remaining work. Permits for demolition
shall expire 90 days after day of issuance. Permits for swimming pools,
repairs, minor alterations, damage assessment, decks, accessory structures,
electric service, privacy fences, temporary structures, tower and control
buildings, co-locations of antennas, and establishment of use permits shall
expire 180 days after the date of issuance. If the work is not completed, an
extension or a new permit will be required for all remaining work.”
Insert the following new sub-section:
105.8 Conformance with other county regulations and state laws.
No building permit shall be issued for a building to be constructed on any lot,
piece, parcel or tract of land that does not conform with provisions of all
laws compiled in Chapter 109 of the Illinois Revised Statutes, in force from
time to time, and the subdivision regulations and other applicable ordinances
in force from time to time in this county and also the county's zoning
ordinance, as amended from time to time. No permit shall be issued unless and
until the road base, for required roads in any subdivision, has been installed,
approved and accepted by the proper authority. No permit shall be issued for
any public building or facility, used by the public, unless plans and
specifications for such building, or facility, meet the standards promulgated
pursuant to the provision of the Illinois Accessibility Act October 23, 2018,
as amended from time to time.
Insert the following new sub-section:
“105.9 Construction waste and site materials. Construction waste and site
materials, of any type, will be contained on the property from which it was
generated. Waste and site materials will be removed in a manner, which prevents
injury or damage to persons, adjoining properties and public right-of-ways. All
waste and site materials will be disposed of properly per local, state and
federal guidelines.”
Section 107 Submittal Documents
Insert the following new sub-section to 107.1 Submittal Documents:
“107.2.9 Component parts of prefabricated structures.
In order to permit the use of component parts in a structure erected on a site
in the county, which component parts are manufactured or fabricated at an
offsite location in such a manner as to comply fully with requirements of this
article, but which arrive at the site of erection having inside wall covering
already installed and, thus, rendering inspection thereof impossible or
difficult, then, in such cases the inspection required by this article at the
time after the building is framed, roofed, and rough wiring and plumbing
installed, but before any inside wall is installed, will be waived if the
following conditions are first satisfied:
   (1)   That evidence satisfactory to the building officer shall be submitted
to the building officer that the component part or parts are manufactured or
fabricated by a manufacturer in a uniform manner and production control
procedures are maintained and the records thereof are kept; copies of said
records are made available to the building officer.
   (2)   That the plans and specifications for the component parts prepared in
such detail as to evidence compliance with the requirements of this article are
submitted to the building officer for approval if found to be in compliance
with the requirements of this article.
   (3)   That said plans and specifications shall have contained on each page
thereof the certificate of an Illinois registered architect or structural
engineer attesting that said plans and specifications provide for full
compliance with the construction requirements of this article.
   (4)   That there be furnished to the building officer prior to the use of
the prefabricated component part at the site of erection a certificate of the
manufacturer attesting to the fact that said part was constructed or fabricated
in strict accordance to the applicable plans and specifications, which plans
and specifications shall be specifically identified.
   (5)   That the builder or manufacturer furnish to the building officer and/
or his representative, transportation to and from the place of manufacture of
said building, on the day of construction of said building, so said officer can
inspect fully the building to be erected in the county.
   (6)   See Appendix E “Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings,” 2021
International Residential Code for additions, alterations or repairs to
existing manufactured homes and building service equipment.”
Section 110 Inspections
Section 110.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection.
Insert the following at the end of the text:
“An approved solid base for the proposed drive must be installed from the
appropriate public right-of-way to within 25 feet of the structure prior to
scheduling a footing and foundation inspection to provide safe and adequate
access to the structure for building inspectors and emergency vehicles.”
Section 113 Board of Appeals
Delete Section 113 Board of Appeals and insert the following:
Section 113 Appeals and disputes
113.1   Appeals to the County Development Committee
   113.1.1 An appeal may be taken to the Development Committee of the County
Board by any person aggrieved, from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the building officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
twenty (20) days of the date of the action from which it is taken by filing
with the building officer and with the Development Committee a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Development Committee shall
thereupon set a reasonable date, time, and place certain for a hearing of said
appeal, and shall cause written notice thereof to be mailed to the appealing
party, or his attorney, and to the building officer.
   113.1.2 The Development Committee may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partially, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as
in its opinion ought to be done or made in the premises, and to that shall have
all the powers vested in the building officer by this article.
   113.1.3 The concurring vote of five (5) members of the Development Committee
shall be necessary to reverse, in whole or part, or to modify, any orders,
requirements, decisions or determinations of the building officer. The
Development Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings hereunder, showing
the vote of each member upon every question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions.
   113.1.4   All decisions of the Development Committee hereunder shall be
reduced to writing, filed with the clerk of the county, and a copy thereof
mailed to the appealing party and to the building officer.
113.2   Disputes
Where a dispute arises regarding a code interpretation or engineering opinion
furnished by the owner of property involved in any matter covered by this
article, the county may engage the services of a qualified registered architect
or engineer. The owner of the property involved shall reimburse the county for
the reasonable customary cost of such services. Where a permit is issued, such
engineering expense shall be added to the permit fee. Where no permit is
issued, such expense shall be paid by the owner of the property or may be
collected by civil action against the owner.
Chapter 2 Definitions
Insert the following new definition:
“Useable Space. Any space in or attached to a building including habitable
spaces, living spaces, occupiable spaces and all other areas including storage
spaces, utility spaces, mechanical spaces, unfinished basements, open porches,
decks, and breezeways.” (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-
475, 11-9-2021)
DIVISION 2. ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCES AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
6-3: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCES AND ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES:
2021 International Residential Code
Appendix AA   Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping
Appendix AB   Sizing of Venting Systems
Appendix AC   Exit Terminals of Venting Systems
Appendix AD   Recommended Procedures for Safety Inspection of an Existing
Appliance Installation
Appendix AE   Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings
Appendix AF   Radon Control Measures (not mandatory)
Appendix AJ      Existing Buildings and Structures
(Appendix I, & K, L, and M, O, P are not adopted)
2021 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) Chapter 42 and Section
305 Barrier Requirements
2020 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269. (Ord.
12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
6-4: AMENDMENTS TO RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The following amendments to the 2021 International Residential Code shall
apply:
Chapter 1 Administration
The same amendments to Chapter 1 Administration of the 2021 International
Building Code listed in Division 1 of this ordinance that pertain to text
duplicated in this chapter do likewise apply.
In addition, the following non-duplicated text is amended as follows:
Section R105 Permits
   R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
      Building:
      Delete “1. One-story detached structures, providing the floor area does
not exceed 200 square feet.”
Chapter 2 Definitions
Townhouse
Delete definition for townhouse and insert the following:
“Townhouse. A single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two (2) up
to six (6) attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof
and with open space on at least two sides. Dwelling units where more than six
(6) units are attached shall be governed by the 2021 International Building
Code.”
Insert the following new definition:
“Useable Space. Any space in or attached to a building including habitable
spaces, living spaces, occupiable spaces and all other areas including storage
spaces, utility spaces, mechanical spaces, unfinished basements, open porches,
decks, and breezeways.”
Chapter 3 Building Planning
Section R301 Design Criteria
   R301.2(1) Insert:
 
Ground    Wind               Subject To Damage From                     Winter
Snow Load        Seismic                 Frost Line                     Design
In Pounds Wind   Design      Weatheringa Depth In   Termitec   Decayd   Tempf
Per Sq.   Speed  Categoryf,g             Inchesb                        (F Deg)
Ft.
          90 mph
30 lbs/sf Topo   B           Severe      42"        Moderate - Slight - -5°
          effect                                    heavy      moderate
          No
 
 
                                Air
Ice Shield Flood Hazardh        Freezing Mean Annual Temp.
                                Index
Yes        See local ordinanc e 2000     48.5°
 
   R301.2.4 Floodplain Construction
   Delete and insert the following:
   “For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas as established on local
floodway rate maps, locally adopted floodplain ordinances shall apply.”
Section R302 Fire Resistant Construction
   Section R302.2 Townhouses
   Delete Section R302.2 Townhouses and the corresponding exception and insert
the following:
   “R302.2 Townhouses
   Each townhouse, as defined in this code, shall be constructed as a separate
single-family dwelling and shall be separated by a minimum of a two (2) hour
rated solid masonry wall between living units, which shall extend vertically
from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing and horizontally the
full length of the common wall. The number of single family dwelling units
attached in this manner shall not exceed six (6).”
   R302.2.6 Structural independence.
   Delete Exceptions 2.and 5.
   Delete Section R302.3 Two-family dwellings and the corresponding exception
and sub-section.
Section R310 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings
   R310.1 Emergency escape and rescue required.
   Delete the first sentence and insert the following:
   “Basements and every sleeping room shall have at least one openable
emergency escape and rescue opening.”
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
   R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. Change "shall" to "may".
   R313.2 One- and Two-family dwellings automatic fire systems. Change "shall"
to "may".
Section R314 Smoke Alarms
   R314.1 Smoke detection and notification.
   R314.3 Location
   Delete 2. and insert the following:
   “2. Outside each separate sleeping area within 15 feet of every room used
for sleeping purposes per 425 ILCS 60, Smoke Detector Act.”
Chapter 4 Foundations
Section 401 General
   Delete Section R401.1 and insert the following:
   “R401.1   The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and
construction of the foundation and foundation spaces of all buildings. Wood
foundations shall not be allowed.”
   Section R402 Materials
   Delete the following section and corresponding sub-sections:
   Section R402.1 Wood foundations
   Section R403 Footings
   Delete Section R403.1.1 Minimum size and insert the following:
   “R403.1.1 Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings shall be as set
forth in Table R403.1 and Figure R403.1(1). The footing width, W, shall be
based on the load bearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1.
Spread footings width shall be twice the width of the foundation wall and not
less than 16 inches. Spread footing Thickness (depth) shall be equal to the
width of the foundation wall and not less than 8 inches. Footing Projections,
P, shall be ½ the width of the foundation wall, not less than 2 inches and
shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The minimum size for deck piers
shall be 12 inches in diameter.”
   Insert the following new sub-section:
   “R403.1.4.2 Exterior footings and foundation systems for detached accessory
structures and non-conditioned attached useable spaces.
   1.   Detached single story accessory structures shall be allowed to be
supported on a turned down slab per R403.1.3.3. or on piers designed and sealed
by an Illinois licensed architect or structural engineer.
   2.   Non-conditioned attached useable space easily capable of converting to
conditioned space shall have continuous footings per R403.1.4.1.
      a.   Determination of whether a useable space is easily capable of
converting to conditioned usable space shall be per the Building Officials. If
any of the following are provided, the non-conditioned useable space may be
construed as easily capable of converting to conditioned useable space.
      i)   Exterior insulated walls
      ii)   Insulated roofs
      iii)   Permanently installed weatherproof windows and/or doors
      iv)   Electrical fixtures or outlets consistent with habitable space or
living space
      v)   Heating or air conditioning appliances or provisions for same
      vi)   Plumbing fixtures or provisions for same
   3.   Non-conditioned attached usable space not easily capable of converting
to conditioned useable space may be supported on pier foundation systems that
extend to frost depth.
      a.   Non-conditioned structures built on pier systems shall not be
converted to attached conditioned useable space without addressing the lack of
a continuous footing to the satisfaction of the Building Official.
   Delete the following section and corresponding sub-sections:
   Section R403.2 Footings for wood foundations
   Section R404 Foundation Walls
   Delete the following section and corresponding sub-sections:
   Section R404.2 Wood foundations walls
   Section R405 Foundation Drainage
   Delete the following section and corresponding sub-sections:
   Section 405.2 Wood foundation drainage
   Section R408 Under-Floor Space
   Delete Section R408.4 Access and insert the following:
   “R408.4 Access. Access shall be provided to all under-floor spaces. Access
openings through the floor shall be a minimum 24 inches by 30 inches. Openings
through a perimeter wall shall be a minimum of 24 inches by 30 inches. When any
portion of the through wall access is below grade, an areaway of not less than
24 inches by 30 inches shall be provided. The bottom of the areaway shall be
below the threshold of the access opening. Through wall access openings shall
not be located under a door. See M1408.4 for access requirements where
mechanical equipment is located under floors."
   Delete Sections R408.5 and R408.6 and insert the following:
   “R408.5 Finished grade. Exposed soil shall not be allowed. Four (4) inches
of clean granular stone fill or two (2) inches of concrete shall be required
over an approved continuous membrane of 6-mil polyethylene or equivalent
material. Any joints will be lapped six (6) inches minimum and sealed with an
approved material. The distance between the top of the granular fill or
concrete, to the bottom of the floor joist above will be a minimum of 24 inches
and a maximum 48 inches.”
   Delete Section R408.7 Flood resistance and insert the following:
   “R408.6 Flood resistance. Flood resistance construction shall meet the
requirements of applicable state and local ordinances.”
Chapter 5 Floors
Delete Section R502.7.1 Bridging and insert the following:
"R502.7.1 Bridging. Joists shall be supported laterally by solid blocking,
diagonal bridging (wood or metal) at intervals not exceeding eight (8) feet.
The Building Official may approve alternate methods of bridging."
Section R504 Pressure Preservative Treated-wood Floors (on ground)
Delete the above section and corresponding sub-sections.
Section R506 Concrete Floors (on ground)
Insert the following new sub-section:
“R506.2.1.1   Back-fill under concrete floors in attached garages.
The sub-base for poured concrete garage floors shall be undisturbed inorganic
soil.
   a.   Fill materials brought from off site shall be clean, graded sand,
crushed stone or gravel.
   b.   When site soil is used as fill, it shall be appropriately compacted.
The slab shall be doweled into the foundation wall as follows. Dowels (#4)
shall be 3'-4" long, shall be doweled into foundation wall a minimum of 4", and
shall be spaced at 24" on center; on all walls that do not provide 4" of
bearing for slab.”
Part VII Plumbing
Delete the following chapters:
   Chapter 25 Plumbing Administration
   Chapter 26 General Plumbing Requirements
   Chapter 27 Plumbing Fixtures
   Chapter 28 Water heaters
   Chapter 29 Water Supply and Distribution
   Chapter 30 Sanitary Drainage
   Chapter 31 Vents
   Chapter 32 Traps
Insert the following text:
“The design and installation of all plumbing shall be in accordance to the
Illinois Plumbing Code and all other applicable federal, state and local
ordinances.” (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-
2021)
DIVISION 3. ALL OTHER NEW CONSTRUCTION
6-5: ADOPTION OF ALL OTHER NEW CONSTRUCTION CODES:
2021 International Building Code
2021 International Mechanical Code
2018 International Energy Conservation Code as published by the International
Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401
2020 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269. (Ord.
12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
6-6: AMENDMENTS TO THE BUILDING CODE:
The following amendments to the 2021 International Building Code shall apply:
Chapter 1 Administration
Amendments to Chapter 1 Administration of the 2021 International Building Code
are listed in Division 1 of this ordinance. Amendments that pertain to text
duplicated in this chapter of the 2021 International Mechanical Code, 2020
International Electrical Code, and the 2018 International Energy Conservation
Code do likewise apply.
Chapter 11 Accessibility
In addition to Chapter 11 Accessibility, the following shall apply:
“The design and installation of all accessibility features shall be in
accordance to the Illinois Accessibility Code and the Department of Housing and
Urban Development Fair Housing Act Design and Construction requirements,
Section 3,(24 CFR 100.205), 4 and 5 (Guidelines).”
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
Delete Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems and insert the following text:
“The design and installation of all plumbing shall be in accordance to the
Illinois Plumbing Code and all other applicable federal, state and local
ordinances.” (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-
2021)
DIVISION 4. EXISTING BUILDINGS
6-7: ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING REGULATIONS:
2021 International Existing Building Code
2021 International Mechanical Code as published by the International Code
Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401
2018 International Energy Conservation Code as published by the International
Code Council, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401
2020 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., One Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts, 02269. (Ord.
12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
6-8: AMENDMENTS TO EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
The following amendments to the 2021 International Existing Building Code shall
apply:
Chapter 1 Administration
Amendments to Chapter 1 Administration of the 2021 International Building Code
are listed in Division 1 of this ordinance. Amendments that pertain to text
duplicated in this chapter of the 2021 International Existing Building Code,
2021 International Mechanical Code, and the 2018 International Energy
Conservation Code do likewise apply. (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013;
amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
DIVISION 5. RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
6-9: ADOPTION OF SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE, 2021 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL
CODE SECTION 305:
Chapter 42   Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2021 International Residential Code
Section 305 - Barrier Requirements as published by the International Code
Council,
5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600, Falls Church, Virginia, 22041-3401 (Ord. 12-366,
12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
ARTICLE II. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
6-10: Definition
6-10: DEFINITION:
As used in this article, the term "nonconforming building or structure" means
an existing building or structure or part or appurtenance thereof not in
conformance with the provisions of the county's zoning ordinance, as amended.
Repair work on a nonconforming building or structure requires a written
application and permit. Work shall be limited to necessary repairs only unless
the building or part thereof is made to conform in whole or part with the
requirements of the county's zoning ordinance, as amended. Altering or
enlarging of the same shall be done in conformance with Article I. (Ord. 12-
366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
ARTICLE III. EXEMPTIONS
SECTION:
6-11: Agricultural Exempt Buildings
6-11: AGRICULTURAL EXEMPT BUILDINGS:
Exempt from the provisions of Article I are buildings and structures used for
agricultural purposes on land used for agriculture, as defined in the county's
zoning ordinance, as amended. To be considered exempt, such building or
structure shall be located on land where the raising of crops or animals is the
principal occupation of owners, residents or users of said property, and be
accessory to the cultivation of crop acreage, the raising of animals, or other
agricultural operations as defined in the county's zoning ordinance. Buildings
and structures used wholly or partially for residential purposes shall not be
considered as agriculturally exempt from the provisions of Article I.
All structures proposed to be constructed or enlarged under the above exemption
must first be approved for conformance to the county's zoning ordinance, as
amended, in terms of zoning classification, setback, and proposed use of the
property and structure. Application for approval must be made on the Building
Permit Application form and be accompanied by an agricultural exemption
affidavit, three copies of a site plan showing the location of the proposed
structure(s), and a building floor plan or diagram indicating the use(s) of
interior rooms. (Ord. 12-366, 12-11-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-
9-2021)
ARTICLE IV. FEES
SECTION:
6-12: Fee Schedule
6-12: FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fee schedule shall be applicable to this chapter:
   A.   Residential Construction (Not Over 2 Single-Family Dwelling Units):
      1.   New construction, including wiring, plumbing and water supply:
         a.   Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per one hundred (100) square feet,
or portion thereof, of overall area of each floor aboveground, and basement
area, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) minimum fee;
         b.   Thirty dollars ($30.00) per one hundred (100) square feet, or
portion thereof, of overall crawl space, three hundred ($300.00) minimum fee.
      2.   For additions, incidental or accessory buildings and/or structures
including wiring and plumbing:
         a.   Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per one hundred (100) square feet,
or portion thereof, of each floor and basement, and crawl space, three hundred
dollars ($300.00) minimum fee;
         b.   For an accessory building less than two hundred (200) square feet
in area, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
         c.   For accessory buildings two hundred (200) square feet or greater
in area, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per one hundred (100) square feet, or
portion thereof, three hundred dollars ($300.00) minimum fee.
      3.   Alterations, remodeling, reroofing, siding or replacing steps not
including any addition to existing building which will add to the ground area
thereof:
         a.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less of estimated cost, one
hundred dollars ($100.00);
         b.   Each additional one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated
cost or portion thereof, ten dollars ($10.00).
   B.   All Other Construction:
      1.   New construction and additions, including wiring, plumbing and water
supply:
         a.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) per one hundred (100) square feet
or portion thereof, of overall area of each floor above ground, three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) minimum fee;
         b.   One hundred dollars ($100.00), or portion thereof, of overall
basement and crawl space, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) minimum fee.
      2.   Alterations, remodeling, reroofing, siding or replacing steps, not
including any addition to existing building which will add to the ground area
thereof:
         a.   Less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less of estimated
cost, one hundred dollars ($100.00);
         b.   Each additional one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated
cost or portion thereof, ten dollars ($10.00).
   C.   Towers Including Associated Equipment Structures:
      1.   New towers, thirty dollars ($30.00) per each foot of tower height.
      2.   Collocation of antennas on existing towers or structures, one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   D.   Electrical Work:
      1.   Electrical service upgrade for residential use, one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00);
      2.   Electrical service upgrade for nonresidential use, three hundred
dollars ($300.00).
   E.   Miscellaneous:
      1.   Moving, raising, shoring or underpinning of structures:
         a.   Less than one thousand (1,000) square feet ground floor area
(outside measurements), five hundred dollars ($500.00);
         b.   One thousand (1,000) square feet ground floor area or over
(outside measurements), one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00);
         c.   Foundation, thirty dollars ($30.00) per one hundred (100) square
feet, or portion thereof, of overall unfinished basement area and crawl space,
three hundred dollars ($300.00) minimum fee plus a plan examination fee that
shall be set according to subsection G of this section.
   F.   Demolition:
      1.   Building under five hundred (500) square feet, two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00);
      2.   Building five hundred (500) square feet or over, five hundred
dollars ($500.00);
      3.   Residential or commercial building, seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   G.   Plan Examination (Nonrefundable):
      1.   Building under two hundred (200) square feet, no fee;
      2.   Buildings two hundred (200) square feet or over, and all other
permits except for swimming pools, twenty five percent (25%) of building fee
(to nearest dollar).
      3.   Minimum fee, one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   Reexamination of changes to approved plans after a permit has been
issued, fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour of plan review time, fifty dollars
($50.00) minimum fee, plus additional building fee if square foot area is
increased.
   H.   Swimming Pool:
      1.   Above ground pool, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      2.   In ground pool, five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   I.   Fences:
      1.   A fence which cannot be viewed through, one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   J.   Advertising Signs and Billboards:
      1.   Fee shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
   K.   Permit Extension:
      1.   To extend a permit, the fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
   L.   Assessment of Damage Due to Fire, Wind or Flood:
      1.   A minimum fee of two hundred fifty ($250.00) for the initial
assessment of damage. Additional fees shall apply as required by the type of
repair, alteration or reconstruction of the damaged building. Additional
permits and subsequent fees may be required.
   M.   Inspection Fees: An inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall be paid prior to scheduling additional inspections, necessitated by any
of the following conditions:
      1.   All second re-inspections (third time to project site) and
subsequent re-inspections.
      2.   When the construction work to be inspected was incomplete at the
time the building inspector arrived at the construction site for a scheduled
inspection and the holder of the building permit failed to provide reasonable
notice to cancel said scheduled inspection.
      3.   One or more required inspections were not inspected, and a
resolution is approved per the policy for missed inspections.
   N.   Construction, Alteration, or Addition Made for Any Public or
Governmental Body: Whenever the construction, alteration or addition is being
made for any public or governmental body, there shall be no charge made for any
permit issued or any service in connection therewith.
   O.   Construction, Alteration or Addition Made for Religious, Educational or
Charitable Purposes: Whenever the construction, alteration or addition is being
made for religious, educational or charitable purposes, the maximum fee for
each permit issued and for all services in connection therewith shall be two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
   P.   Work Started Before Obtaining a Permit: Where work for which a permit
is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining
said permit, the fees above specified shall be increased by one hundred percent
(100%). The payment of such additional fee shall not relieve any persons from
fully complying with the requirements of this chapter, in the execution of the
work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
   Q.   Agricultural Exemption Setback Permit Fees: A permit shall be required
for agriculturally exempt buildings strictly for the purpose of determining
conformance with building setback lines as allowed in 55 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/5-12001. Such fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   R.   Permit or Permit Application Cancellation:
      1.   A permit application will be considered canceled when the applicant
fails to provide requested information that the minimum code requirements have
been met within six (6) months from the date of application. The applicant will
owe the plan examination fee plus twenty five percent (25%) of the total
building fee.
      2.   When a permit has already been issued, an applicant may only cancel,
in writing, within six (6) months of the date of issuance of such permit, if no
construction has commenced. The applicant will receive a refund of seventy five
percent (75%) of the building permit fee less the plan examination fee and any
fees assessed by other departments. If no inspections are scheduled within six
(6) months of date of issuance, the permit will be canceled, and the entire
building fee forfeited.
   S.   Temporary Structures and Uses:
      1.   Mobile modular offices and trailers, two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) each.
      2.   Tents, one hundred dollars ($100.00) each.
      3.   Structures under roof but not enclosed, one hundred dollars
($100.00) each.
      4.   Stages, platforms and band shells, five hundred dollars ($500.00)
each.
      5.   Bleachers and elevated spectator areas, five hundred dollars
($500.00) each.
      6.   Elevated structures for judges, officials, referees, and/or print,
radio or television media, one hundred dollars ($100.00) each.
      7.   Pedestrian walkways over roads, creeks, or other obstacles, one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each.
      8.   Permits for events with multiple temporary structures and uses will
be permitted by structure type and/or vendor and may be reduced, if requested
in writing, up to fifty percent (50%) to account for multiple structures on the
same site.
      9.   Inspection fees in accordance with subsection M of this section
shall apply.
      10.   Review of plans are included in the above fees.
   T.   Establishment of Use for a new business or a change of use in an
existing building or space: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   U.   Solar Equipment Installations:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   0-10 kw    Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
         b.   Over 10 kw   Five hundred dollars ($500.00)
      2.   Non-Residential:
         a.   0-100 kw   Six hundred dollars ($600.00)
         b.   101-500 kw   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
         c.   501-1MW   Three thousand dollars ($3,000.00)
         d.   1MW-2MW   Six thousand dollars ($6,000.00)
         e.   over 2MW   Six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) plus two hundred
dollars ($200) for each additional 100 kw or $2000 per MW
(Ord. 18-422, 11-13-2018, eff. 1-1-2019; Ord. 19-140, 5-7-2019, eff. 5-14-2019;
amd. Ord. 21-475, 11-9-2021)
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
7-1 - 7-10: Reserved
7-1 - 7-10: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
7-11: Definitions
7-12: Applicants
7-13: Applications
7-14: Licenses
7-15: Imposition And Amount Of Annual Tax
7-16: Enforcement; Inspection
7-17: Enforcement; Seizure Of Devices
7-18: Enforcement; Confiscation And Forfeiture; Hearing; Sale
7-19: Review Under Administrative Review Act
7-20: Violations And Penalties
7-21 - 7-30: Reserved
7-11: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them below. Words used in the singular number shall
include the plural and words used in the plural number shall include the
singular as the context requires.
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine which upon monetary exchange
between patron and owner and/or his employee or upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, or, disc, may be operated by the public generally for the
use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, electronic
games, skill balls, mechanical grab machines, pool tables, coin operated music
players, and all games, operations or transactions, similar thereto under
whatever names games may be known.
COUNTY: Shall mean and refer to county of Kane, state of Illinois.
LICENSE COMMITTEE: Shall mean and refer to the license committee of the county
board of Kane County, state of Illinois. The license committee shall be the
Kane County development committee. (Ord. 82-157, Art. I, §§ 1-4, 11-9-1982)
7-12: APPLICANTS:
   A.   Who Must Apply: The following must obtain a license from the county
pursuant to this article:
      1.   Any person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation, or
association owning or leasing or otherwise acquiring any coin operated
amusement device and/or engaged in any business or activity whereby any such
device is to be used or operated by the public within the jurisdiction of the
county for entertainment, amusement, or recreation purposes shall obtain a
license from the county for the purpose of so displaying any such device for
use or operation by the public;
      2.   In the event a device is leased, all owners/lessors and all lessees
shall sign the license applications;
      3.   Any person, firm or organization, partnership or association who
owns, locates or operates coin operated amusement devices on one or more zoning
taxes, as defined in the Kane County zoning ordinance, shall obtain a separate
license for each zoning lot location.
   B.   Licenses Not To Be Issued To Certain Persons: No license shall be
issued to:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony:
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association in
which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a person is active
or employed;
      5.   Any firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association in
which such a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is an
officer, director, or employer whether compensated or not;
      6.   Any firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association in
which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is to
participate in the management or operation of a business or activity whereby
any coin operated amusement device is to be used by the public;
      7.   Any person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation or
association convicted of any violation of this article.
      8.   Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 82-157, Art.
II, §§ 1, 2, 11-9-1982; Ord. 82-199, 12-14-1982; Ord. 83-152, 10-11-1983)
7-13: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   License Committee Of The County Board: License applications shall be
made to the license committee in a form prescribed by that committee.
   B.   Required Information: On an application form which shall be furnished
by the license committee and filed with that committee, each applicant shall
show the following:
      1.   The name and address of each applicant (see section
7-12 of this chapter);
      2.   The tax parcel number of the premises where the devices would be
located;
      3.   A description of each coin operated device to be displayed for use
or operation by the public under the license if granted and the address where
said device(s) will be offered for use or operation by the public;
      4.   The name and address of any lessee of each device described in
response to above if applicable;
      5.   The name and address of the owner of each device described in
response to subsection B3 of this section;
      6.   The full names and addresses of all partners if an applicant is a
partnership;
      7.   The full names and addresses of all officers or directors and
stockholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the corporate stocks if an
applicant is a corporation;
      8.   The name and address of the presiding officer and secretary of an
application if applicable;
      9.   Such other relevant data as the license committee may require.
   C.   Sworn Statement: The license application shall contain a sworn
statement to the accuracy of the information provided therein which statement
shall be signed by an authorized individual.
   D.   Fee: An application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid by each
applicant to the treasurer of the county and deposited into the general
corporate fund of the county.
   E.   Investigation Of Applicant: The license committee and chairman of the
county board shall have the authority to question the applicant and other
witnesses that they may require, under oath, touching upon any matters relevant
to the issuance or renewal of such license. (Ord. 82-157, Art. III, §§ 1-5, 11-
9-1982)
7-14: LICENSES:
   A.   Issuance: If the application is approved, the license committee shall
issue a license stating the name of the licensee and the date on which the
license issued.
   B.   License Display: The license issued hereunder shall be displayed at all
times.
   C.   Sticker For Each Individual Device: The license committee will also
issue a nontransferable, serially numbered decalcomania sticker for each coin
operated amusement device displayed for use or operation by the public pursuant
to a license or license renewal issued hereunder. A current sticker must be
securely affixed to each coin operated amusement device in a prominent place in
plain view for inspection at all times. A transfer sticker may be obtained for
five dollars ($5.00) only if obtained prior to the removal of the original
device.
   D.   License Period: The license period for all licenses issued hereunder
shall be for one year from January 1 to December 31 of each year. No refund or
rebate shall be made to any applicant whenever any license is denied,
suspended, revoked or surrendered for any reason and no licenses shall be
prorated for any portion of any year.
   E.   License Renewal: Application forms for renewal for a license shall be
in all respects identical to the original application but indicating that such
is an application for renewal. Application forms for renewal of a license shall
be filed with the license committee not less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the expiration of the license being renewed.
   F.   Renewal Fee: The fee for each establishment for a license renewal shall
be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   G.   Restrictions:
      1.   Use By Minors During School Hours: No licensee shall permit any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to operate any coin operated
amusement device during the hours school is in session in that school district
wherein the devices are located.
      2.   Use By Minors In Bars: No licensee shall permit any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to operate any coin operated amusement device at
any time in a premises where alcoholic beverages are served. (Ord. 82-157, Art.
IV, §§ 1-6, 11-9-1982; Ord. 83-14, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-1983; Ord. 92-122, 6-9-1992)
7-15: IMPOSITION AND AMOUNT OF ANNUAL TAX:
   A.   Imposed: An annual tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each coin operated
amusement device displayed for use or operation by the public in the county and
outside the corporate limits of any city, village or incorporated town is
hereby imposed.
   B.   Responsibility For Payment: A licensee hereunder licensed for the
purpose of displaying any coin operated amusement device for use or operation
by the public above shall be responsible for payments of this tax on any device
so displayed.
   C.   Payment: Said tax shall be paid on or before December 31 of the year
within any part of which the coin operated amusement device subject to the tax
is displayed for use or operation by the public.
   D.   No Proration: No tax shall be prorated for any portion, except if
applicant applies after July 1 of any year, he/she shall pay only one-half (1/
2) of the local tax. (Ord. 82-157, Art. V, §§ 1-4, 11-9-1982; Ord. 92-122, 6-9-
1992)
7-16: ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTION:
The chairman of the county board, his/her authorized agents, the license
committee, its duly authorized agents, or the sheriff of Kane County, or his
duly authorized deputies, reserve the right to inspect the devices for which a
license is issued without notice to the licensee or operator of said device.
(Ord. 82-157, Art. VI, § 1, 11-9-1982)
7-17: ENFORCEMENT; SEIZURE OF DEVICES:
Any fully authorized employee of the sheriff of Kane County may, without a
search warrant, seize any coin operated amusement device which is being
displayed in his presence in a manner that violates any provision of this
article. Such an amusement device so seized shall be subject to confiscation
and forfeiture as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 82-157, Art. VIII, 11-9-1982)
7-18: ENFORCEMENT; CONFISCATION AND FORFEITURE; HEARING; SALE:
   A.   Generally: After seizing any coin operated amusement device, as
provided in section
7-17 of this chapter, the license committee shall hold a hearing in Kane County
and shall determine whether such amusement device was being displayed in a
manner which violates any provision of this article.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing:
      1.   The license committee shall give not less than seven (7) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing to the owner of such amusement
device, if he is known, and also to the person in whose possession the
amusement device so taken was found, if such a person is known and if such
person in possession is not the owner of said amusement device.
      2.   In case neither the owner nor the person in possession of such
amusement device is known, the license committee shall cause publication of the
time and place of such hearing to be made at least once in each week for three
(3) weeks successively in a newspaper of general circulation in Kane County.
   C.   Order: If, as the result of such hearing, the license committee shall
determine that the amusement device seized was, at the time of seizure, being
displayed in a manner in violation of this article, the committee shall enter
an order declaring such amusement device to be confiscated and forfeited to the
county.
   D.   Notice Of Order:
      1.   The license committee shall give notice of such order to the owner
of such amusement device if he is known, and also to the person in whose
possession the amusement so taken was found, if such person is known and if
such person in possession is not the owner of such amusement device.
      2.   In case neither the owner nor the person in possession of such
amusement device is known, the license committee shall cause publication of
such order to be made at least once in each week for three (3) weeks
successively in a newspaper of general circulation in Kane County.
   E.   Redemption: The person from whom such amusement device has been seized
(or the owner of such device if that is a different person), may redeem and
reclaim said device thirty five (35) days after the license committee's order
of confiscation and forfeiture becomes final by payment of an amount equal to
twice the annual tax applicable to such amusement device, plus a penalty of ten
percent (10%).
   F.   Sale:
      1.   When any amusement device shall have been declared forfeited to the
county by the committee, as provided in this section, and when all proceedings
for the judicial review of the license committee's decision have terminated,
the license committee shall (if such amusement device is not redeemed and
reclaimed within the time and in the manner provided for in this section), to
the extent that its decision is sustained on review, sell such amusement device
for the best price obtainable and shall forthwith pay over the proceeds of such
sale to the county treasurer; provided, however, that if the value of the
property sold at any one time shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more,
such property shall be sold only to the highest and best bidder on such terms
and conditions and on open competitive bidding after public advertisement, in
such manner and for such terms as the license committee, by rule, may
prescribe.
      2.   If no complaint for review, as provided in section
7-19 of this chapter, has been filed within the time required by the
administrative review act and if such amusement device is not redeemed and
reclaimed within the time and in the manner provided for in this section, the
license committee shall proceed to sell said property for the best price
obtainable and shall forthwith pay over the proceeds of such sale to the county
treasurer; provided, however, that if the value of the property to be sold at
any one time shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, such property
shall be sold only to the highest and best bidder on such terms and conditions
and on open competitive bidding after public advertisement, in such manner and
for such terms as the committee, by rule, may prescribe. (Ord. 82-157, Art. IX,
§§ 1-6, 11-9-1982)
7-19: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW ACT:
All final administrative decisions of the county board or its license committee
under any provisions of this article shall be subject to judicial review
pursuant to the provisions of the "administrative review act" approved May 8,
1945, and any amendment and modification thereof, and the rules adopted
relative thereto. (Ord. 82-157, Art. X, § 7, 11-9-1982)
7-20: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association
violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in other than a
penitentiary for not more than six (6) months, or both. Each day that said
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Any person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association
permitting a display or operation of any coin operated amusement device upon
their premises contrary to the provision of this article shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in other than a
penitentiary for not more than six (6) months or both. Each day that said
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.
   C.   Any person, firm, organization, partnership, corporation or association
who or which shall knowingly file a false application or knowingly provide
false information on the application required by this article shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in other
than a penitentiary for not more than six (6) months or both.
   D.   A license issued hereunder to any person, firm, organization,
corporation, partnership, or association who or which is convicted of any
violations set forth above is subject to suspension or revocation without
notice.
   E.   A license issued hereunder to any person, firm, organization,
partnership, corporation, or association, who or which violates the provisions
of this article may be suspended or revoked by the license committee after
notice and hearing. (Ord. 82-157, Art. VII, §§ 1-5, 11-9-1982)
7-21 - 7-30: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. TELECOMMUNICATION CARRIERS
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
7-31 - 7-40: Reserved
Division 2. 911 Emergency Telephone System Surcharge
7-41: Definitions
7-42: Surcharge
7-43: Certification Of Exemptions From Surcharge
7-44: Imposition Of Surcharge
7-45: Recovery Of Expenses
7-46: Remittance Of Surcharge
7-47: Carrier's Report
7-48: Credit Of Mistakenly Paid Surcharge
7-49: Limitations On Recovery Of Surcharge
7-50: Emergency Telephone System Board
7-51: Emergency Telephone Fund
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
7-31 - 7-40: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. 911 EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE
7-41: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this division the following definitions shall apply:
NETWORK CONNECTION: The number of voice grade communication channels directly
between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier's public switched network
without the intervention of any other telecommunications carriers switched
network which would be required to carry the subscriber's interpremises
traffic.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: Shall have the meaning ascribed to the term in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 89-137, § 1, 7-11-1989)
7-42: SURCHARGE:
If (since) a majority of the votes cast upon the question are (were) in favor
thereof, a surcharge is hereby imposed upon all telecommunication carriers
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity
originating within the corporate limits of Kane County and terminating within
the state of Illinois for funding of a "911" emergency telephone system at a
rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per month per inservice "network connection", as
defined herein. A network connection shall not be deemed to be in service where
a subscriber's account is uncollectible. (Ord. 89-137, § 2, 7-11-1989)
7-43: CERTIFICATION OF EXEMPTIONS FROM SURCHARGE:
The Kane County clerk shall provide any telecommunication carrier subject to
the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to
the county of Kane and the various municipalities located within the county of
Kane which are to be exempt from imposition of a surcharge. The certified list
may be revised by the county of Kane on sixty (60) days' prior written notice
provided to the telecommunication carriers. Furthermore, the Kane County clerk
shall provide any telecommunication carrier subject to the surcharge with a
certified list of those network connections which are subject to another "911"
surcharge by virtue of their location and therefore are also exempt from the
imposition of the Kane County "911" surcharge. In no event shall a "network
connection" be subject to a "911" surcharge pursuant to this division if it is
subjected to another "911" surcharge. (Ord. 89-137, § 3, 7-11-1989)
7-44: IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE:
The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following the
expiration of ninety (90) days from the date the county clerk certifies to the
individual telecommunication carriers subject to the surcharge that the
referendum has passed. (Ord. 89-137, § 4, 7-11-1989)
7-45: RECOVERY OF EXPENSES:
In lieu of the telecommunication carriers imposing a three percent (3%)
accounting and collection charge on its subscribers as permitted under the act,
each telecommunication carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to recover
said accounting and collection charge by deducting three percent (3%) from the
amount of surcharge otherwise due and owing the county of Kane prior to
remittance under section 7-46 of this division. (Ord. 89-137, § 5, 7-11-1989)
7-46: REMITTANCE OF SURCHARGE:
Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the county treasurer the amount
of surcharge due and owing for each calendar month within thirty (30) days
following expiration of each month to which the surcharge applies, net of any
network or other "911" or sophisticated "911" system charge then due the
particular telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill and the three
percent (3%) accounting and collection charge described in section 7-45 of this
division. (Ord. 89-137, § 6, 7-11-1989)
7-47: CARRIER'S REPORT:
Simultaneously with the remittance described in section 7-46 of this division
each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the Kane County treasurer
for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:
   A.   The name of the telecommunication carrier.
   B.   The telecommunication carrier's principal place of business.
   C.   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies.
   D.   The amount of surcharge due.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require. (Ord. 89-137, § 7, 7-11-1989)
7-48: CREDIT OF MISTAKENLY PAID SURCHARGE:
If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this division, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
surcharge due, or to become due, under this division from the telecommunication
carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited. Ninety (90) days' prior notice shall be given to the emergency
communications board on any credit against a surcharge due. (Ord. 89-137, § 8,
7-11-1989; Ord. 08-254, 8-12-2008)
7-49: LIMITATIONS ON RECOVERY OF SURCHARGE:
No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions of this
division shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount. (Ord. 89-137, § 9, 7-11-1989)
7-50: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD:
   A.   There is hereby created a Kane County emergency telephone system board
(the "board") consisting of nine (9) members, as follows:
      1.   A public member who is a resident of the territory included within
the Kane County ETSB region;
      2.   Four (4) members representing the Tri-Com Public Safety Answering
Point (PSAP);
      3.   The sheriff of Kane County or his designee;
      4.   Three (3) members representing the KaneComm Public Safety Answering
Point (PSAP) agency designated by the chairman of the Kane County board.
   B.   All members shall be appointed on the basis of their ability and
experience and shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for
their actual and necessary expenses. The board of directors of the Tri-Com
emergency dispatch, an intergovernmental agency of the cities of St. Charles,
Geneva, and Batavia shall recommend to the county board chairman one or more
nominees for each of the four (4) Tri-Com appointments. The county board
chairman shall make the appointments from the names submitted or reject the
nominees so recommended and request additional names to be submitted. The
members of the board shall be appointed by the chairman of the Kane County
board with the advice and consent of the full Kane County board. The chairman
shall act on the nominees submitted within forty five (45) days.
   C.   A quorum of the board shall consist of a majority of the duly appointed
members of the board. All appointments to the board heretofore made shall
terminate on the adoption of this section by ordinance. The term of office of
the members appointed to the Kane County emergency telephone system board shall
be for a period of three (3) years. Three (3) of the membership of the board
shall have their terms expire on January 1, 2018. Three (3) of the membership
of the board shall have their terms expire on January 1, 2019. The remaining
board members' terms shall expire on January 1, 2020. Board members may be
reappointed upon the expiration of their terms by the chairman of the Kane
County board. The chairman shall act on the nominees submitted within forty
five (45) days.
   D.   The powers and duties of the Kane County emergency telephone system
board shall be as follows:
      1.   Planning of "911" system(s);
      2.   Planning for and recommending improvements and upgrades to the "911"
system(s);
      3.   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems;
      4.   Receiving monies from the surcharge imposed under section
7-42 of this division, the Illinois Compiled Statutes and from any source for
deposit into the emergency telephone system fund;
      5.   Authorizing all disbursements from this emergency telephone system
fund;
      6.   Hiring any staff or consultants necessary for the planning,
implementation or upgrade to the system;
      7.   Authorizing and accepting additional member communities to the Kane
County emergency telephone system. (Ord. 16-393, 3-14-2017)
7-51: EMERGENCY TELEPHONE FUND:
All monies received pursuant to the surcharge imposed under section
7-42 of this division shall be deposited into an emergency telephone system
fund. The county treasurer shall be custodian of the fund. All interest
accruing on the fund shall remain in the fund. No expenditures may be made from
such fund except upon the direction of the emergency telephone system board or
by resolution passed by a majority of all members of the emergency telephone
system board. Expenditures may be made only to pay for the costs associated
with the following:
   A.   The design of the emergency telephone system.
   B.   The coding of an initial master street address guide database, and
update and maintenance thereof.
   C.   The repayment of any monies advanced for the implementation of the
system.
   D.   The charges for automatic number identification and automatic location
identification equipment, a computer aided dispatch system that records,
maintains, and integrates information, mobile data transmitters equipped with
automatic vehicle locators and maintenance, replacement and update thereof to
increase operational efficiency and improve the provision of emergency
services.
   E.   The nonrecurring charges related to installation of the emergency
telephone system and the ongoing network charges.
   F.   Other products and services necessary for the implementation, upgrade
and maintenance of the system and any other purpose related to the operation of
the system, including costs attributable directly to the construction, leasing,
or maintenance of any buildings or facilities or costs of personnel
attributable directly to the operation of the system. Costs attributable
directly to the operation of an emergency telephone system do not include the
costs of public safety agency personnel who are and equipment that is
dispatched in response to an emergency call.
   G.   The acquisition and installation, or the reimbursement of costs
therefor to other governmental bodies that have incurred those costs, of road
or street signs that are essential to the implementation of the emergency
telephone system and that are not duplicative of signs that are the
responsibility of the jurisdiction charged with maintaining road and street
signs. (Ord. 89-137, § 11, 7-11-1989; Ord. 01-25, 2-13-2001)
CHAPTER 8
CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
8-1: Appropriations And Tax
8-2: Purchases And Contracts
8-3: Declaration Of Local Disaster Emergencies
8-4 - 8-13: Reserved
8-1: APPROPRIATIONS AND TAX:
The county board may make an appropriation for emergency services and disaster
purposes in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 95-11, 1-10-1995)
8-2: PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS:
   A.   The county board may, on recommendation of the county director of the
county emergency management agency, authorize any purchase or contracts
necessary to place the county in a position to combat effectively any disaster
resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural
disaster.
   B.   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the director is
authorized, on behalf of the county, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to county contracts or obligations, as authorized
by law; provided, that if the county board meets at such time he shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by it. (Ord. 76-12, § 9, 1-
13-1976)
8-3: DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES:
A local disaster emergency may be declared by the chairman of the county board,
in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois emergency management agency
act of 1988 1 . (Ord. 76-12, § 13, 1-13-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
8-4 - 8-13: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
8-14: Created; Composition
8-15: Director
8-16: Functions Generally
8-17: Cooperation With State
8-18: Mobile Support Teams
8-19: Mutual Aid Agreements
8-20: Compensation While Training
8-21: Oath Of Members
8-22: Office Space
8-23 - 8-29: Reserved
8-14: CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created the county emergency management agency to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade
disaster. It shall consist of the director and such additional members as may
be selected by the director. (Ord. 76-12, § 1, 1-13-1976)
8-15: DIRECTOR:
   A.   The director of the county emergency management agency shall be
appointed by the chairman of the county board with the consent of the county
board and shall serve until removed by same.
   B.   The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the emergency management agency.
   C.   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the director, the chairman of the county board or any person designated by
him, shall be and act as director until a new appointment is made as provided
herein. (Ord. 76-12, § 2, 1-13-1976)
8-16: FUNCTIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   The county emergency management agency shall perform such emergency
services and disaster functions within the county as shall be prescribed in and
by the state emergency management plan and program prepared by the governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
law.
   B.   The county emergency management agency volunteer personnel functions
shall include, but are not limited to: communications; participation in traffic
and crowd control; land and water search and rescue, including the use of the
agency air-boat; severe weather spotting/monitoring; radiological monitoring;
nondisaster declared flooding assistance; immediate relief for victims/first
responders; downed power line safety; crime scene safety; hazardous materials
spill scene safety; first aid assistance; public relations; education
activities, including participation in fairs, parades and exhibits; training
exercises; participation in meetings/work nights; 9-1-1 outage; MABAS response;
and emergency and nonemergency assistance to other agencies and jurisdictions
within and outside the county. Provided, however, that emergency management
agency volunteer personnel shall participate in traffic and crowd control and
crime scene safety only upon request of the Kane County sheriff and in any such
instance said volunteers shall be subject to the direction, control and
supervision of the Kane County sheriff or his or her authorized representative.
(Ord. 95-11, 1-10-1995)
8-17: COOPERATION WITH STATE:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the county emergency
management agency to cooperate fully with the state emergency management agency
and with the governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(Ord. 76-12, § 6, 1-13-1976)
8-18: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS 1 :
All or any members of the county organization may be designated as members of a
mobile support team created by the director of the state emergency management
agency as provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be
designated by the director of the county emergency management agency
organization. Any member of a mobile support team who is a county employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the governor, or the director of the
state emergency management agency, shall receive the compensation and have the
powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or office.
Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the county, while so
serving, shall receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by
law. (Ord. 76-12, § 4, 1-13-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/8.
8-19: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The director of the emergency management agency may negotiate mutual aid
agreements with other counties or political subdivisions of the state, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the county
board and by the director of the state emergency management agency. (Ord. 76-
12, § 5, 1-13-1976)
8-20: COMPENSATION WHILE TRAINING:
Members of the county emergency management agency who are paid employees or
officers of the county, if called for training by the director of the state
emergency management agency, shall receive for the time spent in such training
the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members who are not
such county employees or officers shall receive for such training time such
compensation as may be established by the county board. (Ord. 76-12, § 7, 1-13-
1976)
8-21: OATH OF MEMBERS:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the county emergency
management agency organization shall, before entering upon his duties,
subscribe the following oath, which shall be filed with the director:
I,                , do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will take this obligation freely, without
any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear, or affirm, that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the Kane County Emergency
Management Agency organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 76-12, § 10, 1-13-1976)
8-22: OFFICE SPACE:
The chairman of the county board is hereby authorized to designate space in a
county building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the county board, for
the county emergency management agency and its office. (Ord. 76-12, § 11, 1-13-
1976)
8-23 - 8-29: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE CONTROL AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT
EXPENSE RECOVERY
SECTION:
8-30: General State Of Liability For Payment Of Expenses
8-31: Definitions
8-32: Hazardous Materials Incident Expense Recovery
8-33: Limitations Of Liability
8-34 - 8-39: Reserved
8-30: GENERAL STATE OF LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF EXPENSES:
The recipients, benefactors, administrators, personal representatives,
executors, successors, heirs or assigns thereof ("persons"), who are determined
by either the director or hazardous materials coordinator of the Kane County
emergency management agency to be recipients of emergency assistance or
emergency services as a result of an incident involving known or potentially
hazardous materials shall reimburse the county for any extraordinary expenses
or supplies and equipment expended as a result of services or assistance
provided. In addition, the parties set forth above shall reimburse any third
parties for services rendered or supplies and equipment expended as a result of
their involvement in the incident. Said reimbursement to the county and all
appropriate parties shall also include the cost of all related medical
monitoring or medical treatment of any representatives who, as a part of their
association with the incident, may have come in contact with known or
potentially hazardous materials. (Ord. 97-63, § 1, 3-11-1997)
8-31: DEFINITIONS:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any substance, material or mixture of substances which is
toxic, corrosive, an irritant, strong sensitizer, radioactive, flammable,
combustible or which generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other
means, which may cause injury or illness to humans, domestic livestock or
wildlife, or other material defined as hazardous by the Illinois environmental
protection act or any state or federal law.
THIRD PARTY: As used herein the term "third party" shall mean any person,
persons, company, corporation or business entity specifically brought in to
investigate or mitigate an incident. Such persons shall not be or include
employees or officers of the county. (Ord. 97-63, §§ 2, 4, 3-11-1997)
8-32: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT EXPENSE RECOVERY:
   A.   A person causing or permitting a hazardous materials incident shall be
responsible jointly or severally, for all of the following:
      1.   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the county
in responding to such hazardous materials incidents at the rate of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour per vehicle (or any fraction of an hour) and
the hourly pay, including overhead costs, and the prorated cost of employee
benefits for each employee who participates in such response to a hazardous
materials incident, and administrative expenses.
      2.   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the county
for equipment and materials damaged, lost, spent, destroyed or rendered
irreparable in connection with a hazardous materials incident, including costs
of time of employees spent in replacing said equipment and materials.
      3.   Reimbursement of and full liability for any and all costs of cleanup
and removal resulting from a hazardous materials incident, including, but not
limited to, expenses charged by any "third party" as defined in section 8-31 of
this chapter, which may be necessitated by such hazardous materials incident.
   B.   The county shall prepare and forward to the person or persons causing
or permitting a hazardous materials incident a bill for the total costs and
expenses incurred for which said person or persons are responsible pursuant to
this section; provided, however, any costs in connection with any third party
may be billed directly by such third party. Payment of the total bill shall be
made within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any bill or portion of a bill
remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days of receipt shall accrue interest on the
unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month, or
fraction of a month. (Ord. 97-63, § 3, 3-11-1997)
8-33: LIMITATIONS OF LIABILITY:
The county, its agents, its officers or employees shall have no liability or
responsibility for any claim, injury or damage of any kind resulting from a
potentially hazardous materials incident to which the county or any of its
departments, officers, agents, or employees respond. (Ord. 97-63, § 5, 3-11-
1997)
8-34 - 8-39: RESERVED:
(Ord. 97-63, 3-11-1997)
CHAPTER 8.5
KANE COUNTY EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS BOARD
SECTION:
8.5-1: Creation Of KaneComm
8.5-2: Board Created
8.5-3: Membership
8.5-4: Term Of Board; Ex Officio Members; Removal From Office
8.5-5: Compensation And Expenses
8.5-6: Meetings; Officers
8.5-7: Special Account Established
8.5-8: Annual Budget
8.5-9: Powers And Duties Of The Board
8.5-10: 911 Director
8.5-11: User Group
8.5-12: User Members
8.5-13: Definitions
8.5-1: CREATION OF KANECOMM:
The Illinois commerce commission has directed and authorized local units of
government to establish and operate public safety answering points ("PSAP").
The Kane County PSAP shall be known as Kane County emergency communications
("KaneComm") which is created for the receipt of a request for emergency
services; and whereby pertinent information is noted by the recipient of a
telephone request for such services, and is relayed to the appropriate public
safety agency or other provider of emergency services for dispatch of an
emergency service unit so as the proper action may be taken. (Ord. 11-398, 12-
13-2011)
8.5-2: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby established the Kane County emergency communications board
("KaneComm") with the duties, responsibilities and membership hereafter
provided. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-3: MEMBERSHIP:
KaneComm shall be governed by an eleven (11) member board (the "KaneComm
board") comprised of the following:
   A.   The chairman of the Kane County board, or a member of the county board
designated by the chairman, who shall also serve as the chairman of the
KaneComm board;
   B.   The county board member appointed by the chairman of the Kane County
board, who is the chairman of the county board judicial and public safety
committee;
   C.   A county board member appointed by the chairman of the Kane County
board, who is the chairman of the administration committee;
   D.   The executive director of the Kane County department of information
technology;
   E.   The executive director of 911 as appointed as hereinafter provided;
   F.   The sheriff of Kane County, or a member of the sheriff's office
designated by the sheriff;
   G.   A police user member as determined by volume of service activity chosen
from among the units of government entering into subscriber agreements with the
county (the "user member");
   H.   A police user member appointed by the chairman of the Kane County board
chosen from among the units of government entering into subscriber agreements
with the county (the "user member");
   I.   A fire user member as determined by volume of service activity chosen
from among the units of government entering into subscriber agreements with the
county (the "user member");
   J.   A fire user member appointed by the chairman of the Kane County board
chosen from among the units of government entering into subscriber agreements
with the county (the "user member");
   K.   A member of the public appointed by the chairman of the Kane County
board, who is a resident of the Kane County emergency communications service
area. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011; Ord. 13-91, 4-9-2013)
8.5-4: TERM OF BOARD; EX OFFICIO MEMBERS; REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
   A.   All appointed members of KaneComm shall serve for a term of four (4)
years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless otherwise
provided in this chapter.
   B.   All members except the public member shall serve ex officio. (Ord. 11-
398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-5: COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES:
All members of the KaneComm board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for their actual mileage and expenses. Nothing herein shall be
construed to preclude or limit any board member from receiving any compensation
for any other office. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-6: MEETINGS; OFFICERS:
The KaneComm board shall meet quarterly. Special meetings may be called by the
chairman of the KaneComm board or any two (2) user representatives, in
accordance with the requirements of the open meetings act, or may be scheduled
at any regular meeting. The proceedings of the board shall be governed by
"Robert's Rules Of Order" (current edition) and such other rules as may be
adopted by the KaneComm board or the Kane County board. A majority of the
members shall constitute a quorum to do business. The executive director of 911
shall serve as the ex officio secretary to the KaneComm board. (Ord. 11-398,
12-13-2011)
8.5-7: SPECIAL ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED:
All fees, grants, or revenues related to the operation of the Kane County
emergency communications system shall be deposited in a special account (the
"KaneComm fund") in the custody of the Kane County treasurer. All warrants and
charges on the KaneComm fund shall be by order of the board and paid by the
treasurer. The special account shall be subject to audit by the county auditor
and shall have an annual audit of its books and records. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-
2011)
8.5-8: ANNUAL BUDGET:
The KaneComm board shall determine its annual budget subject to the approval of
the Kane County board and the KaneComm board shall also approve all
expenditures in accordance with applicable law and county ordinances. (Ord. 11-
398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-9: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD:
The board shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To adopt the format of all subscriber agreements with other units of
local government who are dispatched through KaneComm to be ratified by the Kane
County board;
   B.   To approve all subscriber agreements to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law;
   C.   To set all fees and charges for subscribers;
   D.   To keep and maintain all records necessary to the discharge of its
duties;
   E.   To receive and administer all funds provided by this chapter or other
provision of law related to the emergency communications system, the custody of
which is not given to some other officer;
   F.   To authorize the executive director of 911 to approve for payment any
invoices which have been authorized and approved in the annual KaneComm budget
necessary to the operation of the emergency communications system;
   G.   To plan for and recommend improvements and upgrades to the county 911
system;
   H.   To coordinate and supervise the implementation, upgrading or
maintenance of the county 911 system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications;
   I.   To review regular financial and budget reports and expenditures no less
than annually and to approve, as needed, disbursements from the KaneComm fund;
   J.   To set the guiding vision for PSAP operations, ensure representation of
the subscriber community, clarify KaneComm's mission and strategic direction;
   K.   To support the executive director of 911 in setting strategic
direction, providing input into operations and promoting accountability for
service and results among the user group. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-10: 911 DIRECTOR:
The chairman shall appoint with concurrence of a majority of the KaneComm
board, a director (the "executive director of 911") for the 911 operation who
shall be the executive director for the KaneComm board. The 911 director shall
submit reports as directed by the KaneComm board on the status of PSAP
activities and issues, and shall be responsible for the hiring of all 911
employees. The 911 director shall also submit an annual report on all PSAP
operations. Department of information technology personnel assigned to the PSAP
shall remain the staff of the information technology department. (Ord. 11-398,
12-13-2011)
8.5-11: USER GROUP:
The 911 director shall organize a user group, which shall hold regular meetings
to assist in providing input into operations, setting direction and promoting
accountability of services and results among the subscribers. The user group
shall be comprised of the elected or appointed head of the police and/or fire
user agency of each subscriber. Any decision impacting more than one user
agency as it relates to KaneComm must be presented to the user group for
approval prior to implementation. (Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-12: USER MEMBERS:
Five (5) user members shall be appointed by the county board chairman as voting
members of the KaneComm board. Three (3) members shall be representatives of
the police discipline. The first shall be the sheriff of Kane County, or a
member of the sheriff's office designated by the sheriff. A representative from
the police agency utilizing the greatest volume of services shall be appointed
to the KaneComm board. One additional member shall be appointed by the chairman
of the county board by recommendation of the user group.
Two (2) members shall be representatives of the fire discipline. The one fire
user utilizing the greatest volume of services shall be appointed to the
KaneComm board. One additional member shall be appointed by the chairman of the
county board by recommendation of the user group.
No two (2) user members representing the same community, village or
organization shall be permitted to serve concurrently on the KaneComm board.
(Ord. 11-398, 12-13-2011)
8.5-13: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT: A facility equipped and staffed to receive 911
calls.
SUBSCRIBER: A unit of local government that enters into an agreement with the
Kane County board for emergency dispatch services.
SUBSCRIBER AGREEMENT: An intergovernmental agreement executed between the
county of Kane and a unit of local government desiring to utilize the dispatch
services of KaneComm that explicitly identifies the terms of the agreement.
USER OR USER GROUP: The public safety agency of a subscriber. (Ord. 11-398, 12-
13-2011)
CHAPTER 9
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1: Statutory Authority
9-2: Kane County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan And
Effective Date Ordinance
9-3: Purposes Of This Chapter
9-4: Scope Of Regulation
9-5: Exemptions
9-6: Amendments
9-7: Effective Date
9-8 - 9-27: Reserved
9-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
   A.   This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the KANE COUNTY
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
   B.   The Kane County Board adopts this chapter pursuant to its authority to
regulate stormwater management and govern the location, width, course, and
release rate of all stormwater runoff channels, streams, and basins in the
County, in accordance with the Kane County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater
Management Plan (plan). The statutory authority for this chapter is contained
in 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1041, 5/5-1042, 5/5-1049, 5/5-1062, 5/5-
1063, 5/5-1104, 5/5-12003 and 5/5-15001 et seq., and 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/43, and other applicable authority, all as amended from time to
time.
   C.   As applicable, the municipalities within the County adopt and enforce
this chapter pursuant to 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1062; 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2; and
615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq., including 5/18g. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-2: KANE COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN AND
EFFECTIVE DATE ORDINANCE:
   A.   The plan was recommended by the Kane County Stormwater Management
Committee (committee) and adopted by the County Board, after review by the
appropriate agencies and a public hearing, by ordinance 98-251 on October 13,
1998. The plan is available for public inspection in the Office of the Kane
County Clerk;
   B.   The Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance was originally adopted
by the County Board by the passage of Ordinance no. 00-312 on November 14,
2000;
   C.   The Kane County Stormwater Management Technical Manual was originally
adopted by the County Board by the passage of Ordinance no. 01-149 on May 8,
2001; and
   D.   The Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance and Technical Manual
were revised, and those revisions were adopted by the County Board by the
passage of Ordinance no. 01-338 on October 9, 2001. Ordinance no. 01-338 became
effective on January 1, 2002. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-3: PURPOSES OF THIS CHAPTER:
   A.   The principal purpose of this chapter is to promote effective,
equitable, acceptable and legal stormwater management measures by establishing
reasonable rules and regulations for development. Other purposes of this
chapter include:
      1.   Managing and mitigating the effects of urbanization on stormwater
drainage throughout Kane County through planning, appropriate engineering
practices and proper maintenance;
      2.   Protecting the public health and safety and reducing the potential
for loss of human life and property from flood damage;
      3.   Protecting the public from the degradation of water quality on a
watershed basis;
      4.   Preserving and enhancing the natural hydrologic and hydraulic
functions and natural characteristics of watercourses and floodplains to
protect water quality, aquatic habitats, reduce flood damage, reduce soil
erosion, provide recreational and aesthetic benefits and enhance community and
economic development;
      5.   Controlling sedimentation and erosion in and from stormwater
facilities, developments, agricultural fields, and construction sites and
reducing and repairing stream bank erosion;
      6.   Requiring planning for development to provide for water resource
management, taking into account natural features such as vegetation, wildlife,
waterways, wetlands and topography in order to reduce the probability that new
development will create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion or degrade
the quality of ground and surface waters;
      7.   Protecting environmentally sensitive areas from deterioration or
destruction by private or public actions;
      8.   Protecting and enhancing the quantity and quality of potable
groundwater and potable surface water supplies;
      9.   Requiring appropriate and adequate provision for site runoff
control, especially when the land is developed with a large amount of
impervious surface;
      10.   Requiring the design and evaluation of each site's stormwater
management plan to be consistent with watershed capacities;
      11.   Encouraging the use of stormwater storage and infiltration of
stormwater in preference to stormwater conveyance;
      12.   Lessening the taxpayers' burden for flood related disasters,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      13.   Meeting the IDNR-OWR floodway permitting requirements delineated in
615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g ("an Act in Relation to the Regulation of
the Rivers, Lakes, and Streams of the State of Illinois" (1992)), as amended
from time to time;
      14.   Complying with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program thereby making Federally subsidized flood insurance available
to persons throughout the County;
      15.   Minimizing conflicts and incompatibilities between agricultural and
urban drainage systems and maintaining agriculture as a viable and productive
land use;
      16.   Encouraging cooperation and consistency in stormwater management
activities within and between units of government having floodplain and
stormwater management jurisdiction;
      17.   Restricting development in the floodplain to facilities that will
not adversely affect the potential for flood damage;
      18.   Protecting and improving surface water quality and promoting
beneficial uses of ponds, lakes, wetlands, rivers and streams by reducing point
source and nonpoint source discharges of pollutants;
      19.   Requiring regular, planned maintenance of stormwater management
facilities;
      20.   Requiring control of stormwater quantity and quality at the most
site-specific or local level and preventing unauthorized or unmitigated
discharge of flow off-site;
      21.   Protecting the quantity and quality of wetlands;
      22.   Allowing the use of simple technologies whenever appropriate and
realistic, but requiring the use of more sophisticated techniques when
necessary to ensure the adequacy of stormwater controls;
      23.   Providing a procedure by which communities throughout the County
may petition the committee for authority to implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter; and
      24.   Requiring strict compliance with and enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   The purposes of this chapter are consistent with and supersede the
plan. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-4: SCOPE OF REGULATION:
This chapter applies to all development within the County and to all
development within the corporate boundaries of any certified community,
including that under the control of any governmental entity, agency, or
authority.
   A.   Any person undertaking a development shall obtain a stormwater
management permit from the permitting authority within whose boundaries the
development is located;
   B.   Any person undertaking a development having a wetland impact shall
obtain a permit from the department (or Administrator in a community certified
to administer article VII of this chapter);
   C.   Any certified community undertaking development in the regulatory
floodway, or regulatory floodplain where no regulatory floodway has been
designated, shall obtain a permit from IDNR-OWR if required prior to issuance
of a stormwater management permit; and
   D.   All units of local government shall obtain stormwater management
permits from the permitting authority within whose boundaries the development
is located. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-5: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter does not apply to:
      1.   Development which has been substantially completed before January 1,
2002, with the exception of any structure located in the floodplain; and
      2.   Wetland impacts occurring before the effective date.
   B.   Nonconforming structures shall not be replaced or enlarged in any
manner unless such replacement or enlargement conforms to the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-6: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   A minimum of forty five (45) days prior to the Kane County Board's
consideration of an amendment(s) to the Kane County Stormwater Ordinance, the
Director shall notify and provide a copy of said amendment(s) to every
certified community (the certified community's Administrator and City/Village
Engineer), and the proposed date said amendment(s) will be presented to the
committee.
All of the communities in the County, FEMA, IDNR-OWR, USACE, NRCS, the Kane
DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District, the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS), the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA),
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) shall be notified
of any amendments to this chapter.
   B.   Administrators or their designees shall be allowed to present oral or
written comments to the committee expressing their comments relating to said
amendment(s).
   C.   No amendment may be passed without a public hearing first being held
before the committee.
   D.   Publication for a public hearing shall occur no less than fifteen (15)
days and no more than thirty (30) days per section 9-317 of this chapter. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
After its passage, approval and publication according to law, the Kane County
Stormwater Management Ordinance took effect on January 1, 2002. The revision
date of this chapter is June 1, 2019. This chapter replaces Ordinance 01-338
adopted on October 9, 2001 and all revisions thereafter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-8 - 9-27: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE II. REQUIRED SUBMITTALS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMITS
SECTION:
9-28: General Requirements
9-29: Duration And Revision Of Permits
9-30: Required Submittals
9-31: Application And Project Overview
9-32: Plan Set Submittal
9-33: Performance Security
9-34: Maintenance Schedule And Funding
9-35: Record Drawings
9-36: Terms Of Permit/Denial - Appeal
9-37 - 9-57: Reserved
9-28: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A stormwater management permit is required if:
      1.   The development is located in the regulatory floodplain;
      2.   There is a substantial improvement in the floodplain;
      3.   There is any floodplain within the site;
      4.   The development impacts a wetland; or
      5.   The development has a detention storage facility previously
permitted under this chapter and the net new impervious area is less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet and storage for those improvements is not included
in that detention storage facility.
      6.   The development disturbs more than five thousand (5,000) square feet
of ground or two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards of material (earth, soil,
clay, gravel, grindings, etc.), unless the development consists solely of:
         a.   The installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system,
potable water service line or other utility serving an existing structure
located outside of a special management area;
         b.   The installation of a watermain, sanitary sewer, overhead and
underground utilities located outside of special management areas;
         c.   The maintenance, repair or at grade replacement of existing lawn
areas not otherwise requiring a stormwater management permit under this
chapter; or
         d.   The maintenance of an existing stormwater management measure,
Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, not requiring other State or Federal
permits or approvals.
   B.   Certified communities may develop general permits for certain
activities with the approval of the Director.
   C.   All appropriate stormwater management related approvals and permits,
including, without limitation, an IDNR-OWR floodway/floodplain construction
permit, a USACE 404 permit, and an IDNR-OWR dam safety permit shall be obtained
from all Federal, State and regional authorities prior to the issuance of a
stormwater management permit. An IEPA NPDES ILR10 permit, if required, shall be
obtained prior to the start of construction.
   D.   All permit fees shall be paid at the time of application, or according
to a schedule determined by the Administrator. Permit fees shall be established
by separate ordinance. Fees may be established based upon all costs incurred by
the permitting authority in the administration of the permit, including,
without limitation, the costs of review and inspections both during and after
construction within the period for the establishment of permanent cover.
   E.   The design of stormwater facilities, calculations for the determination
of the regulatory floodplain and calculations of the impacts of development
shall meet the standards of this chapter and shall be prepared, signed, and
sealed by a professional engineer (excluding category I BMPs). The signature
and seal of such professional engineer shall stand as his or her opinion that
the submittals which accompany the permit application meet the requirements of
this chapter.
      1.   For projects which include earth embankments which are subjected to
a differential water pressure the submittal shall include evidence that the
embankment design and construction specifications are adequate for the design
conditions. This review shall include consideration of the existing foundation
soils for the embankment, the materials from which the embankment is to be
constructed, compaction requirements for the embankment and protection of the
embankment from failure due to overtopping. Specifications for the construction
and materials for all such embankments shall be included. When directed by the
Administrator, or when the impounded water pressure differential exceeds three
feet (3') or when appropriate considering the volume impounded and water
surface elevation differential to which the embankment is subjected, these
calculations may be required to be reviewed, signed and sealed by a qualified
geotechnical or registered structural engineer.
      2.   For structures (not including earth embankments) that are subject to
a differential water pressure greater than three feet (3') the submittal shall,
at a minimum, be reviewed by a professional engineer. Such reviews shall
include stability of the structure under design conditions considering the
protection of downstream life and property in the event of a failure. When
directed by the Administrator the calculations submitted for such structures
shall be reviewed, signed and sealed by a registered structural engineer. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-29: DURATION AND REVISION OF PERMITS:
   A.   Permits expire on December 31st of the third year following the date of
their issuance.
   B.   For new buildings or substantial improvements to a building in the
floodplain, the start of construction of the structure must begin within one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of permit issuance. If start of
construction of the structure has not begun within one hundred eighty (180)
days of permit issuance, the applicant shall submit to the Administrator proof
that the BFE has not changed and that the project is in compliance with any
revisions to this chapter or resubmit a revised application that reflects
changes to the BFE or any revisions to this chapter. If the Administrator
determines that the revised plans are in compliance with the then current
requirements of this chapter, an amended permit may be issued.
   C.   If the permitted activity has begun but is not complete by the
expiration date of the permit, the permittee may submit a written request for
an extension to the Administrator. Upon receipt of such request, the
Administrator may extend the expiration date for up to three (3) years for
permitted activities outside special management areas. Expiration dates for
permitted activities within special management areas may also be extended for
up to three (3) years provided the activity is in compliance with the then
current requirements of this chapter. A permittee may apply for any number of
extensions.
   D.   If the applicant revises the approved plans after issuance of the
permit, the permittee shall submit the revised plans to the Administrator,
along with a written request for approval. If the Administrator determines that
the revised plans are in compliance with the then current requirements of this
chapter, an amended permit may be issued. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-30: REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
   A.   Refer to table
9-30 of this section for the submittals required to accompany the permit
application based upon the type of development. The Administrator may, at his
or her discretion, modify the submittal requirements on a case by case basis
considering the size, complexity and likelihood that a development will affect
the discharge of stormwater runoff. Such modifications shall be requested and
approved in writing. The Administrator's response shall note the relevant
findings and be specific as to what submittal requirements are changed. The
Administrator may not modify submittal requirements for any aspect of the
development requiring State or Federal permits or approvals, nor for any
application in which any variance is requested.
Kane County   TABLE 9-30
PERMIT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
            Section/Number Descriptions
                                              9-110
                                              Stormwater
Type Of     9-31         9-32      9-86       Mitigation/ 9-145      9-180     9-33        9-34        9-35
Development Applications Plan Set  Stormwater BMP         Floodplain Wetland   Performance Maintenance Record
            And Project  Submittal Submittal  And         Submittal  Submittal Security    Schedule    Drawings
            Overview                          Watershed                                    And Funding
                                              Benefit
                                              Submittal
             Section/Number Descriptions
                                               9-110
                                               Stormwater
Type Of      9-31         9-32      9-86       Mitigation/ 9-145      9-180     9-33        9-34        9-35
Development  Applications Plan Set  Stormwater BMP         Floodplain Wetland   Performance Maintenance Record
             And Project  Submittal Submittal  And         Submittal  Submittal Security    Schedule    Drawings
             Overview                          Watershed                                    And Funding
                                               Benefit
                                               Submittal
All
requiring a  X            X                                                 X           X           X
permit
All sites
with         X            X                              X                   X           X           X
floodplain
All sites
with or
adjacent to
linear       X            X                                        X         X           X           X
watercourse,
nonlinear
waterbodies,
or wetlands
All
applications X            X                              If on-site If on-    X           X           X
for                                                                   site
variances
All
requiring
detention    X            X         X                                        X           X           X
storage
facilities
All
requiring
stormwater
mitigation/  X            X                   X                              X           X           X
BMPs or
watershed
benefit
measures
 
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-31: APPLICATION AND PROJECT OVERVIEW:
   A.   The applicant shall at a minimum, provide the following information on
forms or in a format approved by the Administrator:
      1.   The names and legal addresses of all owners of the site;
      2.   The names and legal addresses of the developer or developers
responsible for completing the development according to the plans submitted,
the terms and conditions of the permit and the requirements of this chapter;
      3.   The common address, legal description and parcel identification
number (PIN) of all parcels which comprise the site;
      4.   The name of the project, area of the site in acres, and type of
development;
      5.   A general narrative description of the development, existing and
proposed conditions and project planning principles considered, including
stormwater mitigation/Best Management Practices (BMPs) used;
      6.   A statement of opinion by a professional engineer as to the presence
of a floodplain or floodway on the site;
      7.   A statement of opinion by a qualified wetland specialist as to the
presence of wetlands on or near the site. This requirement may be waived if the
professional engineer determines in writing that it is obvious from the nature
of the development or redevelopment that wetlands cannot be located on or near
the site;
      8.   Copies of all other permits or permit applications as required;
      9.   A survey of the Subsurface Drainage System;
      10.   An engineer's estimate of probable construction cost of the
stormwater management measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, Subsurface
Drainage Systems, special management area and the installation and maintenance
of erosion and sedimentation control practices; and
      11.   An engineer's estimate of probable yearly maintenance costs for all
stormwater management measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, stormwater
facilities, and special management areas. The owner shall provide certification
that Association Covenants, Deeds and Restrictions will allow for sufficient
funds to be collected based on engineer's estimate with built in inflation not
subject to lot owner approval. If these areas are to be conveyed to one or more
persons, not a homeowners' association, the owner shall provide certification
that this person(s) has the means to perform the yearly maintenance based on
engineer's estimate with built in inflation.
   B.   The application shall be signed by all owners and developers identified
in subsections A1 and A2 of this section and shall contain their attestation
that they have read and understand the provisions of this chapter and agree to
bind themselves to the permitting authority to comply therewith. If at any time
prior to completion and final inspection and approval of the development the
identity of the persons required to be disclosed in subsections A1 and A2 of
this section changes, an amended application containing the current information
shall be filed and the permit shall be amended accordingly. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-32: PLAN SET SUBMITTAL:
All applicants for a stormwater management permit shall provide the following
basic plan exhibits: site topographical map, general plan view drawing, erosion
and sedimentation control plan and a vicinity topographical map. A construction
plan set that includes this information or individual plan sheets may be used
to meet this requirement. Each exhibit may be on more than one drawing for
clarity. The specific information to be included on each exhibit shall be as
noted below:
   A.   Site Topographical Map:
      1.   Map scales as one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') (or less)
and accurate to plus or minus 0.5 foot;
      2.   Existing and proposed contours on-site (1 foot maximum contour
interval) and within one hundred feet (100') of the site;
      3.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns and watershed boundaries;
      4.   Delineation of pre-development regulatory floodplain and floodway
limits;
      5.   Delineation of post-development regulatory floodplain and floodway
limits;
      6.   Location of cross sections and any other hydrologic or hydraulic
computer modeled features;
      7.   The location of all on-site drain tiles in accordance with
subsection 9-83B2a of this chapter;
      8.   Boundaries of all linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies,
wetlands, and buffers, with normal water elevations, if applicable, noted;
      9.   The existing and proposed impervious area and net new impervious
area;
      10.   Location of all existing buildings and those to remain on the site
noted;
      11.   Nearest base flood elevations;
      12.   North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) and reference bench
marks used; and
      13.   All contours used in the calculation of depressional storage
highlighted.
   B.   General Plan View Drawing:
      1.   Drawing at the same scale as the site topographical map;
      2.   Existing Major and Minor Stormwater Systems;
      3.   Proposed Major and Minor Stormwater Systems;
      4.   Design details for stormwater management measures (i.e., stormwater
structure and outlet work detail drawings, etc.). If BMPs and watershed benefit
measures are proposed, additional drawings shall be provided in accordance with
section
9-110 of this chapter;
      5.   Scheduled maintenance program for stormwater management measures,
Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and Subsurface Drainage Systems;
      6.   Planned maintenance tasks and schedule;
      7.   Identification of persons responsible for maintenance;
      8.   Permanent public access maintenance easements granted or dedicated
to, and accepted by, a government entity;
      9.   Proposed regulatory floodplain and floodway location (with the base
flood elevations and flood protection elevations noted);
      10.   Existing linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies, wetlands, and
buffers. If impacts are proposed to these areas, additional drawings shall be
provided in accordance with section
9-180 of this chapter;
      11.   All plan areas at elevations below the high water elevation of
detention storage facilities highlighted; and
      12.   Where the two-tenths percent (0.2%) and the one percent (1%)
regulatory flood profile are available, the plan limit of the floodplain.
   C.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan:
      1.   Drawings at the same scale as the site topographical map;
      2.   Existing and proposed roadways, structures, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks and other impervious surfaces;
      3.   Existing soil types, vegetation and land cover conditions;
      4.   Limits and acreage of disturbance;
      5.   Location of all special management areas;
      6.   Location of all erosion and sedimentation control practices;
      7.   Details for all proposed erosion and sedimentation control
practices;
      8.   List of maintenance tasks for all erosion and sedimentation control
practices;
      9.   Schedule for implementation and maintenance of erosion and
sedimentation control practices and temporary and permanent stabilization; and
      10.   The name, address and phone number at which the person responsible
for erosion and sedimentation control practices may be reached on a twenty four
(24) hour basis.
      11.   All items identified in subsection
9-59J of this chapter.
   D.   Vicinity Topographical Map:
      1.   Vicinity topographical map identifying the upstream drainage area to
the development and downstream receiving channel (a 2 foot contour map is
preferred at a scale readable by the reviewer but a USGS quadrangle map is
acceptable);
      2.   Watershed boundaries for the drainage area through or from the
development;
      3.   Soil types related to hydrologic soils group, vegetation and land
cover affecting runoff upstream of the site for any upstream drainage area;
      4.   Location of site within the major watershed(s); and
      5.   Overland flow path from the downstream end of the development to the
receiving channel. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-33: PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
Performance security in accordance with article VIII of this chapter shall be
required prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-34: MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE AND FUNDING:
A completed maintenance schedule for the stormwater management measures, Major
and Minor Stormwater Systems, Subsurface Drainage Systems and special
management areas in accordance with article IX of this chapter shall be
submitted along with identification of the persons responsible for maintenance
and funding and backup funding sources for maintenance in accordance with
sections
9-233 and
9-234 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-35: RECORD DRAWINGS:
The permittee is required to submit record drawings of all permitted
development improvements, including but not limited to: stormwater management
measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and Subsurface Drainage Systems,
wetland mitigation facilities and stream restoration. The record drawings shall
be signed and sealed by a professional engineer who shall state that the
project as constructed is substantially in conformance with the development as
permitted. The record drawing shall be referenced to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-36: TERMS OF PERMIT/DENIAL - APPEAL:
   A.   Within ten (10) days after being served with the permit or notice that
the permit has been denied, the applicant may appeal the terms or denial of the
permit to the oversight committee. The appeal shall be made by filing a notice
thereof with the oversight committee specifying the specific provisions
appealed from and the grounds therefor. The oversight committee shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal not more than sixty (60) days after the filing of the
notice of appeal. The hearing shall be de novo. Notice of the hearing shall be
served upon the applicant, the Administrator, the Director and upon all
communities within the same watershed as the development to which the appeal
relates. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The oversight
committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct of such
hearings.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the oversight
committee shall decide whether to affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, the
terms or denial of the permit. The decision of the oversight committee shall be
in writing and shall include the specific findings and conclusions supporting
its determination. A copy of the decision and order shall be served upon all
parties entitled to notice in accordance with section
9-316 of this chapter.
   C.   Within ten (10) days of being served with the order of the oversight
committee, the Applicant may (and if the denial of the permit or any of the
terms thereof have been reversed, in whole or in part, by the oversight
committee, the Administrator shall), further appeal to the decision-making
authority. The decision- making authority shall decide the appeal upon the
record before the oversight committee. The decision-making authority shall
decide the appeal within forty five (45) days of its receipt thereof. The
decision-making authority shall affirm the order of the oversight committee if
it is supported by substantial evidence in the record. A copy of the decision
and order of the decision-making authority shall be served upon all parties
entitled to notice in accordance with section
9-316 of this chapter.
   D.   Within ten (10) days of being served with the order of the decision
making authority, the applicant may (and if the effect of the decision making
authority's decision is that the denial of the permit or any of the terms
thereof have been reversed, in whole or in part, the Administrator shall),
further appeal to the committee. The committee shall decide the appeal upon the
record below. The committee shall decide the appeal within forty five (45) days
of its receipt thereof. The committee shall affirm the order of the decision-
making authority if it is supported by substantial evidence in the record. A
copy of the decision and order of the committee shall be served upon all
parties entitled to notice in accordance with section
9-316 of this chapter.
   E.   From a final order of the committee, the applicant may appeal to the
courts under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-37 - 9-57: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE III. REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
SECTION:
9-58: Applicability
9-59: Erosion And Sediment Control
9-60 - 9-80: Reserved
9-58: APPLICABILITY:
All developments and redevelopments shall meet the requirements of this
article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-59: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   A.   Erosion and sedimentation control planning shall be part of the initial
site planning process. In planning the development of the site, the applicant
shall consider the sensitivity of existing soils to erosion and topographical
features such as steep slopes, stream corridors and special management areas
which must be protected to reduce the amount of erosion and sedimentation which
occurs. Where appropriate, existing vegetation shall be protected from
disturbance during construction by fencing or other means. In the planning
process the applicant shall also address the following:
      1.   For projects that involve phased construction, existing land cover
for those areas not under current development shall be addressed. If existing
land cover does not consist of an appropriate dense vegetation, then these
phases shall be planted temporarily to reduce erosion from idle land.
      2.   In planning the erosion and sedimentation control strategy,
preference shall be given to reducing erosion rather than controlling
sedimentation. In order to accomplish this, the construction sequence of the
phases must be carefully considered so that the amount of land area exposed to
erosive forces is the minimum consistent with completing construction.
   B.   An applicant with land disturbing activities greater than one acre
shall provide, upon receipt, a copy of the Notice of Intent, stormwater general
permit under Illinois Environmental Protection Agency general NPDES permit no.
ILR 10 (IEPA NPDES ILR10).
   C.   Standards and specifications for erosion and sedimentation control
practices shall be taken from the current editions of one of the following
sources, where the "Illinois Urban Manual" conflicts with the other sources,
the Illinois Urban Manual shall prevail:
      1.   The "Illinois Urban Manual";
      2.   The Technical Manual;
      3.   IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Projects; and
      4.   Other design criteria, standards or specifications may be approved
by the Administrator.
   D.   The runoff from disturbed areas shall not leave the site without first
passing through sedimentation control practices or devices. This requirement
shall apply to all phases of construction and shall include an ongoing process
of implementation of practices and maintenance of those practices during both
the construction season and any construction shutdown periods.
   E.   In the hydraulic and hydrologic design of major erosion and
sedimentation control practices (those whose tributary drainage area is greater
than 3 acres) such as sedimentation basins and traps, diversions and the like,
the design frequency shall be commensurate with the risk of the design event
being exceeded. The following design frequencies shall be regarded as minimum
design frequencies for the construction period:
      1.   If disturbance is estimated to be permanently stabilized in less
than six (6) months, the storm event having a fifty percent (50%) (2-year
event) chance of being exceeded in any year shall be used for design purposes;
      2.   If disturbance is estimated to be permanently stabilized in greater
than six (6) months but less than one year, the design frequency for major
sedimentation basins shall be a rainfall event with a twenty percent (20%) (5-
year event) chance of being exceeded in any one year;
      3.   If disturbance is estimated to be permanently stabilized in greater
than one year, major sedimentation basins shall be designed for a rainfall
event with a ten percent (10%) (10-year event) chance of being exceeded in any
one year; and
      4.   All sedimentation basins shall be designed for a minimum residence
time of ten (10) hours for detained runoff and draw down the storage within a
twenty four (24) to forty (40) hour period at discharge rates, which at a
minimum do not increase over pre-construction conditions for the storm event
having a fifty percent (50%) chance (2-year frequency, 24-hour storm event) of
being exceeded in any given year. The basin should have a maintenance schedule
that restores its original design dimensions once the sediment has accumulated
to two-thirds (2/3) the design depth of the dead sediment storage per the
Illinois Urban Manual.
   F.   The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall designate a series of
practices which shall be implemented either at the direction of the applicant
or the applicant's representative on- site or at the direction of the
Administrator should an inspection of the site indicate a deficiency in soil
and erosion and sedimentation control practices. At a minimum, these practices
shall include: sedimentation basins, sediment traps, diversion swales, silt
fences, temporary seeding, and erosion control blankets.
   G.   The area of disturbance on-site at any one time shall be limited to
forty (40) acres. An additional forty (40) acres (a maximum of 80 acres of
disturbance at any one time) may be disturbed if necessary to balance cut and
fill on-site. The Administrator may approve a larger area of disturbance
pursuant to a plan for phased construction or after development has begun, if
the developer adequately demonstrates the need therefor and the Administrator
finds that adequate temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control
practices can be maintained and that the developer is proposing an area of
disturbance which at any one time is the smallest practical area consistent
with the intent to limit disturbed area and minimize the risk of sediment being
introduced into site runoff and being carried off-site. No additional area may
be disturbed without the permission of the Administrator until the previously
disturbed areas have been temporarily or permanently stabilized.
   H.   Stabilization of disturbed areas must, at a minimum, be initiated
immediately whenever any clearing, grading, excavating or other earth
disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the site, or
temporarily ceased on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period
exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days. Stabilization of disturbed areas must be
initiated within one working day of permanent or temporary cessation of earth
disturbing activities and shall be completed as soon as possible but not later
than fourteen (14) days from the initiation of stabilization work in an area.
Exceptions to these time frames are specified below:
      1.   Where the initiation of stabilization practices is precluded by snow
cover, stabilization practices shall be initiated as soon as practicable.
      2.   On areas where construction activity has temporarily ceased and will
resume after fourteen (14) days, a temporary stabilization method can be used.
   I.   The condition of the construction site for winter shutdown shall be
addressed early in the fall growing season so that slopes and other bare earth
areas may be stabilized with temporary and/or permanent vegetative cover for
proper erosion and sedimentation control. All open areas that are to remain
idle throughout the winter shall receive temporary erosion control practices
including temporary seeding, mulching and/or erosion control blanket prior to
the end of the fall growing season. The areas to be worked beyond the end of
the growing season must incorporate soil stabilization practices that do not
rely on vegetative cover such as erosion control blanket and heavy mulching.
   J.   Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall include the following:
      1.   Detailed construction phasing plan identifying erosion and
sedimentation control practices to be in place for each phase shall be
submitted;
      2.   Erosion and sedimentation control practices to be installed
initially prior to stripping existing vegetation or mass grading shall be
indicated on the plans;
      3.   Permanent stabilization practices shall be indicated on a separate
plan;
      4.   The expected 2-year and 10-year runoff rates from all off-site areas
draining into the site shall be identified on the plan;
      5.   Methods for conveying flows through the site during construction
shall be indicated. These methods must include the temporary and permanent
stabilization practices to be used to reduce velocity and erosion from flow
through the construction zone;
      6.   A maintenance schedule of each practice used shall be indicated on
the plan;
      7.   A note stating that at a minimum, all erosion and sedimentation
control practices on-site shall be inspected in accordance with the current
IEPA NPDES ILR10 permit, which is weekly or after a one-half inch (1/2") or
greater rainfall event, as of the revision date of this chapter. Any required
repairs shall be made to keep these practices functional as designed; and
      8.   Special management areas shall be indicated on the erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
   K.   Temporary stream crossings of linear watercourses used only for and
during construction shall be designed to convey a storm event having a fifty
percent (50%) chance of occurrence in any given year (2-year frequency, 24-hour
storm event), without overtopping unless a more frequent design event is
allowed by the Administrator and will not obstruct the portion of the channel
carrying the base flow. The entire crossing shall be designed to withstand
hydrodynamic and erosive forces up to the base flood event without washing out.
Ephemeral streams may be crossed at temporary at grade crossings provided that
the crossing point is stabilized with materials resistant to the erosive forces
produced by runoff from the upstream drainage area and the design is approved
by the Administrator. All temporary stream crossings shall be completely
removed, and the stream restored to its preconstruction condition upon
completion of construction. Restoration shall incorporate appropriate native
vegetation.
   L.   To the extent practicable, proposed ditches and waterways that are to
convey off-site flows through the site shall be stabilized prior to their use
to convey flood flows.
   M.   Erosion control blanket placed along the banks of linear watercourses,
within wetlands or buffers shall be one hundred percent (100%) biodegradable or
photodegradable, unless otherwise approved by the Director (or Administrator in
a community certified to administer article VII of this chapter).
   N.   Stockpiles of soil and other building materials (sand, limestone, etc.)
shall not be located in special management areas or buffers, unless otherwise
approved by the Administrator. If a stockpile is to remain in place for more
than three (3) days, erosion and sedimentation control practices shall be
provided.
   O.   Storm sewer inlets shall be protected with sediment trapping and/or
filter control devices during construction.
   P.   Water pumped or which is otherwise discharged from the site during
construction dewatering shall be filtered and a means provided to reduce
erosion and sedimentation.
   Q.   Graveled roads, access drives, parking areas of sufficient width and
length and vehicle wash down facilities if necessary, shall be provided to
prevent soil from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any soil
tracked onto a public or private roadway shall be removed before the end of
each workday or sooner as directed by the authority maintaining the roadway or
the Administrator.
   R.   On areas of exposed soils, the generation of dust shall be minimized
through the appropriate application of water or other dust suppression
techniques.
   S.   The applicant shall design, install, implement, and maintain effective
pollution prevention practices to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a
minimum, such practices must be designed, installed, implemented and maintained
to:
      1.   Ensure and demonstrate compliance with applicable State and/or local
waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system regulations;
      2.   Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle
washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated
in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better
treatment prior to discharge;
      3.   Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products,
construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides,
herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste and other materials present on the site
to precipitation and to stormwater;
      4.   Minimize the exposure of fuel, oil, hydraulic fluid and other
petroleum products by storing them in covered areas or containment areas;
      5.   Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and
implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures; and
      6.   Monitor directional drilling operations and have a contingency plan
in place to contain drilling lubricants and restore disturbed areas if a frac-
out occurs.
   T.   For sites that require an IEPA NPDES ILR10 permit, the applicant shall
provide qualified personnel to inspect disturbed areas of the site for
compliance with the plan. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with the
current IEPA NPDES ILR10 permit, which, as of the revision date of this
chapter, is at least once every seven (7) calendar days and within twenty four
(24) hours of the end of a storm or by the end of the following business or
work day that is one-half inch (1/2") or greater. Areas inaccessible during
inspections due to flooding or other unsafe conditions shall be inspected
within seventy two (72) hours of becoming accessible. Inspections may be
reduced to once per month when construction activities have ceased due to
frozen conditions. Weekly inspections will recommence when construction
activities are conducted, or if there is one-half inch (1/2") or greater
precipitation event, or a discharge due to snowmelt occurs. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-60 - 9-80: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE IV. REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
9-81: General Information
9-82: General Stormwater Requirements
9-83: Site Runoff Requirements
9-84: Detention Storage Facility Requirements
9-85: Fee-In-Lieu Of Stormwater Management Measures
9-86: Stormwater Submittal
9-87 - 9-106: Reserved
9-81: GENERAL INFORMATION:
   A.   All developments shall meet the requirements of sections
9-81 and
9-82 of this article and articles III and VI of this chapter.
   B.   The thresholds for requiring stormwater management measures are
summarized in
table 9-81 of this subsection.
TABLE 9-81
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES
X = Required; O = Option for required measure; A = Allowed
            New Impervious Area Detention               Watershed
Development For Development     Storage   Stormwater    Benefit   Fee-In-Lieu3
Category    Or Net New          Facility  Mitigation/   Measure1  (Section)
            Impervious Area     (Section) BMP (Section) (Section)
            For Redevelopment
                New Impervious
                Area            Detention               Watershed
Development     For Development Storage   Stormwater    Benefit   Fee-In-Lieu3
Category        Or Net New      Facility  Mitigation/   Measure1  (Section)
                Impervious Area (Section) BMP (Section) (Section)
                For
                Redevelopment
Development or                            X2                      A
redevelopment   <5,000 sq. ft.           (                      (
                                          9-107C)                 9-85)
                5,000 sq. ft. -           X                       A
               24,999 sq. ft.           (                      (
                                          9-107C)                 9-85)
                25,000 sq. ft.  X         X             O         A
               and <1% site    (         (             (         (
                area            9-84)     9-107D)       9-108)    9-85)
                25,000 sq. ft.  X         X                       A
               and 1% site     (         9-107D)                (
                area            9-84)                             9-85)
                >1-acre in
                aggregate for             X1            O         A
Linear project  roads and                (             (         (
(trails/roads)  trails that are           9-107C)       9-108)    9-85)
                AASHTO max.
                width
                >1-acre in
                aggregate for   X         X                       A
               roads and       (         (                      (
                trails that are 9-84)     9-107D)                 9-85)
                > AASHTO max.
                width
Total impervious area >50% site           X                       A
area (for sites <1-acre)                 (                      (
                                          9-107)                  9-85)
Hydrologically disturbed area   X4        X             O         A
>3-acres                        (         (             (         (
                                9-84)     9-107D)       9-108)    9-85)
 
Notes:
   1.    A watershed benefit measure may be provided in lieu of the required
detention storage facility and stormwater mitigation/BMP at the discretion of
the Administrator.
   2.    Required at the discretion of the Administrator where known flooding
or drainage issues are in the immediate vicinity of the project, in areas
without adequate downstream stormwater capacity, or that outlet to a volume
sensitive watershed.
   3.    Fee-in-lieu requires approval of the Administrator and compliance with
the requirements listed under subsection B4 of this section.
   4.    Redevelopment with a net new impervious area less than the impervious
area being removed will not be required to provide a detention storage facility
per subsection B3a of this section.
      1.   The Administrator may require stormwater management measures for
developments or redevelopments in areas where known flooding or drainage issues
are in the immediate vicinity of the project, in areas without adequate
downstream stormwater capacity, or that outlet to a volume sensitive watershed
unless the applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Administrator,
that the development or redevelopment will not result in adverse impacts
upstream or downstream of the site.
      2.   An exemption from the detention storage facility requirements may be
granted by the Administrator in accordance with subsection
9-84R, tables
9-84.A and
9-84.B of this article for redevelopment sites containing an existing detention
storage facility. The redevelopment may still be required to provide a BMP or
watershed benefit measure to meet the requirements of table
9-81 of this subsection B.
      3.   The following special conditions and cases of development and
redevelopment are exempt from providing stormwater management measures:
         a.   Redevelopment with a net new impervious area less than the
impervious area being removed will not be required to provide a detention
storage facility. The redevelopment may still be required to provide a BMP to
meet any other requirements of table
9-81 of this subsection B, such as hydrologically disturbed area or total
impervious area;
         b.   Bridge and culvert modifications, repairs, and replacements;
         c.   Projects whose sole purpose is to install, repair or replace
water, sewer and all underground or overhead utility lines within a public
right-of-way or utility easement;
         d.   Stream restoration projects;
         e.   Restoration of natural areas;
         f.   Wetland mitigation facilities or banks; and
         g.   Flood-relief projects.
      4.   The Administrator may waive the requirements of table
9-81 of this subsection B and approve a fee-in-lieu of stormwater management
measures if the following conditions are met:
         a.   The development will not increase peak discharges from the site,
nor change the existing conveyance of off-site flow:
            (1)   If the development produces increased runoff to a volume
sensitive watershed, fee-in-lieu may be allowed if it discharges to an outfall
in accordance with subsection
9-83B1 of this article;
            (2)   If the development produces increased runoff to a volume
sensitive watershed and it does not discharge to an outfall in accordance with
subsection
9-83B1 of this article, then:
               (A)   The applicant shall be required to rebuild the outfall in
accordance with subsection 9-83B1 of this article before approval of fee-in-
lieu; or
               (B)   The cost to rebuild the outfall in accordance with
subsection
9-83B1 of this article shall be included in the assessed fee.
         b.   The development provides a net benefit in water quality compared
to the existing conditions;
         c.   The Administrator may waive the requirements of subsection
9-81B3a of this article if the development discharges directly to a perennial
stream or river and will not cause an adverse hydraulic impact. (Ord. 19-151,
5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-82: GENERAL STORMWATER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No development shall:
      1.   Result in any new or additional expense to any person other than the
developer for flood protection; or
      2.   Increase water surface elevations or decrease conveyance capacity
upstream or downstream of the site.
   B.   Analysis and design of all stormwater management measures required for
a development shall:
      1.   Comply with the standards and criteria established in any applicable
Watershed Plan or Interim Watershed Plan; and
      2.   Ensure that the site is reasonably safe from flooding.
Stormwater management measures shall be functional where practicable before a
building permit is issued for any other construction on a site and all of its
parcels.
   C.   The design of any development shall incorporate the following specific
planning principles:
      1.   Impervious areas are the minimum necessary to satisfy the intended
design function. Where requirements of zoning ordinances conflict with this
principle, consideration has been given to asking for a zoning variance.
      2.   Where feasible, allow sufficient right-of-way and easement widths so
that stormwater runoff may be conveyed in vegetated swales. Storm sewers may be
used for conveyance of nuisance flows and where conveyance in vegetated swales
is impractical.
      3.   Existing open channels have been preserved and incorporated into the
design.
      4.   BMPs have been used in the site drainage plan to reduce the volume
of stormwater runoff and the quantity of runoff pollutants.
      5.   Wetlands have been avoided, preserved or enhanced. (Ord. 19-151, 5-
7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-83: SITE RUNOFF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The location of the existing outfall from the site prior to development
is maintained (unless approved in writing by the Administrator) and in a manner
so as not to cause an adverse hydraulic impact downstream. Concentrated
discharges from new developments must enter conveyance systems capable of
carrying the design flow rate without increasing flood elevations, damage,
inundation depths or duration, erosion or maintenance costs to upstream,
downstream, or adjacent properties.
   B.   The following principles and requirements shall be observed in the
design:
      1.   Off-Site Outfall: Surface drainage, Major and Minor Stormwater
Systems and Subsurface Drainage Systems shall be evaluated with regard to their
capacity and capability to convey nuisance flows and the detention storage
facility release without damage to downstream structures and land. The off-site
outfall shall be evaluated to the nearest open channel. If the outfall is
located within a publicly owned storm drainage system, it shall be evaluated to
the downstream location directed by the Administrator. The following provisions
shall apply:
         a.   The applicant or developer shall notify adjoining, downstream
property owners in writing of any proposed modifications to stormwater outlet
locations and designs.
         b.   Discharges from outfalls to downstream agricultural surface
drainage systems and steep slope zones (examples are provided in the Technical
Manual) with no base flow must be conveyed one hundred percent (100%)
underground within forty eight (48) hours after a storm event up to and
including the one percent (1%) chance storm event.
         c.   Off-site outfalls shall be located within a public right-of- way
or dedicated easement and marked on the record drawings. The easement language
shall clearly define the individual or entity responsible for long term
maintenance.
         d.   Discharge from outfalls to volume sensitive watersheds shall not
increase flood elevations and shall mitigate for any additional volume produced
to ensure the flood duration is not increased.
         e.   Off-site Agricultural Subsurface Drainage Systems shall not be
used for surface water discharges including the discharge from the control
structure or nuisance flows discharges, but may be used for stormwater
mitigation/BMP underdrains in accordance with reasonable use:
            (1)   The capacity of such systems shall be the lesser of the
existing downstream capacity or three thousandths of a cubic foot per second
per acre of tributary area (0.003 cfs/acre) to the Agricultural Subsurface
Drainage System;
            (2)   Nonagricultural Subsurface Drainage Systems may be used for
nuisance flows with the approval of the permitting authority or owner of the
Subsurface Drainage System;
            (3)   Nuisance flows must be conveyed in a storm sewer to an open
channel or publicly owned storm drainage system with approval by the permitting
authority if a Nonagricultural Subsurface Drainage System is not available; and
            (4)   Off-site Agricultural Subsurface Drainage Systems may be used
for surface water discharges including the discharge from the control structure
or nuisance flows discharges if there is an agreement between the applicant and
the downstream owner specific to capacity and long term maintenance and that
agreement is recorded with the property and on a plat.
         f.   If an off-site outfall is required to be constructed and the
downstream property owner refuses to grant access across his or her property,
and construction within a right-of-way or alternate route is not feasible or
reasonable, the applicant shall provide the Administrator a two (2) year post-
development security for the engineer's estimate of probable construction cost
for the off-site outfall plus a ten percent (10%) contingency. If the
downstream property owner has not granted access for construction of the
improvements within two (2) years following completion of the development, the
Administrator shall release the security.
         g.   The applicant shall consider coordinating with adjacent property
owners that may develop within the same tributary area to design and construct
a mutually beneficial stormwater management improvement to meet the
requirements of this chapter. Maintenance, construction costs, and
responsibilities for the improvement shall be coordinated between the owners by
an agreement.
         h.   Contributions to a Recapture Fund shall be considered by the
certified community for developments occurring without an off- site outfall
that meets the provisions of this section in an effort to establish the means
to construct a mutually beneficial stormwater system.
         i.   Permit applications are required to be submitted for a fifteen
(15) business day review to the following entities prior to issuance of a
stormwater management permit:
            (1)   Drainage Districts, if the development discharges to a
drainage facility owned and maintained by an active Drainage District within
the County; or
            (2)   Downstream municipalities (including unincorporated Kane
County), if the development discharges outside of the municipal boundary of the
certified community issuing the permit.
      2.   On-Site Drainage Systems: Agricultural Subsurface Drainage Systems
and other Subsurface Drainage Systems shall be evaluated in accordance with
article II of this chapter and the following provisions:
         a.   A subsurface drainage survey shall be conducted to locate
existing farm and storm drain tiles by means of slit trenching or other
appropriate methods performed by a qualified subsurface drainage consultant.
Any Subsurface Drainage System damaged during investigation shall be repaired
to its previous working status. A subsurface drainage survey shall include the
following as applicable on a topographic map:
            (1)   The location of each slit trench identified to correspond
with the investigation report and field staked at no less than fifty foot (50')
intervals;
            (2)   The location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow,
tile size and any connection to adjoining properties;
            (3)   A summary of the investigation report showing trench
identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of tile
filled with water, percentage of restrictions caused by sedimentation, depth of
ground cover and working status; and
            (4)   The name, address, phone number and qualifications of the
person or consultant responsible for the subsurface drainage survey.
         b.   Information collected during the subsurface drainage survey shall
be used as part of the design and construction of a stormwater management
system that meets the requirements of this chapter. The County's standard
Subsurface Drainage System notes (refer to the Technical Guidance Manual) shall
be included on the plans. Subsurface Drainage Systems that service a single
site may be excused from this requirement upon approval from the Administrator.
         c.   The Administrator may accept a drain tile map prepared by a
Drainage District or other reliable source in lieu of a subsurface drainage
survey. The survey requirement shall be waived by the Administrator for any
development with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of net new
impervious area. The Administrator may waive the survey requirement for other
development, provided the applicant submits a narrative and supporting evidence
indicating to the satisfaction of the Administrator that Subsurface Drainage
Systems are not likely present within the development. This evidence may
consist of:
            (1)   Soil maps;
            (2)   Historic aerial photographs;
            (3)   Historic topographic maps; and
            (4)   Wetland maps.
         d.   Subsurface Drainage Systems found on-site during design or
construction of the development shall be replaced and incorporated into the new
Minor Stormwater System or Subsurface Drainage System. The system or bypass
shall be of an equivalent size and capacity. The capacity shall be determined
by either the capacity of the existing tile flowing full, in its original
condition, or the existing downstream capacity, whichever is more restrictive.
A flow restrictor shall be required as necessary to achieve the existing
discharge requirements.
         e.   All existing on-site Agricultural Subsurface Drainage Systems not
serving a beneficial use shall be abandoned in their entirety by trench removal
prior to development and recorded on record drawings. If any existing system
continues to serve adjacent properties, the applicant or his or her
representative must maintain drainage service during construction until new
storm sewers or a maintainable outlet can be installed for a permanent
connection.
      3.   Off-Site Tributary: Existing drainage systems shall be evaluated
with regard to existing capabilities and reasonable future expansion capacities
of upstream properties. The following provisions shall apply:
         a.   All existing tributary Subsurface Drainage Systems shall be
incorporated into the new Minor Stormwater System or Subsurface Drainage System
including observation structures located at the limits of the site. Maintenance
access shall be provided through an easement;
         b.   Subsurface connections serving off-site tributary areas shall
have a free flow discharge into the drainage system within the development,
where practical, and shall not be subject to head pressure within the storm
sewer or surcharge resulting from fluctuating water elevations in a detention
storage facility;
         c.   Sizing of subsurface connections for off-site tributary areas
shall be based upon the established sizing chart published as part of Illinois
Drainage Law to allow for reasonable future subsurface drainage improvements to
occur on upstream, tributary farms. A drainage coefficient of three-eighth
inches per day (3/8"/day) shall be assumed for plastic tubing;
         d.   The applicant or his or her representative shall consult with the
upstream land owner regarding plans for future stormwater improvements. The
applicant or the representative shall provide documentation showing
consultation with the upstream owner regarding future drainage improvements;
and
         e.   Tributary surface conveyance from agricultural land shall be
accepted by the new development with design consideration given to the natural
amount of erosion, sediment and farm debris present in agricultural runoff.
Highly erodible land in agricultural production shall maintain agricultural
Best Management Practices in accordance with NRCS conservation guidelines and
standards. The following provisions shall apply:
            (1)   The applicant shall work with the agricultural land owners to
develop a means for a maintainable system, such as a sedimentation trap. The
proposed system may be provided on the site or the upstream agricultural
property;
            (2)   If a maintainable system is not provided then the tributary
surface conveyance from agricultural land shall bypass the Major and Minor
Stormwater System and detention storage facility within the development;
            (3)   Upstream surface agricultural flows shall be conveyed through
the development within a public right-of-way, outlot, or other commonly owned
property. It shall not be conveyed in a drainage easement located on a private,
residential property; and
            (4)   Maintenance costs and responsibility for this system shall be
included in the long-term maintenance plan in accordance with article IX of
this chapter for the development.
      4.   Preservation Of Existing Systems: New roadway construction shall
preserve existing Subsurface Drainage Systems within the right-of-way.
Observation structures shall be placed at the right-of-way and Subsurface
Drainage Systems found not to be flowing between structures at the end of
construction shall be replaced if damaged.
   C.   Minor Stormwater Systems shall be sized to convey runoff from the
tributary watershed under fully developed conditions consistent with the design
requirements of the permitting authority.
   D.   Major Stormwater Systems shall be sized to carry the storm with a one
percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year without causing additional
flood damage.
   E.   Major and Minor Stormwater Systems shall be located within easements or
rights-of-way explicitly providing for public access or maintenance of such
facilities.
   F.   All developments shall have an overland flow path to the downstream
limit of the site that will pass flow from the storm with a one percent (1%)
chance of occurrence in any one year without increasing flood damage. If the
upstream drainage area is less than twenty (20) acres, a storm sewer pipe and
inlet sized for the storm with a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any
one year may be constructed in lieu of providing an overland flow path.
Overland flow paths internal to the site shall be considered part of the Major
Stormwater System and shall be designed for conveyance of a minimum of one
cubic foot per second per tributary acre (1 cfs/acre) without damage to
structures. All structures adjacent to an overland flow path shall comply with
the building protection standards of section
9-139 of this chapter.
   G.   Design runoff rates shall be calculated using the event hydrograph
methods and the assumptions contained in subsection
9-84C of this article. Design runoff rates for minor conveyance systems may be
calculated using the rational method if the tributary watershed is less than
twenty (20) acres.
   H.   Any design runoff rate calculation method shall use Bulletin 70
northeast sectional rainfall statistics and shall calculate flow from all
tributary areas upstream of the point of design. Peak discharges for conveyance
design purposes shall be based on the one percent (1%) critical duration
considering the appropriate rainfall distribution.
   I.   Maximum flow depths for new transverse stream crossings shall not
exceed one foot (1') at the crown of the road during the storm with a one
percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year. The maximum flow depth on a
roadway shall not exceed six inches (6") at the crown for flow parallel to the
roadway. For flow over a roadway or parallel to a roadway the product of the
flow depth (in feet) and velocity (in feet per second) shall not exceed four
(4) for the storm with a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year.
   J.   Transfers of waters between watersheds (diversions) shall be prohibited
except when such transfers will not violate the provisions of subsection
9-82A of this article and are otherwise lawful. Watersheds for the purposes of
this section shall be the major watershed divides shown in article XVII,
appendix A of this chapter.
   K.   Building protection standards shall be in accordance with section
9-139 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-84: DETENTION STORAGE FACILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The onsite hydrologically disturbed area, area of land cover
disturbance, or a combination thereof, whichever encompasses the greatest area
of the site, shall be used to calculate the required detention storage volume.
The tributary area at the point of discharge shall be used to calculate the
allowable release rate of the restrictor for the detention storage facility.
   B.   Absent any applicable Watershed Plan or Interim Watershed Plan,
sufficient detention storage shall be provided such that the probability of the
post-development release rate exceeding 0.1 cubic foot per second per acre of
development shall be less than one percent (1%) per year.
      1.   For sites where the undeveloped release rate is less than 0.1 cubic
feet per second per acre, the developed release rate and corresponding
detention storage volume shall be based on the existing undeveloped release
rate for the site.
      2.   The applicant shall demonstrate the allowable release rate from the
site, considering all upstream tributary flows, is less than the existing
conditions flows from the one percent (1%) critical duration design storm.
      3.   The Administrator may allow a higher release rate to accommodate the
minimum restrictor size specified in subsection I of this section provided that
the applicant demonstrates there are no adverse impacts.
   C.   Runoff volumes shall be calculated using event hydrograph methods (such
as EPA-SWMM, HEC-1, HEC-HMS, TR-20, TR-55 or other tabular methods using SCS
curve number methodology as approved by the Administrator). Event methods shall
incorporate the following assumptions:
      1.   Antecedent moisture condition equals two (2);
      2.   Appropriate Huff rainfall distribution except that SCS type II
distribution is acceptable with TR-55 tabular method only; and
      3.   Twenty four (24) hour duration for the storm with a one percent (1%)
probability of occurrence in any one year as specified by Bulletin 70 northeast
sectional rainfall statistics.
   D.   When depressional storage is present on-site, detention storage volume
shall be provided in accordance with subsections A and B of this section. A
volume equivalent to any filled depressional storage shall be provided between
the high-water elevation and the elevation of the emergency overflow at a one-
to-one (1:1) ratio. The emergency overflow shall be designed and sized in
accordance with subsection G of this section.
   E.   If there is additional on-site or off-site tributary area to the
detention storage facility that is routed to the basin, but is not
hydrologically disturbed or is off-site to the development, then:
      1.   Detention volume shall be provided for the development according to
subsections A and B of this section when there is no depressional storage on-
site. The restrictor shall be sized independently for a release rate of 0.1
cubic feet per second per acre for the total tributary area to the detention
storage facility using the computed high-water elevation and assuming
appropriate tailwater considerations. The normal water level shall be designed
to establish the design head on the reservoir side of the restrictor. The
emergency overflow shall be sized to accommodate the upstream tributary flow in
accordance with subsection G of this section. Two stage restrictors shall be
considered with large, off-site tributary areas.
      2.   Sites with upstream tributary flows and depressional storage shall
provide detention volume for the development in accordance with subsection B of
this section and shall replace any lost depressional storage between the high-
water elevation and the elevation of the emergency overflow. The restrictor
shall be sized independently using the high-water elevation used to replace the
depressional storage, and the normal water elevation. The restrictor is sized
for a maximum release rate at the new high-water elevation for 0.1 cubic feet
per second per acre for the total tributary area. An emergency overflow shall
be sized to accommodate the upstream tributary flow in accordance with
subsections D and G of this section.
   F.   Nuisance flows shall be included when calculating the allowable release
rate. Any nuisance flows that are not routed through the detention storage
facility shall be added to the allowable release rate assuming a rate of five
(5) gallons per minute per structure with sump pumps for the first fifty (50)
structures, and assuming three (3) gallons per minute per structure for every
structure thereafter.
   G.   The detention storage facility shall have an emergency overflow set at
a minimum elevation required to contain the detention storage volume and any
depressional storage volume in accordance with subsection D of this section.
The emergency overflow shall be sized to convey the flow from the allowable
release rate for the site for the one percent (1%) critical duration design
storm.
   H.   Hydraulic computations for the release structure must assume
appropriate backwater conditions considering the likelihood of concurrent flood
events on the site and receiving stream.
   I.   Restrictors such as orifices, weirs and perforated risers shall be
located within a control structure and be designed to prevent tampering and
clogging and reduce the need for maintenance. The Administrator may adopt a
minimum restrictor policy so long as the policy does not have a minimum
diameter greater than four inches (4") when a single pipe outlet or an orifice
plate is used to restrict the outflow from a detention storage facility. The
Administrator may require a restrictor less than four inches (4") in diameter
if it is determined there will be adverse impacts to properties downstream or
if it outlets to a volume sensitive watershed.
   J.   Detention storage facilities shall be designed such that:
      1.   A minimum freeboard of one foot (1') is provided above the high-
water elevation as determined by the flow over the emergency overflow according
to subsection G of this section.
      2.   All design detention storage volume shall be provided above the
seasonal high groundwater table and the invert elevation of the restrictor;
      3.   The impacts of stormwater runoff on water quality are minimized by
incorporating BMPs as described in article V of this chapter;
      4.   The distance between inlets and outlets is maximized to the extent
possible;
      5.   Sedimentation and catchment of floating material is facilitated.
Unless specifically approved by the Administrator, concrete lined low flow
ditches shall not be used in detention storage facilities;
      6.   The basin functions without human intervention under tailwater
conditions assuming the tailwater conditions for the receiving stream is equal
to the design storm event with a ten percent (10%) (10-year event) chance of
being exceeded in any one year; and
      7.   Minimum maintenance is required and there is adequate access for
maintenance equipment.
   K.   Detention storage facilities located within the regulatory floodplain
shall:
      1.   Comply with article VI of this chapter;
      2.   Store the required amount of detention volume to meet the allowable
release rate under all stream flow and tailwater conditions up to the design
storm event with a ten percent (10%) (10-year event) chance of being exceeded
in any one year flood elevation on the adjacent receiving watercourse. The
Administrator may approve designs which can be shown by detailed hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis to provide a net watershed benefit not otherwise realized by
strict application of the requirements set forth in this subsection; and
      3.   Provide compensatory storage in accordance with section
9-141 of this chapter.
   L.   Detention volume provided by enlarging existing regulatory floodplain
storage (an on-stream detention storage facility) shall be allowed only as a
watershed benefit measure.
   M.   Detention storage facilities may be located off-site if:
      1.   The off-site storage facility meets all the requirements of this
article;
      2.   Adequate storage capacity in the off-site facility is dedicated to
the development; and
      3.   The development includes means to convey the one percent (1%) chance
design storm to the off-site storage facility.
   N.   Detention storage facilities for redevelopment shall be designed and
constructed according to subsection R, tables
9-84.A and
9-84.B of this section with the following characteristics:
      1.   The required total detention volume for the site shall not be less
than the existing volume of the existing detention storage facility at the time
of application, regardless of the provisions of this section;
      2.   Incidental disturbance to an existing detention storage facility to
provide new required detention volume will not be counted as part of the
hydrologically disturbed area;
      3.   The redevelopment provides stormwater mitigation/BMPs in accordance
with section
9-137 of this chapter, subsection
9-81B,
table 9-81 of this article and article V of this chapter; and
      4.   The redevelopment provides adequate capacity to convey stormwater
runoff to the existing detention storage facility for all storms up to and
including the one percent (1%) design storm.
   O.   Structures built across the channel to impound water to meet detention
storage requirements shall be prohibited on any perennial stream (i.e., has
continuous flow) unless part of a public flood control project with a net
watershed benefit. Those streams appearing as blue on a USGS quadrangle map
shall be assumed to be perennial unless better data is provided by the
developer. In all cases it must be demonstrated that all such structures will
not cause short term or long-term stream instability. Where such facilities are
approved the applicant must also comply with article VI of this chapter and
obtain an IDNR-OWR dam safety permit or letter stating no permit is required
prior to the start of such activity.
   P.   All structures adjacent to a detention storage facility shall comply
with the building protection standards of section
9-139 of this chapter.
   Q.   Record drawings shall be provided for every detention storage facility
and shall indicate the as-constructed volume and utility information, including
the control structure.
   R.   Maintenance costs and responsibility for every detention storage
facility shall be included in the long-term maintenance plan submitted as part
of the stormwater management permit for the development.
   TABLE 9-84.A
   PRE-ORDINANCE BASIN (Prior to 2002)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2947.jpg]
 
   TABLE 9-84.B
   POST-ORDINANCE BASIN (After 2002)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2949.jpg]
 
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-85: FEE-IN-LIEU OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES:
   A.   The Administrator may require, or in the limited circumstances
prescribed in this article an applicant may request approval of, the payment of
a fee-in-lieu of stormwater management measures. The fee-in-lieu of shall be
the greater of:
      1.   The sum of the fee for each acre-foot or part thereof of detention
volume otherwise required as computed under a schedule adopted for such purpose
by the permitting authority, the fee for each cubic-foot or part thereof of BMP
storage otherwise required as computed under a schedule adopted for such
purpose by the permitting authority, and the engineer's opinion of probable
cost of off-site Major, Minor or Subsurface Drainage System; or
      2.   The engineer's opinion of probable cost of otherwise providing the
required stormwater management measure and the verifiable off-site Major, Minor
or Subsurface Drainage System, including the value of the land required and all
construction costs. For this purpose, the land required shall be valued
according to the use to which it will ultimately be put if not used to provide
the required stormwater management measure. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-86: STORMWATER SUBMITTAL:
The stormwater submittal shall include a narrative discussion and calculations
to support a finding by a professional engineer that the proposed development
complies with the technical requirements of this article. The submittal shall
consist, at a minimum, of the following materials:
   A.   A narrative description of the existing and proposed site drainage
patterns and conditions and include a description of off-site conditions which
help to identify stormwater considerations in the design;
   B.   A schedule for implementation of the site's stormwater management plan;
   C.   On-site and off-site runoff calculations that address the following:
      1.   Documentation of the procedures and assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for sizing Major Stormwater Systems and
Minor Stormwater Systems;
      2.   Cross section data for open channels;
      3.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under design flow
conditions; and
      4.   Hydraulic grade line and water surface elevations under base flood
flow conditions.
   D.   Detention storage calculations, which address the following:
      1.   Calculation of existing impervious areas, new impervious areas, and
net new impervious areas;
      2.   Documentation of the procedures and assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the allowable release rate;
      3.   Documentation of the procedures and assumptions used to calculate
on-site depressional storage;
      4.   Documentation of the procedures and assumptions used to calculate
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions for determining the detention storage
volume;
      5.   Elevation and storage data and calculations for detention volume;
and
      6.   Elevation and discharge data and calculations specifically related
to the restrictor depicted in the engineering drawings. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-87 - 9-106: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE V. REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MITIGATION/BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
(BMPs) AND WATERSHED BENEFIT MEASURES
SECTION:
9-107: Requirements For Stormwater Mitigation/BMPs
9-108: Requirements For Watershed Benefit Measures
9-109: Performance Standards And Monitoring For Stormwater Mitigation/BMPs And
Watershed Benefit Measures
9-110: Stormwater Mitigation/Best Management Practice (BMP) And Watershed
Benefit Measure Submittal
9-111 - 9-131: Reserved
9-107: REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MITIGATION/BMPs:
   A.   All development and redevelopment shall meet the requirements of
sections
9-82 and
9-83 and articles III and VI of this chapter.
   B.   Stormwater mitigation/BMPs shall be required for all developments and
redevelopments in accordance with table
9-107 of this subsection.
TABLE 9-107
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MITIGATION/
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs)
X = Required; A = Allowed
            New Impervious Area Stormwater Mitigation/BMP
Development For Development                               Fee-In-Lieu2
Category    Or Net New          Category I Category II    (Section)
            Impervious Area     (Section)  (Section)
            For Redevelopment
                New Impervious Area   Stormwater Mitigation/BMP
Development     For Development                                 Fee-In-Lieu2
Category        Or Net New            Category I Category II    (Section)
                Impervious Area       (Section)  (Section)
                For Redevelopment
                                      X1                        A
                <5,000 sq. ft.        (                        (
                                      9-107C)                   9-85)
                5,000 sq. ft. -       X                         A
                24,999 sq. ft.        (                        (
Development or                        9-107C)                   9-85)
redevelopment   25,000 sq. ft. and               X              A
                <1% site area                   9-107D)        (
                                                                9-85)
                25,000 sq. ft. and 1%            X              A
                site area                       (              (
                                                 9-107D)        9-85)
                >1-acre in aggregate  X
                for roads and trails  (                        A
                that are AASHTO max.  9-107C)                   (9-85)
Linear project  width
(trails/roads)  >1-acre in aggregate             X              A
                for roads and trails            (              (
                that are > AASHTO                9-107D)        9-85)
                max. width
Total impervious area >50% site area  X                         A
(for sites <1-acre)                   (                        (
                                      9-107C)                   9-85)
Hydrologically disturbed area >3-                X              A
acres                                           (              (
                                                 9-107D)        9-85)
 
   Notes:
      1.    Required at the discretion of the Administrator where known
flooding or drainage issues are in the immediate vicinity of the project, in
areas without adequate downstream stormwater capacity, or that outlet to a
volume sensitive watershed.
      2.    Fee-in-lieu requires approval of the Administrator and compliance
with the requirement listed under subsection
9-81B4 of this chapter.
   C.   Category I BMPs shall provide volume reduction and water quality
treatment of one-inch (1.0") of rainfall over the new impervious area. The
required volume reduction shall be calculated as the product of the new
impervious area and a one- inch (1.0") rainfall event with no abstractions.
   D.   Category II BMPs shall provide volume reduction and water quality
treatment of the required volume reduction. The required volume reduction shall
be:
      1.   Calculated as the product of the new impervious area and a one-inch
(1.0") rainfall event with no abstractions; or
      2.   Calculated via continuous simulation so that the post- development
infiltration volume shall match ninety percent (90%) of the pre-development
infiltration volume, based on the average annual rainfall.
   E.   The applicant shall identify the pollutants of concern that may be
generated by the development or redevelopment and select BMPs that address
those pollutants. BMPs shall provide both water quality treatment and runoff
volume reduction unless no pollutants are identified, then applicant may
provide a BMP that provides volume reduction only.
   F.   Pretreatment shall be required for runoff from non-permeable parking
lots or roadway areas that will enter an infiltration- based BMP.
      1.   The pretreatment shall be designed to treat one-inch (1.0") of
rainfall over the new impervious areas tributary to the infiltration-based BMP
to protect it from clogging prior to scheduled maintenance and to protect
groundwater quality;
      2.   Pretreatment options include: manufactured BMPs such as hydrodynamic
separators, biofiltration, vegetated swales, filter strips, or other
pretreatment BMPs, upon approval by the Administrator;
      3.   For manufactured BMPs, pollutant removal rates shall be eighty
percent (80%) removal of hydrocarbons and total suspended solids (TSS), with
the TSS being defined as the OK110 particle size distribution (PSD).
   G.   Infiltration-based BMPs are prohibited on sites where:
      1.   Fueling and vehicle maintenance areas are tributary to the BMP;
      2.   Commercial, industrial and institutional land uses are tributary to
the BMP within four hundred feet (400') of a known community water system well,
or within one hundred feet (100') of a known private well. The applicant shall
identify such zones from available information sources, which include the
Illinois State Water Survey, IEPA, USEPA, Kane County Health Department and the
local municipality or water agency;
      3.   Contaminants of concern, as identified by the USEPA or the IEPA
prior to development, are present in the soil through which infiltration would
occur. For sites with a No Further Remediation (NFR) letter from the USEPA or
IEPA, the applicant shall determine whether or not structural barriers are part
of the mitigation strategy and account for such measures in the design;
      4.   Soils on-site that are classified entirely as hydrologic soils group
A by the NRCS through which rapid infiltration would occur and alternate
locations on-site where more suitable soils are present are not practical;
      5.   Soils on-site through which infiltration would occur are proven to
have low permeability that are not conducive for infiltration-based BMPs and
alternate locations on-site where soil permeability is conducive for
infiltration-based BMPs are not practical; and
      6.   The seasonally high groundwater table is within two feet (2') of the
surface where infiltration would occur.
   H.   Developments and redevelopments that are prohibited from providing on-
site infiltration-based BMPs shall provide BMPs within a native vegetated
detention storage facility or the following:
      1.   Treatment of one-inch (1.0") for all new impervious areas within a
pretreatment practice identified within subsection F of this section; and
      2.   A payment of a fee in lieu of providing stormwater management
measures in accordance with section 9-85 of this chapter.
   I.   Developments and redevelopments that provide volume reduction are
eligible to receive credit for detention storage provided the calculated volume
is infiltrated and/or evapotranspirated in no less than one day or no greater
than five (5) days of the storm event. The potential average daily
evapotranspiration rate shall be one-tenth inch per day (0.1 in/day). The
applicant may provide site specific calculations to prove an evapotranspiration
rate that is different than one-tenth inch per day (0.1 in/day) for review and
approval by the Administrator. The applicant must document that:
      1.   The infiltration capacity of the subgrade soils of areas where BMPs
are proposed are suitable for the intended BMP. This shall be verified by an
appropriate geotechnical investigation. An opinion of the soils suitability
shall be provided by a professional engineer or soil scientist. Verification of
soil conditions prior to placement of subsurface storage material or topsoil
may be required by the Administrator. Final approval is at the sole discretion
of the Administrator; or
      2.   That Subsurface Drainage Systems and flow control orifices or weirs
are incorporated into the design of BMPs to meet this requirement.
   J.   Detention storage credit shall be:
      1.   The volume of the ponding zone provided it is no greater than twenty
four inches (24") in depth; and
      2.   The volume of the expected void space (typically no greater than 36
percent) within the uniformly graded stone, aggregate or sand layer of the BMP.
Particles less than one-sixteenth millimeter (1/16 mm) may not be used to
complete this calculation. The design shall incorporate pretreatment measures
to protect the void space from long term deposition of fine sediments. If
testing is completed on samples of the proposed material which indicates a
higher level of porosity, the applicant may submit the analysis completed on
the material along with the storage calculations.
   K.   The applicant may use the Technical Manual as a reference for the
design.
   L.   Native vegetated BMPs shall be planted with predominately native deep-
rooted vegetation and a BMP planting plan shall be submitted in accordance with
section
9-110 of this article. Native vegetated BMPs shall be appropriately managed and
maintained in accordance with section
9-109 of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-108: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATERSHED BENEFIT MEASURES:
   A.   For developments for which the Administrator has approved a watershed
benefit measure per subsection
9-81B,
 table 9-81 of this chapter, a Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS)
Conservation Practice, or other approved practice, may be provided in lieu of
the required detention storage facility and BMP, provided:
      1.   There are no adverse impacts upstream or downstream of the
development;
      2.   The measure provides a benefit to the overall watershed via runoff
reduction, increased storage volume, or water quality improvement that meets or
exceeds the benefits provided by the minimum requirements of this chapter;
      3.   The design considers the guidance provided in the NRCS Conservation
Practices technical guides;
      4.   The proposed watershed benefit measure meets the other requirements
of this chapter;
      5.   The watershed benefit measure is not a permit requirement under
article VI of this chapter, flood hazard area or article VII of this chapter,
wetland; and
      6.   The watershed benefit measure is not required by the Department of
Agriculture as part of a conservation plan in accordance with Food Security
Act.
   B.   For storage-based watershed benefit measures, the quantifiable storage
provided shall meet or exceed the sum of the calculated volume required in the
detention storage facility and the volume reduction required in the BMP for the
development or redevelopment.
      1.   The detention storage facility volume required may be calculated
using the simple methodology outlined in Investigation of Hydrologic Methods
for Site Design in Northeastern Illinois (Dreher and Price, 1991).
      2.   Creation of floodplain storage shall occur between the ten percent
(10%) and one percent (1%) probability storms and shall be designed to drain
freely and openly to the channel.
      3.   Vegetated areas of storage-based watershed benefit measures may
continue to be in agricultural production if they have been in production
within the past five (5) years or maintained as turf or landscape areas if they
have been so as of the effective date of this chapter or previously permitted.
      4.   Vegetated areas of storage-based watershed benefit measures that do
not meet subsection B3 of this section shall be planted with predominately
native deep-rooted vegetation and a planting plan shall be submitted in
accordance with subsections
9-110A1e and A4 of this article. These areas shall be appropriately managed and
maintained in accordance with section
9-109 of this article.
   C.   For water quality watershed benefit measures such as edge of field
nitrogen removal practices like bioreactors or saturated buffers, the
quantifiable treatment acreage shall meet or exceed the twenty four (24) hour -
one percent (1%) probability flow rate of the development or redevelopment.
      1.   Peak discharge from the new impervious area shall be calculated
according to the following equation:
 
  Q = c * i * A
Where:
 c = Rational method coefficient = 0.95 for impervious surfaces
 i = Intensity of the 24 hour - 1% probability storm event = 0.3571 inches per
      hour (in/hr)
 A = Area of new impervious surfaces in acres
 Q = Peak discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs)
 
      2.   Peak discharge shall be converted to an equivalent drainage area
over a twenty four (24) hour period according to the following equation:
 
  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
  IMAGES/0-0-0-2951.jpg]
Where:
 Q         = Peak discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs)
  Cdrainage = Drainage coefficient = 3/8 inches per day (in/day)
 Aeq       = Equivalent drainage area (acres)
 
      3.   Equivalent Agricultural Subsurface Drainage System pipe diameter for
the required treatment area shall be calculated according to the following
equation:
 
  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
  IMAGES/0-0-0-2957.jpg]
Where:
 n    = Manning's coefficient for corrugated plastic pipe = 0.019
 Q    = Peak discharge in cubic feet per second (cfs)
 S    = Assumed drain tile slope = 0.001 foot per foot (ft/ft)
 Deq  = Equivalent pipe diameter in inches (in). Fractions of equivalent pipe
         diameter shall be rounded to typical pipe sizes
 
   D.   For linear watershed benefit measures such as (re)establishment of
buffers or grassed waterways:
      1.   The required square footage for linear watershed benefit measures
shall equal or exceed the square footage required for a detention storage
facility determined using the simple methodology outlined in Investigation of
Hydrologic Methods for Site Design in Northeastern Illinois (Dreher and Price,
1991) and actual site conditions;
      2.   Buffer (re)establishment widths shall be required per section
9-177 of this chapter; and
      3.   Vegetated areas of linear watershed benefit measures shall be
planted with predominately native deep-rooted vegetation and a planting plan
shall be submitted in accordance with subsections
9-110A1e and A4 of this article. These areas shall be appropriately managed and
maintained in accordance with section
9-109 of this article.
   E.   For watershed benefit measures that construct or re-establish wetlands:
      1.   The volume contained within the wetland shall meet or exceed the
calculated runoff volume for the twenty four (24) hours - four percent (4%)
probability storm from the development or redevelopment;
      2.   The upstream tributary flow to the wetland shall be verified to
ensure there is sufficient hydrology to support the wetland vegetation;
      3.   The design shall include provisions for sedimentation and crop
debris management if the upstream tributary flow contains cultivated fields;
and
      4.   Vegetated areas of wetlands shall be planted with predominately
native deep-rooted vegetation and a planting plan shall be submitted in
accordance with subsections
9-110A1e and A4 of this article. These areas shall be appropriately managed and
maintained in accordance with section
9-109 of this article.
   F.   Other Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS) Conservation
Practices may be considered under this section with approval of the
Administrator. Proposed practices other than those outlined above shall
demonstrate that the proposed watershed benefit measure provides a comparable
volume, land area or cost that meets or exceeds the required detention storage
facility and volume reduction. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-109: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND MONITORING FOR STORMWATER MITIGATION/BMPs AND
WATERSHED BENEFIT MEASURES:
   A.   Category I BMPs, shall:
      1.   Meet the following performance standards:
         a.   All proposed vegetated areas shall achieve eighty five percent
(85%) cover;
         b.   All proposed native vegetated areas shall not be dominated by or
contain cumulatively more than twenty five percent (25%) cover by non-native or
invasive species;
      2.   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter, upon
acceptance by the Administrator; and
      3.   Be recorded as Declaration of Restriction and Covenant that
acknowledges the presence of BMPs on-site, the stormwater management permit
number, and any associated maintenance requirements.
   B.   All category II BMPs and watershed benefit measures, shall:
      1.   Meet the following performance standards:
         a.   All proposed vegetated areas shall achieve eighty five percent
(85%) cover;
         b.   All proposed native vegetated areas shall achieve a minimum FQI
of ten (10) within the three (3) year monitoring period; and
         c.   All proposed native vegetated areas shall not be dominated or
contain cumulatively more than ten percent (10%) cover by non- native or
invasive species.
      2.   Be monitored and managed for three (3) years beginning on the day
planting is completed;
      3.   Be monitored via meander method or transect method in accordance
with the procedures set forth in the current Chicago District protocol
promulgated by USACE;
      4.   Provide an annual report to the Administrator by February 15th of
each year for every native vegetated BMP and watershed benefit measure under
permit;
      5.   Make a request for the release of the performance security to the
Administrator once the native vegetated BMPs and watershed benefit measures
meet the performance standards. A release of the performance security may be
requested of the Administrator as early as the end of the second full growing
season;
      6.   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter at the
end of the three (3) year monitoring and management period, or upon acceptance
by the Administrator; and
      7.   Be shown to be within an appropriate plat of easement that includes
the stormwater management permit number and any associated maintenance
requirements.
   C.   At the end of the required monitoring period, or upon an earlier
request for the release of the performance security, the Administrator shall
evaluate native vegetated category II BMPs and watershed benefit measures for
compliance with the performance standards. The Administrator or Administrator's
qualified wetland specialist may review the annual monitoring reports and/or
perform a site visit to make this evaluation. If the Administrator determines
that the native vegetated BMP and watershed benefit measures meet the standards
he shall release the performance security (this is not required for category I
BMPs). If the Administrator determines that the native vegetated BMP and
watershed benefit measures do not meet the standards he shall make an estimate
of the probable cost of mitigating for the shortfall in performance. The
Administrator shall reduce so much of the performance security to cash as is
required to mitigate for the shortfall in performance and shall release the
remainder. The amount withheld shall be deposited in the fund created under and
expended in the manner described in section 9-318 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-
151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-110: STORMWATER MITIGATION/BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) AND WATERSHED
BENEFIT MEASURE SUBMITTAL:
   A.   A stormwater mitigation/BMP and watershed benefit measure submittal in
accordance with the detailed requirements of this article shall be required.
The submittal shall include:
      1.   A narrative description documenting:
         a.   Compliance with the requirements of this article.
         b.   Anticipated pollutants of concern based upon proposed development
land use;
         c.   A listing and discussion of all BMPs or watershed benefit
measures to be used and how they will mitigate water quality and quantity
impacts of the proposed development;
         d.   A description of soils on-site and the following information
where the BMP is proposed:
            (1)   Infiltration rates;
            (2)   Percentage of clay;
            (3)   Proximity to private and community wells; and
            (4)   Depth to seasonal high groundwater table, bedrock, or
limiting layer.
         e.   For native vegetated BMPs or watershed benefit measures the
following shall be provided:
            (1)   Seeding and planting locations, specifications, and
methodology;
            (2)   A schedule for installation; and
            (3)   Proposed maintenance and monitoring provisions.
      2.   The following calculations shall be provided:
         a.   For category I BMPs:
            (1)   The existing impervious area and new impervious area;
            (2)   The net new impervious area for redevelopment;
            (3)   The required volume reduction;
            (4)   The quantifiable storage provided in each proposed BMP.
         b.   For category II BMPs:
            (1)   The existing impervious area and new impervious area;
            (2)   The net new impervious area for redevelopment;
            (3)   The required volume reduction;
            (4)   The quantifiable storage provided in each proposed BMP;
            (5)   Calculations to demonstrate that pretreatment BMPs will treat
the targeted pollutants of concern. For manufactured BMPs, documentation to
support pollutant removal rates from the manufacturer shall be supplied;
            (6)   The drawdown time for each BMP if detention credit is being
sought; and
            (7)   All calculations shall be prepared by a professional
engineer.
         c.   For watershed benefit measures:
            (1)   The existing and proposed runoff from the site;
            (2)   If storage based, the quantifiable storage provided by the
watershed benefit measure that is equivalent to the calculated volume required
in the detention storage facility and/or volume reduction per subsection 9-108B
of this article;
            (3)   If water quality based, the quantifiable treatment acreage
per subsection 9-108C of this article;
            (4)   If area based, the square footage in accordance with
subsection
9-108D of this article;
            (5)   If constructed or reestablished wetland, calculations that
document sufficient hydrology is present to support wetland hydrology; and
            (6)   Calculations to demonstrate no adverse impacts upstream or
downstream of the development are proposed.
      3.   An opinion of probable cost to construct, maintain and monitor the
BMPs or watershed benefit measures.
      4.   Drawings including:
         a.   A plan view of each BMP or watershed benefit measure proposed;
         b.   Cross sections of each BMP or watershed benefit measure proposed;
         c.   Identification of easement areas for category II BMPs or
watershed benefit measures;
         d.   If native vegetated BMPs or watershed benefit measures are
proposed, the plan shall also contain:
            (1)   A planting plan including location and acreage of plant
communities (e.g., lawn, upland prairie, wet prairie, emergent, etc.) and plant
list including scientific and common names, seeding rate, plant quantities and
spacing distance; and
            (2)   Maintenance and monitoring provisions including an annual
work schedule describing each task in detail and time of year when it will be
performed.
      5.   The proposed easement or Declaration of Restriction and Covenant to
be recorded upon completion of the project, in accordance with the following:
         a.   Category I BMPs shall be recorded as a Declaration of Restriction
and Covenant that acknowledges the presence of these areas on-site to alert all
future owners;
         b.   Category II BMPs and watershed benefit measures shall be shown to
be within an appropriate plat of easement; and
         c.   The stormwater management permit number and maintenance
requirements shall be noted on the plat or included in the Declaration of
Restriction and Covenant running with the land in any deed which conveys any
portion of these areas. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-111 - 9-131: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE VI. REQUIREMENTS FOR FLOOD HAZARD AREAS AND BUILDING PROTECTION
STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-132: Reserved
9-133: Disclaimer
9-134: Statewide And Regional Permits
9-135: Floodplain Management
9-136: Floodplain, Regulatory Floodplain, BFE And Regulatory Floodway Locations
And Standards
9-137: General Performance Standards
9-138: Public Health Protection Standards
9-139: Building Protection Standards
9-140: Non-Conforming Structures
9-141: Compensatory Storage Volume Standards
9-142: Floodway Standards
9-143: Non-Designated Floodway
9-144: Bridge And Culvert Standards
9-145: Floodplain Submittal
9-146 - 9-167: Reserved
9-132: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-133: DISCLAIMER:
Nothing in this chapter purports to alter or affect the regulatory program
administered by IDNR-OWR. Anything in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, if under the rules and regulations administered by IDNR-OWR a
submittal need not be made to IDNR-OWR, or a review, approval or permit from
IDNR-OWR need not be obtained, then nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to impose a requirement that such a submittal be made or that such a review,
approval or permit be obtained from IDNR-OWR. Similarly, if IDNR-OWR has
delegated its regulatory authority to another entity, then anything in this
chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, if required by such entity, such
submittal shall be made, or such review, approval or permit shall be obtained
from such entity. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-134: STATEWIDE AND REGIONAL PERMITS:
Development that qualifies for any of the self-issuing Statewide or regional
permits administered by IDNR-OWR (Statewide permits nos. 1 through 14 and
regional permit no. 3) are similarly permitted under this article. The
developer need only submit to the Administrator such information as shall show
the Administrator that the development qualifies for the particular Statewide
or regional permit in question under the regulations established by IDNR-OWR
for such permit and no further submittal need be made under this article. All
other provisions of this chapter applicable to such development, however,
continue to apply. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-135: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT:
All development shall meet the requirements set forth in this article. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-136: FLOODPLAIN, REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN, BFE AND REGULATORY FLOODWAY LOCATIONS
AND STANDARDS:
   A.   The BFE shall be delineated on the site topography to establish the
regulatory floodplain area limits for regulation under this chapter. Regulatory
floodplains shall be delineated on the site map from the current FEMA FIRM, FIS
or LOMR and include those areas of the SFHA which are not regulatory
floodplains. The current version of the maps adopted and published by FEMA for
regulation under the NFIP together with any amendments, additions, revisions or
substitutions thereto or therefor adopted and published by FEMA at any time in
the future are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter. A list of the current regulatory maps for the County
to be consulted is maintained by the department. A list of the current
regulatory maps for each community to be consulted is maintained by the
Administrator.
   B.   The BFE shall be the elevation of the profile shown for the design
storm with the one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given year for the
site on the current Flood Insurance Study.
      1.   In the case of FEMA delineated AH Zones the elevation noted on the
current applicable regulatory map(s) shall be the BFE.
      2.   In the case of FEMA delineated AO Zones the BFE shall be the depth
number shown on the current applicable regulatory map(s) added to the highest
adjacent grade, or at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if
no depth number is provided.
      3.   When no BFE information exists and the upstream tributary area is
six hundred forty (640) acres or more, the BFE shall be determined using a
site-specific floodplain study by a professional engineer using appropriate
hydrologic and hydraulic models as follows:
         a.   Hydrologic models: TR-20, HEC-1, HEC-HMS;
         b.   Hydraulic models:HEC-2, HEC-RAS, WSP-2; or
         c.   A technique approved by the Administrator and IDNR-OWR.
      4.   Where a channel has a tributary drainage area of six hundred forty
(640) acres or more, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR-OWR for
approval.
      5.   For a nonriverine regulatory floodplain where no BFE information
exists, a site-specific floodplain study is required for the purpose of
establishing a BFE for the development.
      6.   For floodplains that are not regulatory, are not draining more than
six hundred forty (640) acres and for which no BFE has been determined, the
Administrator may require a site-specific floodplain study for the purpose of
establishing an FPE for the development.
      7.   The Administrator may require the use of a floodplain study not yet
approved by IDNR-OWR and FEMA if its use would establish a higher BFE than the
approved study. This provision may necessitate that different analyses be
prepared for other agencies having permitting jurisdiction over the floodplain
and floodway.
      8.   When none of the above apply but the proposed development consists
of more than fifty (50) lots or more than five (5) acres, a study acceptable to
the Administrator shall be provided for determination of a site-specific BFE.
   C.   The location of the regulatory floodway shall be as delineated on the
current applicable regulatory map(s). The location of the regulatory floodway
boundary shall be scaled on the site plan using references common to both the
map and the plan (typically the centerlines of adjacent roadways). Where an
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory
floodway boundary, IDNR-OWR should be contacted. If an area of the site is
located in the regulatory floodway that is higher than the BFE, that area is
subject to the floodway standards of sections
9-142 and
9-143 of this article, including the appropriate use criteria, until such time
as a LOMA or LOMR receives concurrence from IDNR-OWR and is issued by FEMA.
   D.   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations in the regulatory
floodway are as follows:
      1.   The flood profiles, flows and data from the current applicable
regulatory map must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study
data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, FEMA and IDNR-OWR shall
be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions
data to use. The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement obligates a public
entity to maintain the proposed conditions or the land cover is changing from
vegetative to nonvegetative. The Administrator shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
      2.   If the BFE at the site is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed development shall be
shown to meet the requirements of this section with the receiving stream at
both the normal water elevation and BFE.
      3.   If the applicant is informed by IDNR-OWR, a local government or a
private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or culvert is
scheduled to be removed, reconstructed or modified, or a public flood control
project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the
next five (5) years, the proposed development shall be analyzed and shown to
meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control
project is built, removed or modified.
      4.   If the development will result in a change in the location of the
regulatory floodway or an increase in the BFE, the applicant shall submit the
information required for the issuance of a CLOMR to IDNR-OWR and FEMA. A public
notice inviting comment on the proposed change in the BFE or location of the
regulatory floodway will be published by IDNR-OWR or its designee before a
CLOMR is issued. All communities adjacent to a watercourse alteration or
revocation shall be notified of the proposed development. Filling, grading,
dredging or excavating may take place upon issuance of a CLOMR issued by FEMA.
No further development activities shall take place in the existing or proposed
floodplain until a LOMR is issued by FEMA. The Administrator shall be copied on
all related correspondence.
      5.   In the circumstances listed below and located in a regulatory
floodway, at a minimum, the information set forth below shall be submitted to
IDNR-OWR for its review and approval:
         a.   Analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge, culvert
crossing or roadway approach;
         b.   A professional engineer's determination that an existing bridge,
culvert crossing, or approach road is not a source of flood damage and the
analysis indicating the proposed flood profile;
         c.   A professional engineer's determination that a proposed bridge
affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a
smaller opening;
         d.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage;
         e.   Stormwater management permits issued to local units of government
for regulatory floodway and floodplain development;
         f.   BFE determinations where none now exist;
         g.   IDNR-OWR will issue permits for any IDNR-OWR projects, dams and
all other State, Federal or local unit of government projects, including
community projects;
         h.   IDNR-OWR will issue permits for construction and other activities
in public bodies of water pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3708; and
         i.   Permits for organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including State, Federal or local units of
government. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-137: GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following general performance standards are applicable to all development
in a regulatory floodplain. The standards of this section apply except when
superseded by more stringent requirements in subsequent sections.
   A.   No development shall be allowed in the regulatory floodplain that
singularly or cumulatively creates any increase in flood stage or velocity off-
site, or a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity on-site or a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   For all projects involving a channel modification, fill, stream
maintenance or a levee, the floodway conveyance and storage capacity of the
regulatory floodplain shall not be reduced.
   C.   If the proposed development would result in a change in the regulatory
floodplain or BFE, the applicant shall obtain a CLOMR from FEMA. No buildings
may be built in the existing or proposed regulatory floodplain until the LOMR
is obtained from FEMA unless the building meets all the building protection
standards of section 9-139 of this article. Proposed changes to the regulatory
floodway delineation and the BFE must be submitted to IDNR-OWR for approval. If
a LOMR is a result of fill FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 shall be followed and
an engineering report shall be completed by a professional engineer or
certified soil scientist.
   D.   If the development is in the Fox River, a permit must also be received
from IDNR-OWR.
   E.   Prior to the commencement of any construction, modification or removal
of a dam the developer shall obtain an IDNR-OWR dam safety permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required.
   F.   For public flood control projects, sections
9-135 through 9-167 of this article will be deemed met if the applicant
demonstrates to IDNR-OWR and the committee that the proposed project:
      1.   By hydraulic and hydrologic modeling will not singularly or
cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the project site or that
any increases will be contained in easements for all flood events up to and
including the base flood;
      2.   Will be operated and maintained by a public entity; and
      3.   Will reduce flood damage to an existing building or structure.
   G.   All activities, defined as development, such as pools, fences, filling,
paving, etc., shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase
potential flood damages. Fences within the floodplain shall not impede the base
flood.
   H.   Drainage paths shall be provided around structures on sloped ground to
guide water away from the structures.
   I.   Nothing in this section precludes the design, engineering, construction
or financing, in whole or in part, of a public flood control project by persons
who are not public entities.
   J.   If a development will alter or relocate a watercourse the Administrator
shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   K.   All new construction and substantial improvements must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the building
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
   L.   All new construction and substantial improvements must be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   M.   All new construction and substantial improvements must be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   N.   All new construction and substantial improvements must be constructed
with electrical, HVAC, plumbing, and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during flood conditions.
   O.   If a proposed subdivision or other similar new development is in a
flood prone area, all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems must be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage and adequate drainage must be provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-138: PUBLIC HEALTH PROTECTION STANDARDS:
   A.   No developments in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank or
floodproofed building and certified by a professional engineer.
   B.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   C.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted if:
      1.   Constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and
      2.   All manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE
are watertight.
   D.   New on-site waste disposal systems, such as septic systems, shall not
be constructed within the regulatory floodplain.
   E.   Substantially improved or replacement wastewater treatment plants shall
have watertight openings for those openings located below the FPE. Such
facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the facility or
contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.
   F.   New or proposed critical facilities shall be located outside of the
two-tenths percent (0.2%) frequency floodplain. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-
1-2019)
9-139: BUILDING PROTECTION STANDARDS:
This section applies to all buildings located in the regulatory floodplain.
However, most new and replacement buildings are not appropriate uses of the
regulatory floodway. A summary of the building protection standards is provided
in tables
9-139.A and
9-139.B of this section:
TABLE 9-139.A
BUILDING PROTECTION STANDARDS FOR
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA)
                  Flood Protection Lowest Floor5 (Feet Lowest Opening
Type Type Of SFHA Elevation (Feet  Above BFE)          Elevation (Feet Above
                  Above BFE)                           BFE)1
                               Flood                            Lowest Opening
Type              Type Of SFHA Protection      Lowest Floor5    Elevation (Feet
                               Elevation (Feet (Feet Above BFE) Above BFE)1
                               Above BFE)
Fox River                                                     
floodplain:
  Residential     Adj. to                      0.5              3
  structures/     floodplain3  3
  additions       Floodplain                   3                -
  Attached        Adj. to
  garages         floodplain3  3               0.5              -
                  Floodplain
 Accessory       Floodplain   3               0.5              -
  structure
 Small accessory Floodplain   3               -                -
  structure
  Non-
 residential/    Floodplain   3               34               -
  industrial
  structure2
Other                                                         
floodplains:
  All residential Adj. to                      0.5              2
  structures/     floodplain3  2
  additions       Floodplain                   2                -
                  Adj. to
  Attached garage floodplain3  2               0.5              -
                  Floodplain
 Accessory       Floodplain   2               0.5              -
  structure
 Small accessory Floodplain   2               -                -
  structure
  Non-
 residential/    Floodplain   2               24               -
  industrial
  structure2
 
Notes:
   1.    This requirement does not apply to dry floodproofed buildings.
   2.    An addition to an existing industrial building may be constructed at
the BFE plus 1 foot of freeboard as approved by the Administrator.
   3.    "Adjacent to" shall apply to the location of the structure and shall
be established by the FPE and includes LOMR-Fs. The Administrator may reduce
this requirement upon review of a soil engineering report prepared by a
professional engineer or certified soil scientist.
   4.    Nonresidential industrial structures may be elevated or dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
   5.    The lowest floor shall be the bottom of the floor joists or top of
slab foundation as applicable for the structure's construction.
TABLE 9-139.B
OTHER BUILDING PROTECTION STANDARDS4
 
Type Of Facility                           Lowest Opening Elevation (Feet Above
                                           HWL)1
All structures adjacent to2 at least 1 of
the following:
 Detention storage facility/pond/lake/    2
  reservoir
 Depressional storage 20 acres of         2
  tributary area3
 Overland flow path 20 acres of tributary 2
  area
 Overland flow path <20 acres of          0.5
  tributary area
 
Notes:
   1.    This requirement does not apply to dry floodproofed buildings.
   2.    "Adjacent to" shall apply to the location of the structure and shall
be established by the FPE.
   3.    When modeling is not provided, the lowest opening shall be 2 feet
above the overtopping elevation.
   4.    The lowest floor may be required to be 6 inches above the normal water
level or seasonal high groundwater table at the discretion of the
Administrator.
   A.   The elevation of the lowest floor, including basements and heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) (i.e., electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility meters), of
all new residential structures, substantially improved structures, and
additions shall be elevated at least to the FPE. The elevation of the lowest
floor of an attached garage for a structure must be elevated at least six
inches (6") above the BFE.
      1.   If placed on fill, the top of the fill for a residential structure
shall be above the FPE. Fill shall be placed following the FEMA guidelines for
ensuring buildings placed on fill (FEMA TB 10-01, or current guidelines) are
reasonably safe from flooding.
         a.   The top of fill for an attached garage shall be at least six
inches (6") above the BFE. The fill shall be placed at that elevation for ten
feet (10') out from the building unless the building design is certified by a
registered structural engineer to be protected from damage due to hydrostatic
pressures.
         b.   The fill shall not settle below the FPE for a residential
structure and not below six inches (6") above the base flood for an attached
garage, and shall be adequately protected against erosion, scour and
differential settlement.
         c.   An LOMR shall be obtained from FEMA removing the residential
structure from the floodplain.
      2.   If elevated by means of walls, pilings, or other foundation, the
building's supporting structure must be permanently open to floodwaters and not
subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood in addition to the
following design standards:
         a.   The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above
existing grade and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must
have a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the BFE.
         b.   The lowest inside grade must match the lowest existing outside
grade adjacent to the structure.
         c.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris.
         d.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials
resistant to flood damage.
         e.   The elevation of the lowest floor and HVAC, including the
basement, for a residential structure shall be located at or above the FPE.
         f.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the FPE.
         g.   No area less than two feet (2') above the BFE shall be used for
storage.
      3.   Fully enclosed areas in new construction and substantial
improvements that are subject to flooding and are used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement shall be:
         a.   Designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing the entry and exit of floodwaters.
         b.   Certified by a registered professional engineer or have a minimum
of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding with the bottom of
all openings no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   B.   The elevation of the lowest floor and HVAC, including the basement, of
all new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings shall be elevated at
least to the FPE as described above or be structurally dry floodproofed to at
least the FPE. A nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided that a professional engineer or registered
structural engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
floodproofed below the FPE and the structure and attendant utility facilities
are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and impacts
from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity. Levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose
of this subsection.
   C.   Manufactured homes placed outside a manufactured home park or on a site
in an existing manufactured home park in which a manufactured home has suffered
substantial damages as a result of a flood shall be at or above the FPE and
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in
accordance with the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Ill. Adm. Code section 870 (77 Ill. Adm. Code 870 [1999], as amended).
Recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and highway ready (i.e., is ready for
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions), shall be at or above the FPE and shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code section 870 (77
Ill. Adm. Code 870 [1999], as amended).
   D.   Small accessory structures such as toolsheds and detached garages which
are not substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be
constructed with the elevation of the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance
with the criteria of this subsection. Accessory structures that do not meet all
of the requirements below may be constructed if they are dry floodproofed or
elevated such that the elevation of the finish floor or bottom of floor joints
(if constructed on blocks or piers) is at least six inches (6") above the BFE.
      1.   The building shall not be used for human habitation.
      2.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with flood- resistant
material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet the floodway
standards of section
9-142 of this article.
      3.   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and movement.
      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and HVAC equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the FPE. Sanitary facilities and plumbing are not
allowed.
      5.   The building shall be no greater than five hundred seventy six (576)
square feet in floor size and cost not more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) to construct.
      6.   The building shall meet the requirements of subsection A2 of this
section.
      7.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools
and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
   E.   The elevation of the HVAC of all new industrial buildings shall be
constructed at the BFE plus two feet (2') unless it is within the Fox River
floodplain, then it shall be constructed at the BFE plus three feet (3'). The
elevation of the HVAC of an addition to an existing industrial use may be
constructed at the BFE plus one foot (1') provided this elevation is required
by the industrial process as demonstrated by the applicant and the
Administrator approves the elevation in writing.
   F.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall employ
anchoring to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure,
use flood resistant materials, and be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damages.
   G.   Where base flood elevation data are used within non-designated floodway
on the community's FIS or FIRM, a record of the following shall be obtained and
maintained by the Administrator:
      1.   The elevation of the lowest floor and HVAC (including basement) of
all new structures and substantially improved structures; and
      2.   The elevation to which the structure was floodproofed (if the
structure has been floodproofed in accordance with subsections A2, B and F of
this section).
   H.   In FEMA Zones AO and AH drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes to guide water around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-140: NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other sources
may be restored unless the cumulative percentage of damage, improvement, and
maintenance since January 1, 2010 is equal to or greater than fifty percent
(50%) of the structure's fair market value in the year prior to damage for that
event, in which case it shall conform to section
9-139 of this article.
   B.   Maintenance of existing buildings may occur unless the cumulative
percentage of damage, improvement, and maintenance is equal to or greater than
fifty percent (50%) of the structure's fair market value in the year prior to
each improvement, in which case it shall conform to section
9-139 of this article. Maintenance will be recorded cumulatively towards the
substantial improvement of the structure. The cost of maintenance improvements
shall be recorded cumulatively over a rolling, ten (10) year period, beginning
on January 1, 2010.
   C.   Substantial improvement does not include any work done to a structure
listed on the State or Federal Historic Register provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-141: COMPENSATORY STORAGE VOLUME STANDARDS:
The following standards apply within the regulatory floodplain:
   A.   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage volume will be required
for development or redevelopment in a riverine regulatory floodplain and at a
minimum, shall be equal to the regulatory floodplain flood storage volume
displaced multiplied by:
      1.   A factor of one and five-tenths (1.5) if no hydraulic modeling is
provided;
      2.   A factor of one and two-tenths (1.2) if hydraulic modeling is
provided;
      3.   A factor of one for public roadway, stream restoration or streambank
stabilization projects; or
      4.   A factor of one for depressional storage and nonriverine regulatory
floodplain.
   B.   Compensatory storage shall be provided incrementally such that:
      1.   The storage volume displaced below the existing ten percent (10%)
frequency flood elevation must be replaced below the proposed ten percent (10%)
frequency flood elevation.
      2.   The storage volume displaced above the existing ten percent (10%)
existing frequency flood elevation must be replaced above the proposed ten
percent (10%) frequency flood elevation and below the existing one percent (1%)
frequency flood elevation.
      3.   The additional compensatory storage required beyond a one to one (1:
1) ratio may be placed below the one percent (1%) frequency flood elevation.
      4.   Incremental compensatory storage for public roadway and stream
restoration or streambank stabilization projects may be waived, through a
written waiver at the discretion of the Administrator, provided the storage
volume displaced is replaced below the one percent (1%) frequency flood
elevation.
   C.   Compensatory storage volume for development or redevelopment in a
nonriverine regulatory floodplain area that is also adjacent to a lake shall be
equal to the storage volume displaced.
   D.   Compensatory storage volume requirements for development or
redevelopment in a nonriverine regulatory floodplain that is not adjacent to a
lake shall be replaced in accordance with subsection A4 of this section. If a
detention storage facility is required and the lost storage is in the same
tributary area then the lost storage shall be replaced in accordance with the
requirements for the loss of depressional storage in subsection 9-84D of this
chapter.
   E.   Compensatory storage areas shall be designed to drain freely and openly
to the channel and shall be located in a hydraulically equivalent area to the
development or redevelopment. This standard does not apply to nonriverine
regulatory floodplain or the replacement of depressional storage.
   F.   Compensatory storage for developments and redevelopments requiring
minimal amounts of fill may be waived through a written waiver at the
discretion of the Administrator provided the developer has verified there are
no repetitive loss areas downstream, and there are no adverse impacts resulting
from the following types of development:
      1.   Replacement of on-site septic systems within the floodplain or
floodway provided:
         a.   The existing land use is maintained;
         b.   The volume of fill is the least amount of fill required to
maintain the existing land use;
         c.   The number of bedrooms is maintained;
         d.   A community's sanitary system is not located within five hundred
feet (500') of the site; and
         e.   The work meets the requirements of section
9-135 of this article.
      2.   Dredging of ditches in the floodplain and non-designated floodway as
long as the dredging spoils are evenly dispersed at a depth of no more than
two-tenths of a foot (0.2') adjacent to the dredging operation;
      3.   Floodproofing of an existing, lawfully habitable residential or
commercial building within ten feet (10') of the outside face of the building
in the floodplain provided the probability of flood damage to other buildings
is not increased;
      4.   Loss of artificially created storage due to a reduction in upstream
head loss caused by replacement of a bridge, culvert, storm sewer, provided
there are no increases to the downstream flows or flood elevation. If increases
to the downstream flows or flood elevation are proposed the following shall be
provided:
         a.   An analysis of the downstream floodplain shall be conducted to
determine whether structures will be at risk of damage. If structures are at
risk of damage, a detailed hydrologic analysis shall be performed to establish
the extent to which the artificial storage decreases flood flows, and the
damages that might be incurred as a result of the loss thereof. Compensatory
storage or mitigation shall be required to the extent necessary to protect the
structures from additional damages; and
         b.   The applicant shall document that the downstream regulatory
entity or Drainage District has been informed.
      5.   Building members (including horizontal and vertical members) for
decks, fences and accessory structures meeting section
9-135 of this article and as constructed within the floodplain;
      6.   Top dressing for the purposes of restoring pre-subsidence grade to
an area that primarily experiences subsidence due to a documented flood event.
Top dressing is the placement of not more than four inches (4") of topsoil or
gravel within the regulatory floodplain. Upon approval of the Administrator,
compensatory storage shall not be required for top dressing provided that it
meets the following:
         a.   This provision shall not be applicable for new developments or
redevelopments;
         b.   Top dressing shall be allowed by permit on a per parcel basis and
not damage or alter adjoining property drainage patterns;
         c.   Top dressing fill shall comply with articles III and VII of this
chapter;
         d.   The restoration fill shall meet pre-subsidence elevations, and
within riverine areas, the pre-subsidence effective regulatory floodplain and
regulatory floodway conveyance shall be maintained;
         e.   Proper documentation shall be submitted as part of the stormwater
management permit application by the applicant and shall be either topographic
information or photographic documentation of the flooding and resulting
subsidence that has occurred on the site;
         f.   Upon completion of top dressing, the applicant shall provide
topographic or photographic documentation of completed work; and
         g.   Repeat top dressing applications are limited to documented flood
events with topographic or photographic evidence of subsidence.
   G.   Compensatory storage shall be operational and functional prior to
placement of fill, structures, or other materials temporarily or permanently
placed in the regulatory floodplain.
   H.   A recorded covenant running with the land is required to maintain the
compensatory storage volume. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-142: FLOODWAY STANDARDS:
The only development in a regulatory floodway or non-designated floodway that
will be allowed are appropriate uses that will not cause an increase in flood
heights or velocities for all flood events up to and including the base flood.
Only those appropriate uses listed below will be allowed in the regulatory
floodway. Development within the floodway will require an approved IDNR-OWR
permit. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, fencing
(including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence), and storage of
materials (except as specifically defined below) as an appropriate use. If the
development is proposed for the regulatory floodway portion of the regulatory
floodplain, the following standards apply in addition to the standards for the
regulatory floodplain:
   A.   Only the construction, modification, repair or replacement of the
following appropriate uses will be allowed in the regulatory floodway:
      1.   Public flood control projects, structures and private improvements
relating to the control of drainage and flooding of existing buildings,
erosion, water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      2.   Water dependent facilities;
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      4.   Replacement of existing septic tanks and fields provided:
         a.   All mechanical parts are elevated a minimum of six inches (6")
above the BFE;
         b.   The system is placed within the conveyance shadow of an existing
structure when possible for mounded septic fields;
         c.   The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Administrator that no reasonable alternative location exists on the site
outside of the floodway, and that the fill volume is the minimum amount
necessary to maintain the existing land use; and
         d.   The applicant provides proof of an approved IDNR-OWR permit.
      5.   Underground and overhead utilities if sufficiently floodproofed;
      6.   Recreational facilities such as open space consisting of playing
fields, open pavilions, trail systems and fencing that is publicly owned by a
governmental agency;
      7.   Detached garages, storage sheds, boathouses or other non- habitable
structures without sanitary facilities that are accessory to existing buildings
and will not block flood flows nor reduce regulatory or non-designated floodway
storage;
      8.   Bridges, culverts and associated roadways, sidewalks and railways,
runways and taxiways, required for crossing the regulatory floodway or for
access to other appropriate uses in the regulatory floodway and any
modification thereto;
      9.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade provided that either:
         a.   The BFE is less than one foot (1') above the proposed parking
lot; or
         b.   The parking lot is accessory to short term outdoor recreational
facilities and the applicant agrees to restrict access during periods of
inundation and agrees to accept liability for all damage caused by vehicular
access during flooding events.
      10.   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a channel;
      11.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures or the construction of floodwalls or berms around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall or berm is no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of
the existing structure and where such activities are not considered to be a
substantial improvement to the structure, unless the structure then meets
building protection standards. Compensatory storage will be required for any
activities that result in fill in the floodway;
      12.   The repair, replacement or reconstruction of a damaged building or
structure, provided the structure is not considered substantially damaged or
improved and none of the outside dimensions of the building are increased and
such repair, replacement or reconstruction does not constitute a substantial
improvement;
      13.   The repair, replacement, reconstruction or floodproofing of a
building or structure that is substantially damaged or improved is allowed at
its previous location on the site or further outside of the regulatory floodway
provided that:
         a.   The building will meet the building protection standards in
section
9-139 of this article;
         b.   The square footage of the portion of the structure below the
floodplain elevation is not greater than the existing building;
         c.   The width of the building perpendicular to the flow shall be
equal to or less than the existing building width; and
         d.   If demolished, the construction of a replacement building shall
begin within two (2) years of the demolition date. If no construction has begun
prior to this date, a replacement structure will not be considered an
appropriate use in accordance with this section.
      14.   Modifications to an existing building such as fireplaces, bay
windows, decks, patios and second story additions, which do not constitute a
substantial improvement, do not increase the enclosed floor area or livable
space of the building below the BFE and does not block flood flows; no enclosed
floor areas may be built on stilts.
   B.   No change shall be made to the list of appropriate uses without the
prior approval of IDNR-OWR and the committee.
   C.   All development in the regulatory floodway shall require a stormwater
management permit and must be in accordance with all provisions of this
chapter.
   D.   An appropriate use may be permitted if the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data. The Administrator may require the
submittal to be prepared and signed by a professional engineer:
      1.   All effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the
development of appropriate uses, other than bridge or culvert crossings or on-
stream structures or dams, shall be replaced at a 1:1 ratio for all flood
events up to and including the base flood.
      2.   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used to
determine transition sections in calculations of effective regulatory floodway
conveyance:
         a.   Flowing water will expand no faster than a rate of one foot (1')
horizontally for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
         b.   Flowing water will contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontally for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
         c.   Flowing water will not expand or contract faster than one foot
(1') vertically for every ten feet (10') of the flooded stream's length.
         d.   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be
perpendicular to flood flows.
         e.   Transition sections must be used to determine the effective
floodway conveyance areas on adjacent properties.
      3.   Development of an appropriate use will not result in an increase in
the channel or regulatory floodway erosive velocities or stage. However, in the
case of bridges or culverts or on- stream structures built for the purpose of
backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, erosive velocities
may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will
be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
      4.   In the case of on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing
up water during normal or flood flows, the increase in flood stage when
compared to existing conditions for all storm events up to and including the
base flood event shall be contained within recorded easements or the channel
banks. On- stream structures may increase the BFE within the limits of the
site, but may not increase the BFE on adjacent or upstream properties. A dam
safety permit or letter indicating a dam safety permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR-OWR for such structures. All dams and impoundment structures
shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams).
      5.   If floodproofing construction is required beyond the outside
dimensions of an existing habitable residential or commercial building, the
outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be no further than
ten feet (10') from the building. Compensation for lost storage and floodway
conveyance will be required for floodproofing within the ten foot (10')
perimeter provided the probability of flood damage to other buildings is not
increased.
      6.   IDNR-OWR will issue permits for all IDNR-OWR, State, Federal or
community projects. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-143: NON-DESIGNATED FLOODWAY:
These standards apply to riverine regulatory floodplains with a non-designated
floodway. The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR-OWR for all
development, any portion of which is located within the regulatory floodplain
(without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a tributary area of six hundred
forty (640) acres or more.
   A.   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in an
obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due to
an increase in flood heights, velocities or loss of floodplain area storage.
   B.   A professional engineer shall submit a study that:
      1.   Determines a floodway which meets the definition of a "regulatory
floodway" and demonstrates that the proposed development meets the floodway
standards in sections
9-142 and
9-143 of this article;
      2.   Determines a BFE and demonstrates that the proposed development will
maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not increase flood
velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will compensate for any lost
floodplain storage in accordance with section
9-142 of this article; or
      3.   Shows that the proposed development will meet the requirements for
regulatory floodplains in sections
9-137 and
9-138 of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-144: BRIDGE AND CULVERT STANDARDS:
These standards are for the construction, reconstruction or modification of
bridges, culvert crossings and roadway approaches located in the regulatory
floodplain:
   A.   A proposed new structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth of a foot (0.1') when compared to the
existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event unless contained within the channel banks or recorded easements. The one-
tenth of a foot (0.1') increase is allowed for the margin of error in the
model, construction, and survey overall. The evaluation must be submitted to
IDNR-OWR for review and issuance of a permit.
   B.   If the proposed new structure will increase upstream flood stages
greater than one-tenth of a foot (0.1') the applicant must contact IDNR-OWR for
a dam safety permit or waiver. The Administrator shall be copied on all related
correspondence.
   C.   A restrictive bridge or culvert may be altered to increase the
conveyance of the base flood if an impact analysis is completed and approved in
writing by the Administrator and all other required regulatory approvals are
obtained.
   D.   Velocity increases must be mitigated by use of appropriate measures to
avoid scour, erosion and sedimentation at the structure.
   E.   For modification or replacement of existing structures in a regulatory
floodway, the existing structure must first be evaluated in accordance with
IDNR-OWR rules (17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3708) to determine if the existing
structure is a source of flood damage. If the structure is a source of flood
damage, the applicant's engineer shall justify allowing the damage to continue
and evaluate the feasibility of relieving the structure's impact. Modifications
to or replacement of structures, other than a restrictive bridge or culvert
under subsection C of this section, shall not increase flood stages (0.0 feet)
compared to the existing condition for all flood events up to and including the
base flood event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR-OWR for review and
approval before a permit is issued. The Administrator shall be copied on all
related correspondence.
   F.   If any work is proposed in, near or over the Fox River, a permit or
letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR-OWR.
   G.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing
the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to
IDNR-OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required.
   H.   Construction vehicles shall cross streams by the means of existing
bridges or culverts. Where an existing crossing is not available, a temporary
crossing, for which a permit or waiver has been issued by IDNR-OWR, shall be
constructed in which:
      1.   The approach roads will be six inches (6") or less above existing
grade;
      2.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the
water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall;
      3.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet
(2') below the top of the lowest bank;
      4.   Any fill in the channel shall be nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel; and
      5.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one
year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by the
Administrator. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-145: FLOODPLAIN SUBMITTAL:
The applicant shall obtain approval from IDNR-OWR and FEMA when required for
all new base flood and floodway determinations or as required in section
9-135 of this article. Documentation supporting a finding by the qualified
engineer that the proposed development is compliant with section
9-135 of this article shall be submitted with the stormwater management permit
application. At a minimum, the following materials shall be submitted for
approval with the application:
   A.   Regulatory floodplain boundary determination:
      1.   Provide the source of flood profile information; and
      2.   Provide all hydrologic and hydraulic study information for site-
specific floodplain studies, non-designated floodway elevation determinations,
and floodplain map revisions;
   B.   Floodway hydrologic and hydraulic analyses for the following
conditions:
      1.   Existing conditions (land use and stream systems);
      2.   Proposed conditions (land use and stream systems);
      3.   Tabular summary of the one percent (1%) design storm elevations,
discharges, and velocities for existing and proposed conditions;
      4.   Calculations used for model development; and
      5.   Hydraulic/hydrologic computer model input/output.
   C.   Floodplain fill and compensatory storage calculations for below and
above the ten percent (10%) design storm elevation up to the base flood
elevation:
      1.   Tabular summary for below and above the ten percent (10%) design
storm elevation of fill, compensatory storage volumes and compensatory storage
ratios provided in the proposed plan; and
      2.   Cross sections used for the above calculations. AutoCAD and
Geographic Information System (GIS) tools may be used to create existing and
proposed surfaces, to determine cut and fill, in place of cross sections, at
the discretion of the Administrator.
   D.   Floodproofing measures:
      1.   Narrative discussion of floodproofing measures including material
specifications, calculations, design details and operation summary; and
      2.   Flood easements when required by this chapter.
   E.   Statewide and regional self-issuing permits (Statewide permits nos. 1
through 14 and regional permit no. 3). Such information as shall show that the
development qualifies for the particular permit in question under the
regulations established therefor by IDNR-OWR. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-146 - 9-167: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE VII. REQUIREMENTS FOR WETLANDS, LINEAR WATERCOURSES, NON-LINEAR
WATERBODIES, BUFFERS AND MITIGATION
SECTION:
9-168: General
9-169: Requirements For Wetland Delineation
9-170: Mitigation Required
9-171: Mitigation To Be Local
9-172: Mitigation Requirements
9-173: Wetland Mitigation And Stream Restoration Plan
9-174: Mitigation Performance Standards
9-175: Mitigation Monitoring
9-176: Non-Performing Mitigation Requirements
9-177: Buffer Requirements
9-178: Denial Of Permit - Appeal
9-179: Fee In Lieu Of Wetland Mitigation
9-180: Wetland Submittal
9-181 - 9-201: Reserved
9-168: GENERAL:
All developments that have a wetland impact, modify a linear watercourse,
nonlinear waterbody, or disturb a buffer shall comply with this article. A
permit for any wetland impact, modification to a linear watercourse, nonlinear
waterbody, or buffer disturbance shall be obtained from the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer this article). (Ord. 19-
151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-169: REQUIREMENTS FOR WETLAND DELINEATION:
   A.   Before any development in or near linear watercourses, nonlinear
waterbodies, or wetlands is permitted, the applicant shall submit a written
report identifying and evaluating the boundaries, location, area, functions and
quality of linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies, wetlands, and buffers.
The presence and extent of linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies, and
wetlands on the site shall be determined as the result of an on-site
delineation using the following methodology:
      1.   The ordinary high water mark (OHWM) shall be used to delineate all
linear watercourses and nonlinear waterbodies, that are not wetlands;
      2.   All on-site wetlands shall be delineated in accordance with the
current Federal wetland delineation methodology; or
      3.   All on-site farmed wetlands in agricultural areas that are in
production that are not determined to be wetlands through the current Federal
wetland delineation methodology shall be delineated in accordance with the
current National Food Security Act Manual methodology. Agricultural land that
has been abandoned for five (5) consecutive years shall be delineated in
accordance with the current Federal wetland delineation methodology per
subsection A2 of this section.
   B.   The following areas are not considered to be linear watercourses,
nonlinear waterbodies, or wetlands under this chapter. Documentation is
required to verify the purpose and use of the facility and that the area was
excavated or diked in an upland area. The Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article) reserves the right on a case-
by-case basis to determine if an area within the categories below shall be
regulated under this chapter:
      1.   Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons;
      2.   Drainage, irrigation, agricultural, and roadside ditches excavated
in upland areas;
      3.   Areas with artificial hydrology, including but not limited to drain
tile breaks, irrigation, or detention storage facility outlets which would
revert to upland if the tile were repaired or irrigation were to cease;
      4.   Artificial nonlinear waterbodies or wetlands created by excavating
and/or diking upland areas to collect and retain water and which are used
exclusively for such purposes as stormwater storage, stock watering,
irrigation, industrial cooling systems, settling basins, sediment traps, or
primarily aesthetic purposes;
      5.   Water filled depressions created in upland areas incidental to
construction activity; and
      6.   Pits or quarries excavated in upland areas for the purpose of
obtaining fill, stone, aggregate, sand, or gravel unless and until the
construction or excavation operation is abandoned for a period of five (5)
years or more and the resulting body of water meets the definition of waters of
the U.S. or wetlands.
   C.   Wetland delineations under this section shall be valid for five (5)
years.
   D.   Delineations for permitting purposes may be performed outside the
growing season when site conditions allow. FQI assessments made before May 1st
or after October 15th shall be considered preliminary.
   E.   The approximate location, extent and relative quality of off- site
linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies and wetlands within one hundred feet
(100') of the site shall be identified and included in the written report. The
location and extent of such, at the time of development, shall be determined by
using the following hierarchy:
      1.   Site-specific delineation in accordance with the current Federal
wetland delineation methodology;
      2.   Wetlands identified in Watershed Plans or ADID studies;
      3.   Wetlands identified in Interim Watershed Plans; or
      4.   Wetlands identified on USFWS National Wetlands Inventory maps.
   F.   The quality of the wetlands shall be evaluated based upon the FQI. The
FQI shall be based solely on the wetland vegetation. Buffers and adjacent plant
communities shall not be included in the calculation.
   G.   The presence of any Federally or State listed threatened and endangered
species on-site shall be determined. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-170: MITIGATION REQUIRED:
All wetland impacts shall be mitigated as described within this article with
the following exceptions:
   A.   A wetland impact created by the dredging of an isolated wetland with a
FQI of less than seven (7) for the purpose of creating a native vegetated
detention storage facility need not be mitigated;
   B.   A wetland impact to isolated wetlands less than 0.10 acre (4,356 square
feet) in aggregate need not be mitigated, provided that:
      1.   One-tenth (1/10) of an acre (4,356 square feet) or more of the
wetlands on the site have not been dredged or filled, cumulatively, since the
effective date of this chapter; and
      2.   The wetland(s) has a FQI less than twenty five (25).
   C.   Development proposing a temporary wetland affect need not be mitigated
provided that the impacted wetland is restored to its pre-existing condition
pursuant to subsection 9-174A of this article;
   D.   A wetland impact occurring on agricultural land administered by any
program under the Food Security Act (16 USC section 3801 et seq.), as amended,
need not be mitigated, provided that:
      1.   It has been enrolled in the program for the previous three (3)
years; and
      2.   It is an approved impact under the program's conservation plan.
   E.   A wetlands impact to wetlands identified as having a FQI greater than
or equal to twenty five (25) shall not be allowed as part of any development
unless the application of this section would:
      1.   Have the effect of depriving the owner of all economically
beneficial use of the site; or
      2.   Make the construction or installation of an essential public
improvement by a public entity impossible or highly impracticable. The
applicant may apply for a variance from the requirements of this section under
article X of this chapter; and
      3.   If such a variance is granted mitigation for the wetland impact
allowed shall be made according to sections 9-171 and 9-172 of this article.
   F.   Mitigation required for indirect impacts shall be prorated by the
percentage of the tributary area to the wetland that is on- site (existing on-
site tributary area/total existing tributary area) multiplied by the wetland
area, excluding any direct impacts via dredge or fill. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-171: MITIGATION TO BE LOCAL:
   A.   All mitigation for wetland impacts required under a USACE section 404
permit or under this chapter shall be provided in this County through:
      1.   On-site mitigation meeting the wetland mitigation plan requirements
per section 9-173 of this article;
      2.   Off-site mitigation meeting the wetland mitigation plan requirements
per section 9-173 of this article within the same major watershed as the impact
within this County;
      3.   The purchase of credits from a wetland mitigation bank within the
same major watershed as the impact; or
      4.   Payment of a fee in lieu of wetland mitigation per section 9-179 of
this article.
   B.   Mitigation outside the County shall be allowed when:
      1.   Wetland mitigation is required for wetland impacts that occur in any
other county;
      2.   Wetland mitigation bank credits are not available within the same
major watershed as the impact in this County, mitigation via the purchase of
credits in a mitigation bank within the other major watershed in the County or
mitigation outside the County within the same major watershed as the impact,
upon approval of the Director; or
      3.   Mitigation required under a USACE section 404 permit that must occur
within a USACE approved bank and credits within a USACE approved bank are not
available within the County at the time of the approval, upon approval of the
Director. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-172: MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   If linear watercourses are to be completely or partially relocated,
mitigation may be made through stream restoration meeting the stream
restoration plan requirements per subsection
9-173B of this article.
   B.   For all mitigable wetland impacts, mitigation may be made:
      1.   Within a wetland mitigation facility meeting the wetland mitigation
plan requirements per subsection
9-173A of this article;
      2.   Through the purchase of credits from a wetland mitigation bank; or
      3.   Through the payment of a fee in lieu of mitigation under section 9-
179 of this article.
   C.   Wetland mitigation shall be provided at the following ratios:
      1.   One to one (1:1) for wetland impacts upon wetlands with a FQI of
less than seven (7). For purposes of this section, a farmed wetland is assumed
to have a FQI less than seven (7);
      2.   Two to one (2:1) for wetland impacts upon wetlands with a FQI of
seven (7) or more but less than sixteen (16);
      3.   Three to one (3:1) for wetland impacts upon wetlands with a FQI of
sixteen (16) or more but less than twenty five (25);
      4.   Ten to one (10:1) plus one-half (1/2) for each point by which the
FQI exceeds twenty five (25) rounded up to the nearest whole number for wetland
impacts upon wetlands with a FQI of more than twenty five (25);
      5.   Three to one (3:1) unless the FQI dictates a higher mitigation ratio
for wetland impacts upon wetlands inhabited by a threatened or endangered
species;
      6.   Mitigation for wetland impacts upon more than one wetland within a
site shall be mitigated at the ratio of the highest quality wetland impacted;
and
      7.   Mitigation requirements based upon preliminary assessments per
subsection
9-169D of this article shall not be considered final unless a FQI of sixteen
(16) is assumed or the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to
administer this article), accepts such security as he shall deem appropriate to
ensure that the required mitigation will be achieved.
   D.   The applicant may provide wetland mitigation by enhancing preserved
wetlands with a FQI of seven (7) or less at the ratio of one-fourth to one
(0.25:1) per one acre of wetland enhanced. If this option is chosen, the entire
wetland shall be enhanced even if credit in excess of that required for the
development is generated. The enhanced wetland shall meet the performance
standards of section
9-174 of this article.
   E.   Mitigation for impacts to wetlands with a FQI less than seven (7) may
occur within the detention storage facility, upon approval of the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer this article).
   F.   The applicant may propose an alternative mitigation plan combining
wetland creation, purchase of credits from a wetland mitigation bank, payment
of a fee in lieu of wetland mitigation, and/or enhancing existing wetlands
either on-site or off-site. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-173: WETLAND MITIGATION AND STREAM RESTORATION PLAN:
   A.   If wetland mitigation is required and is proposed within a wetland
mitigation facility, a wetland mitigation plan shall be submitted in accordance
with section
9-180 of this article. The wetland mitigation plan shall be designed so that:
      1.   Every wetland mitigation facility shall contain at least two (2)
wetland plant communities (for example, wet prairie, emergent, floating
vascular, forested wetland, sedge meadow, or hemimarsh);
      2.   Open water shall not constitute more than twenty percent (20%) of
the entire wetland mitigation facility; and
      3.   It is buffered according to the requirements of section
9-177 of this article. Reductions are allowed in accordance with subsections
9-177B5c and B6 of this article. No buffer is required for that portion of a
wetland mitigation facility which is adjacent to an existing preserved wetland.
   B.   If linear watercourses are modified, a stream restoration plan shall be
submitted in accordance with section
9-180 of this article. The stream restoration plan shall be designed so that:
      1.   If linear watercourses are completely or partially relocated, the
newly created portion must be of equal or greater length than the existing
linear watercourse;
      2.   It is constructed in a manner which will allow naturalizing to occur
(i.e., meandering, pools, riffles, and the like); and
      3.   It is buffered according to the requirements of section
9-177 of this article. Reductions are allowed in accordance with subsections
9-177B5c and B6 of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-174: MITIGATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   All wetland mitigation facilities shall meet the following performance
standards:
      1.   The proposed wetland acreage within the wetland mitigation facility
shall meet the definition of a "wetland" under this chapter.
      2.   All vegetated zones, including the buffer, within any wetland
mitigation facility shall achieve eighty five percent (85%) cover, with the
following exceptions:
         a.   The emergent plant community shall achieve sixty percent (60%)
aerial coverage;
         b.   The floating vascular plant community shall meet twenty five
percent (25%) aerial coverage; and
         c.   Open water shall have zero percent (0%) vegetative coverage.
      3.   A wetland mitigation facility designed to mitigate for impacts to
wetlands with a FQI of less than seven (7) shall achieve a minimum FQI three
(3) points greater than the FQI of the wetland impacted within the five (5)
year monitoring period.
      4.   A wetland mitigation facility designed to mitigate for impacts to
wetlands with a FQI of seven (7) or more but less than twenty five (25) shall
achieve a minimum FQI five (5) points greater than the FQI of the wetland
impacted within the five (5) year monitoring period.
      5.   A wetland mitigation facility, including the buffer, shall not be
dominated or contain cumulatively more than ten percent (10%) cover by non-
native or invasive species.
   B.   All stream restorations and their buffers shall meet the following
performance standards:
      1.   All constructed in stream structures (i.e., pools, riffles, bank
stabilization, and the like) shall be dynamically stable;
      2.   No rills or gullies shall be present on stabilized streambanks;
      3.   The overbank areas of any stream restoration, including the buffer,
shall achieve eighty five percent (85%) coverage. Proposed vegetated areas in
the stream or along the toe shall achieve sixty percent (60%) coverage;
      4.   The overbank areas of a stream restoration with no associated
wetlands shall achieve a minimum FQI of ten (10) within the three (3) year
monitoring period;
      5.   A stream restoration with associated wetlands with a FQI of less
than seven (7) shall achieve a minimum FQI three (3) points greater than the
FQI of the associated wetlands within the three (3) year monitoring period;
      6.   A stream restoration with associated wetlands with a FQI of seven
(7) or more but less than twenty five (25) shall achieve a minimum FQI five (5)
points greater than the FQI of the associated wetlands within the three (3)
year monitoring period; and
      7.   A stream restoration, including the buffer, shall not be dominated
or contain cumulatively more than ten percent (10%) cover by non-native or
invasive species.
   C.   All buffer (re)establishment areas that are not part of a wetland
mitigation facility or stream restoration shall meet the performance standards
in subsection
9-177C of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-175: MITIGATION MONITORING:
   A.   All wetland mitigation facilities shall:
      1.   Be monitored and managed for five (5) years beginning on the day the
wetland planting is completed;
      2.   Be monitored in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
current Chicago District protocol promulgated by USACE;
      3.   Provide an annual report to the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article) by February 15th of each year
for every wetland mitigation facility under permit;
      4.   Make a request for the release of the performance security to the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this article)
once a wetland mitigation facility reaches its required FQI and meets the
performance standards of section
9-174 of this article. A release of the performance security may be requested
of the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article) as early as the end of the third full growing season; and
      5.   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter at the
end of the five (5) year monitoring and management period, or upon acceptance
by the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article).
   B.   All stream restorations shall:
      1.   Be monitored and managed for three (3) years beginning on the day
planting is completed;
      2.   Be monitored in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
current Chicago District protocol promulgated by USACE;
      3.   Provide an annual report to the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article) by February 15th of each year
for the stream restoration under permit;
      4.   Make a request for the release of the performance security to the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this article)
once the stream restoration reaches its required FQI and meets the performance
standards of section
9-174 of this article. A release of the performance security may be requested
of the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article) as early as the end of the second full growing season; and
      5.   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter at the
end of the three (3) year monitoring and management period, or upon acceptance
by the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article). (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-176: NON-PERFORMING MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS:
At the end of the five (5) year monitoring period for a wetland mitigation
facility and the three (3) year monitoring period for a stream restoration, or
upon an earlier request for the release of the performance security, the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this article)
shall evaluate the wetland mitigation facility or stream restoration for
compliance with the performance standards of section
9-174 of this article. The Director (or Administrator in a community certified
to administer this article) may review the annual monitoring reports and/or
perform a site visit to make this evaluation. If the Director (or Administrator
in a community certified to administer this article) determines that the
facility meets the standards he shall release the performance security. If the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this article)
determines that the facility does not meet the standards he shall make an
estimate of the probable cost of mitigating for the shortfall in performance.
The Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article) shall reduce so much of the performance security to cash as is
required to mitigate for the shortfall in performance and shall release the
remainder. The amount withheld for mitigation shall be deposited in the fund
created under and expended in the manner described in section
9-179 of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-177: BUFFER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   The requirements of this section are applicable to:
         a.   Areas in conservation or drainage easements that were established
under this chapter for the purpose of protecting, enhancing or reestablishing a
buffer shall be preserved in accordance with subsection B of this section and
if disturbed, shall be re-established;
         b.   Developments that require a stormwater management permit per
section
9-28 of this chapter but do not require a detention storage facility per
subsection
9-81B of this chapter shall meet subsection B of this section; and
         c.   Developments that require a detention storage facility per
subsection
9-81B of this chapter shall meet subsection B of this section. If disturbance
is proposed within a buffer on the site, the area within the defined width per
subsection B of this section that does not currently meet the definition of a
buffer shall be assessed for potential buffer functions. Areas that have high
potential to provide buffer functions shall be re- established in accordance
with subsection C of this section. Such areas include, but are not limited to:
            (1)   Agricultural land within the defined width currently in
production that are tributary to the linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody,
or wetland;
            (2)   Maintained turf or landscape areas within the defined width
that are tributary to the linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody, or wetland;
            (3)   Fallow or unmaintained areas within the defined width
dominated by invasive species that are tributary to the linear watercourse,
nonlinear waterbody, or wetland;
            (4)   Redevelopment areas within the defined width that propose
removal of buildings, structures or impervious surface in an area that is
tributary to the linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody, or wetland; or
            (5)   Areas within the defined width that are not tributary to, but
provide ground water recharge, to the linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody,
or wetland.
      2.   The requirements of this section are not applicable to:
         a.   Redevelopment projects on sites adjacent to the main channel of
the Fox River; or
         b.   Isolated wetlands or waters of the U.S. that, in either case, are
below the threshold size limitations for mitigation requirements under the
USACE section 404 permit program (currently, less than 0.10 acre);
         c.   Roadside and agricultural drainage ditches that do not meet the
definition of a wetland or waters of the U.S.;
         d.   Swales that do not have a defined bed and bank that do not meet
the definition of a wetland or waters of the U.S.; and
         e.   Public roadway crossings and their associated installations.
   B.   Buffers:
      1.   A buffer shall not constitute a linear watercourse, nonlinear
waterbody or wetland.
      2.   Buffer widths required as a part of a USACE section 404 permit
supersede the widths required in this section, unless the width required herein
is greater. If a USACE permit is obtained to permanently fill a portion of a
wetland and no buffer is required, the buffer width required by this chapter
immediately adjacent to the area of impact does not apply. "Immediately
adjacent" refers to the area within fifteen feet (15') of the area of impact,
which may be used to transition from no buffer to the required width. In no
case shall additional wetland area be filled to provide buffer required by this
chapter.
      3.   Buffer areas are divided into two (2) types, linear buffers and
water body buffers. The buffer area for all linear watercourses and nonlinear
waterbodies, except wetlands, shall extend from the OHWM. The buffer area for
wetlands shall extend from the edge of the approved delineated wetland
boundary.
      4.   A site may contain buffer that originates from a linear watercourse,
nonlinear waterbody or wetland located on another property.
      5.   Buffer widths are to be fifty feet (50') wide unless otherwise
determined using the criteria specified in this section.
         a.   Linear buffers shall be designated along linear watercourses and
associated wetlands (i.e., swales, creeks, streams, rivers, etc.). Refer to
this section where wetlands are adjacent to and not part of the main channel
(i.e., floodplain wetland, backwater slough, oxbow, bordering wetland complex).
The minimum buffer width for all linear watercourses and associated wetlands
shall be:
            (1)   Determined utilizing the formula, X = (A * 0.0547) + 30,
where "X" equals the buffer width in feet and "A" equals the drainage area in
acres when the linear watercourse has a drainage area less than six hundred
forty (640) acres, measured at the downstream property line. The width
calculated by this formula shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of five
(5). Subsection I,
figure 9-177.1 of this section may be used to determine buffer widths provided
the resultant width is increased to the nearest multiple of five (5);
            (2)   Fifty feet (50') when the linear watercourse has a drainage
area greater than six hundred forty (640) acres, measured at the downstream
property line, or is designated as ADID because of high habitat value or an
adjacent wetland has a calculated FQI greater than sixteen (16); or
            (3)   One hundred feet (100') when the linear watercourse is rated
A or B for diversity or integrity or is mapped as biologically significant by
the current edition of "Integrating Multiple Taxa in a Biological Stream Rating
System" by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
         b.   Water body buffers shall encompass nonlinear waterbodies meeting
the definition of waters of the U.S., and wetlands that are not part of the
main channel of a linear watercourse. The buffer width shall be based upon the
FQI of the wetland. Buffer requirements based upon preliminary FQI assessments
per subsection
9-169F of this article shall not be considered final unless maximum buffer
widths are assumed. The minimum buffer width shall be:
            (1)   Fifteen feet (15') and a maximum of thirty five feet (35'),
in accordance with subsection I,
table 9-177.2 of this section, for all wetlands with a FQI of less than seven
(7) and nonlinear waterbodies that do not have associated wetlands;
            (2)   Fifteen feet (15') and a maximum of fifty feet (50'), in
accordance with subsection I,
table 9-177.3 of this section, for all wetlands with a FQI of seven (7) to
sixteen (16);
            (3)   Thirty feet (30') and a maximum of fifty feet (50'), in
accordance with subsection I,
table 9-177.4 of this section, for all wetlands with a FQI greater than sixteen
(16) to twenty five (25); or
            (4)   One hundred feet (100') for all wetlands with a FQI greater
than twenty five (25).
         c.   If protective measures are installed along the perimeter of a
buffer, the width may be reduced by up to ten percent (10%) immediately
adjacent to the protective measure. The reduction in width that may be applied
due to installation of protective measures may not be applied where buffer
width averaging has been used and the buffer would be more than fifty percent
(50%) less than originally specified. Protective measures may consist of
fencing, native vegetated detention storage facilities, BMPs or other methods
approved by the Administrator.
      6.   Buffer width averaging is acceptable at the discretion of the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article). If buffer width averaging is proposed:
         a.   The width may not be more than fifty percent (50%) less, at the
narrowest point, than the required width;
         b.   The width may never be less than fifteen feet (15'); and
         c.   High potential buffer function areas may be re-established to
meet buffer averaging requirements for developments meeting subsection A1c of
this section, upon approval by the Director (or Administrator in a community
certified to administer this article).
   C.   Buffer (Re)Establishment: Buffer (re)establishment includes
revegetation of the required buffer per subsection A of this section using the
width determined per subsection B of this section with predominately native
deep-rooted vegetation.
      1.   If buffer (re)establishment is required, a buffer establishment plan
shall be submitted in accordance with section
9-180 of this article.
      2.   The buffer shall be appropriately managed and maintained in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Buffer (re)establishment areas less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet, cumulatively on-site, shall:
            (1)   Meet the following performance standards:
               (A)   All proposed vegetated areas shall achieve eighty five
percent (85%) cover; and
               (B)   All proposed vegetated areas shall not be dominated by or
contain cumulatively more than twenty five percent (25%) cover by non-native or
invasive species.
            (2)   Within one year of the completion of the development a
qualified wetland specialist retained by the developer shall verify compliance
with this section in a report submitted to the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article);
            (3)   Make a request for the release of the performance security to
the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article) once the buffer (re)establishment areas meet the performance
standards. A release of the performance security may be requested as early as
the end of the first full growing season following planting; and
            (4)   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter
at the end of the monitoring and management period, or upon acceptance by the
Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article).
         b.   Buffer (re)establishment areas greater than five thousand (5,000)
square feet, cumulatively on the site, shall:
            (1)   Meet the following performance standards:
               (A)   All proposed vegetated areas shall achieve eighty five
percent (85%) cover;
               (B)   All proposed vegetated areas shall achieve a minimum FQI
of ten (10) within the three (3) year monitoring period; and
               (C)   All proposed vegetated areas shall not be dominated or
contain cumulatively more than ten percent (10%) cover by non-native or
invasive species.
            (2)   Be monitored and managed for three (3) years beginning on the
day planting is completed;
            (3)   Be monitored via meander method or transect method in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the current Chicago District
protocol promulgated by USACE;
            (4)   Provide an annual report to the Director (or Administrator in
a community certified to administer this article) by February 15th of each year
for every buffer (re)establishment area under permit;
            (5)   Make a request for the release of the performance security to
the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article) once the buffer reaches its required FQI and meets the performance
standards. A release of the performance security may be requested as early as
the end of the second full growing season; and
            (6)   Be maintained in accordance with article IX of this chapter
at the end of the three (3) year monitoring and management period, or upon
acceptance by the Director (or Administrator in a community certified to
administer this article).
      3.   At the end of the three (3) year monitoring period for a buffer
(re)establishment area greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet, or upon
an earlier request for the release of the performance security, the Director
(or Administrator in a community certified to administer this article) shall
evaluate the buffer for compliance with the performance standards. The Director
or Administrator may review the annual monitoring reports and/or perform a site
visit to make this evaluation. If the Director or Administrator determines that
the buffer (re)establishment area meets the standards he shall release the
performance security. If the Director or Administrator determines that the
buffer (re)establishment area does not meet the standards he shall make an
estimate of the probable cost of mitigating for the shortfall in performance.
The Director or Administrator shall reduce so much of the performance security
to cash as is required to mitigate for the shortfall in performance and shall
release the remainder. The amount withheld shall be deposited in the fund
created under and expended in the manner described in section
9-179 of this article .
   D.   Stormwater Management Facilities: Stormwater management measures shall
not require a buffer but may constitute buffer. The total width of the buffer
required may not be reduced by the installation of a stormwater management
measure unless they can be considered a protective measure, then the width of
the buffer may be reduced as specified in subsection B5c of this section.
   E.   Disturbed During Construction: If a buffer area is disturbed during
construction, the buffer shall be re-established in accordance with subsection
C of this section.
   F.   Access Allowed When Necessary: Access through buffer areas shall be
allowed when necessary for maintenance purposes. Unless otherwise dedicated for
a public purpose, buffer areas shall remain private property and are not
generally accessible to the public.
   G.   Discharge Through Buffer: Undetained stormwater which has not passed
through a detention storage facility shall discharge through a BMP or buffer
before entering a linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody or wetland.
   H.   Free From Development Once Established:
      1.   All buffer areas once established shall be maintained free from
development, except as follows:
         a.   A buffer area may be used for passive recreation (e.g.,
birdwatching, walking, jogging, bicycling, horseback riding and picnicking) and
it may contain pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian trails, provided that the
created path is no wider than the width required for the designated use by the
AASHTO Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities, current edition. If the
path leads to a wetland, it must be a winding path to help prevent erosion;
         b.   Accessory structures (i.e., toolshed) and impervious surfaces may
occupy a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of the portion of the required buffer
that extends onto or is part of a site;
         c.   Below and above ground utilities shall be allowed provided all
other Federal, State and local regulations are met;
         d.   Utility maintenance, and maintenance of drainage facilities and
drainage easements shall be allowed provided the maintenance activity meets all
other Federal, State and local regulations; and
         e.   Anchoring and placement of boat docks and piers shall be allowed
provided the structure meets all other Federal, State and local regulations.
      2.   Buffer areas including the protected linear watercourses, nonlinear
waterbodies and wetlands shall be shown to be within appropriate easements on
all new plats. Additionally, the stormwater management permit number, and any
associated maintenance requirements shall be noted on the plat or included as a
covenant running with the land in any deed which conveys any portion of a
buffer area.
      3.   An easement over buffer areas for projects meeting the requirements
of subsection C2a of this section is not required. A Declaration of Restriction
and Covenant that acknowledges the presence of linear watercourses, nonlinear
waterbodies, wetlands and buffers on-site, the stormwater management permit
number, and any associated maintenance requirements. However, an easement per
subsection H2 of this section may be required at the discretion of the
Administrator.
   I.   Buffer Width Calculation Figures And Tables:
FIGURE 9-177.1
BUFFER WIDTH CALCULATION BASED ON DRAINAGE AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2955.jpg]
 
TABLE 9-177.2
LOW QUALITY WETLANDS (FQI <7)
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet)
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet)
0.10         15.0
0.25         15.0
0.50         15.0
0.75         15.0
1.00         20.0
1.25         20.0
1.50         20.0
1.75         25.0
2.00         25.0
2.25         25.0
2.50         25.0
2.75         30.0
3.00         30.0
3.25         30.0
3.50         30.0
3.75         35.0
4.00         35.0
4.25         35.0
4.50         35.0
4.75         35.0
5.00 or more 35.0
 
TABLE 9-177.3
MEDIUM QUALITY WETLANDS (7 FQI <16)
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet)
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet)
0.10         15.0
0.25         15.0
0.50         15.0
0.75         20.0
1.00         25.0
1.25         25.0
1.50         30.0
1.75         30.0
2.00         30.0
2.25         35.0
2.50         35.0
2.75         35.0
3.00         40.0
3.25         40.0
3.50         40.0
3.75         45.0
4.00         45.0
4.25         45.0
4.50         45.0
4.75         50.0
5.00 or more 50.0
 
TABLE 9-177.4
HIGH QUALITY WETLANDS (16 FQI 25)
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet
Wetland Area Buffer Width
(Acres)      (Feet
0.10         30.0
0.25         30.0
0.50         35.0
0.75         40.0
1.00         45.0
1.25         45.0
1.50         45.0
1.75         45.0
2.00         50.0
2.25         50.0
2.50         50.0
2.75         50.0
3.00         50.0
3.25         50.0
3.50         50.0
3.75         50.0
4.00         50.0
4.25         50.0
4.50         50.0
4.75         50.0
5.00 or more 50.0
 
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-178: DENIAL OF PERMIT - APPEAL:
The denial of a permit under this article may be appealed in the manner
described in section
9-36 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-179: FEE IN LIEU OF WETLAND MITIGATION:
If a wetland mitigation is required under this chapter and the applicant
chooses to satisfy the mitigation requirement by paying a fee in lieu of
mitigation, the applicant shall:
   A.   Prepare a statement of the estimated probable cost to acquire the land,
install, monitor and maintain a wetland mitigation facility for five (5) years
(which estimate is subject to the approval of the Director [or Administrator in
a community certified to administer this article]), as if the applicant had
chosen to satisfy the mitigation requirement by mitigating within a wetland
mitigation facility; and
   B.   If mitigation credits are available from any wetland mitigation bank,
the applicant shall also prepare a statement of the estimated probable cost of
satisfying the mitigation requirement through the purchase of credits from a
wetland mitigation bank (which estimate is subject to the approval of the
Director [or Administrator in a community certified to administer this
article]) as if the applicant had chosen to satisfy the mitigation requirement
in such manner.
   C.   The fee in lieu of wetland mitigation to be paid under this section
shall be the greater of subsection A or B of this section. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-180: WETLAND SUBMITTAL:
   A.   The applicant shall obtain a permit for all Federally regulated
activities involving waters of the U.S. from the appropriate Federal
authorities. The applicant shall obtain a permit from the County (or community
certified to administer this article), for all developments having a wetland
impact or that modify a linear watercourse or nonlinear waterbody.
   B.   If the development proposes a wetland impact or modification to a
linear watercourse or nonlinear waterbody, the requirements of this article
shall be met and a wetland submittal shall be required. The submittal shall
include all of the following information:
      1.   A written report containing:
         a.   A wetland delineation report (USACE format);
         b.   Calculation of the required buffer width for each linear
watercourse, nonlinear waterbody, and wetland (including date the FQI was
completed, size and description of the buffer functions);
         c.   Consultation with the Illinois Department of Natural Resources to
determine if the site is inhabited by a State listed threatened or endangered
species and obtain a consultation termination letter or other instrument of
approval;
         d.   An evaluation of the site in accordance with current USFWS review
procedure;
         e.   One of the following forms of documentation from the USACE:
            (1)   A copy of the written Jurisdictional Determination (JD) from
the USACE as to which linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies and wetlands
on the site are waters of the U.S.;
            (2)   A copy of a Letter of No Objection (LONO) where no impacts to
waters of the U.S. are proposed; or
            (3)   A copy of the USACE permit for the development.
         f.   A narrative describing the proposed wetland impacts and means of
mitigation;
         g.   Supporting calculations to prove the development will not cause
an indirect impact to wetlands on-site or within one hundred feet (100') of the
site shall be included in the wetland submittal. An indirect wetland impact is
determined if a development activity would result in the wetland hydrology
falling below eighty percent (80%), or exceeding one hundred fifty percent
(150%), of the existing condition storm event runoff volume to the wetland for
the 2-year, 24-hour storm event. The following minimum information shall be
submitted to address this provision:
            (1)   An exhibit illustrating the existing and proposed tributary
drainage area to wetlands;
            (2)   Existing and proposed condition land use documentation and
soil type;
            (3)   Existing condition and proposed runoff volume determination;
            (4)   Where practical, the development shall include a design for
the stormwater management system that maintains or replicates the existing
hydrologic condition of the wetland, unless changes are proposed to enhance the
wetland function;
            (5)   For proposed developments that will change the size of a
wetland through direct impacts via dredging or filling, the proposed to
existing conditions runoff volume ratio shall be adjusted according to the
change in wetland size, to determine if the hydrology threshold has been met;
            (6)   The requirements of this section may be waived if the on-site
tributary area is less than ten percent (10%) of the total tributary area to
the wetland, upon approval of the Director (or Administrator in a community
certified to administer this article); and
            (7)   If an indirect impact is proposed, the requirements of this
article shall be met.
         h.   If wetland impacts will be mitigated within a wetland mitigation
facility, the report shall also contain:
            (1)   The proposed plan including a description of the proposed
hydrologic regime, soils and site geomorphology, where applicable;
            (2)   Specifications for rough and final grading, soil types, soils
placement, plant procurement, water control structures and a planting plan that
lists the plant materials by scientific and common name, seeding rate or
spacing distance and special planting provisions; and
            (3)   Maintenance and monitoring provisions including an annual
work schedule describing each task in detail and time of year when it will be
performed.
         i.   If linear watercourses are modified, the report shall also
contain:
            (1)   Supporting calculations for bank stabilization measures and
channel width, depth, sinuosity, pool and riffle locations, and the like; and
            (2)   Specifications for bank stabilization measures, in-stream
practices and a planting plan that lists the plant materials by scientific and
common name, seeding rate or spacing distance and special planting provisions.
         j.   Cost estimate for installation and required management,
monitoring, and reporting for all mitigation, restoration, establishment
proposed.
      2.   Plan view drawings including:
         a.   All linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies, and wetlands on-
site or within one hundred feet (100') of the site;
         b.   All buffers with the width labeled;
         c.   Proposed wetland and buffer impacts;
         d.   A wetland summary table for all wetlands including their FQI,
acreage, buffer width, acreage of proposed wetland and buffer impacts, wetland
mitigation ratio, mitigation acreage required, and wetland enhancement acreage
and wetland mitigation facility acreage;
         e.   Identification of easement areas;
         f.   If wetland impacts will be mitigated within a wetland mitigation
facility, the plan shall also contain:
            (1)   Planting plan for wetlands and buffers including location and
acreage of plant communities and plant list including scientific and common
names, seeding rate, plant quantities, and spacing distance; and
            (2)   Maintenance and monitoring provisions including an annual
work schedule describing each task in detail and time of year when it will be
performed.
         g.   If linear watercourses are modified, a stream restoration plan
shall be submitted in accordance with subsection
9-174B of this article. At a minimum the plan shall contain:
            (1)   The plan, profile and cross sections of the existing and
proposed stream;
            (2)   The length of the existing and proposed linear watercourse.
The newly created portion must be of equal or greater length;
            (3)   Location and type of streambank stabilization measures,
meanders, pools, riffles, and the like;
            (4)   A planting plan for disturbed banks that provides
stabilization with native vegetation where appropriate; and
            (5)   An appropriately sized buffer in accordance with subsection
9-177B5 of this article.
         h.   If buffer averaging or re-establishment will occur on-site, the
plan shall also contain:
            (1)   Planting plan for buffers including location and acreage of
plant communities and plant list including scientific and common names, seeding
rate, plant quantities and spacing distance; and
            (2)   Maintenance and monitoring provisions including an annual
work schedule describing each task in detail and time of year when it will be
performed. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-181 - 9-201: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE VIII. PERFORMANCE SECURITY
SECTION:
9-202: General Security Requirements
9-203: Development Security
9-204: Erosion And Sedimentation Control Security
9-205: Stormwater Mitigation/BMP And Watershed Benefit Measure Performance
Security
9-206: Special Management Area Performance Security
9-207: Letters Of Credit
9-208 - 9-228: Reserved
9-202: GENERAL SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   To secure the performance of the developer's obligation to complete the
construction of the Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, stormwater management
measures and special management areas required by the stormwater management
permit, and to pay all costs, fees and charges due under this chapter, and to
fully and faithfully comply with all of the provisions of this chapter, the
applicant shall, prior to the issuance of a stormwater management permit:
      1.   Post the security provided in section
9-203 of this article;
      2.   Post the security provided in section
9-204 of this article if an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required
under this chapter;
      3.   Post the security provided in section
9-205 of this article if stormwater mitigation/BMPs and watershed benefit
measures are required under this chapter; and
      4.   Post the security provided in section
9-206 of this article if mitigation for a wetland impact is required under this
chapter and the applicant chooses to mitigate within a wetland mitigation
facility, stream restoration or buffer (re)establishment is proposed; or
      5.   The security may be posted as one single security that includes all
of the above.
   B.   The applicant shall bear the full cost and responsibility of obtaining
and maintaining the security required by this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-203: DEVELOPMENT SECURITY:
   A.   In all cases the applicant shall post:
      1.   A schedule, agreed upon by the applicant and the Administrator, for
the completion of any Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, stormwater management
measures (excluding category I BMPs) or special management areas required by
the permit;
      2.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to complete the
construction of any Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, stormwater management
measures (excluding category I BMPs) and special management areas required by
the permit which estimate is subject to the approval of the Administrator; and
      3.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the permitting
authority, or other adequate security upon approval by the Administrator, in an
amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved estimated
probable cost to complete the construction of any required Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, stormwater management measures (excluding category I BMPs)
and special management areas.
   B.   The security required by this section shall be maintained by the
applicant in favor of the permitting authority until all Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, stormwater management measures (excluding category I BMPs),
and special management areas required by the permit have been completed, all
conditions set forth in the permit have been satisfied and the applicant has
complied with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The Administrator may approve periodic reductions in the amount of the
security based upon the progress of construction. At no time, however, shall
more than ninety percent (90%) of the security be released prior to approval of
record drawings and final inspection. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
original amount of the security shall be retained for a period of one year
after completion of all required stormwater facilities. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-204: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL SECURITY:
   A.   If an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required under this
chapter the applicant shall post:
      1.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install and maintain
the erosion and sedimentation control practices required by the plan which
estimate is subject to the approval of the Administrator; and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the permitting
authority, or other adequate security upon approval by the Administrator, in an
amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved estimated
probable cost to install and maintain the required erosion and sedimentation
control practices.
   B.   The security required by this section shall be maintained by the
applicant in favor of the permitting authority until construction has been
completed, vegetation has been established, sediment has been removed from all
stormwater facilities and the development has been inspected and approved by
the Administrator at which time it shall be released. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-205: STORMWATER MITIGATION/BMP AND WATERSHED BENEFIT MEASURE PERFORMANCE
SECURITY:
   A.   If category II stormwater mitigation/BMPs or watershed benefit measures
are required under this chapter, the applicant shall post:
      1.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install, monitor and
maintain the native vegetated category II BMPs or watershed benefit measures
required by the plan for three (3) years which estimate is subject to the
approval of the Administrator; and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the permitting
authority, or other adequate security upon approval by the Administrator, in an
amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved estimated
probable cost.
   B.   The security required by this section shall be maintained by the
applicant in favor of the permitting authority, until construction has been
completed, vegetation has been established and the native vegetated category II
BMPs or watershed benefit measures have been evaluated by the Administrator,
and found to meet the performance standards of section
9-174 of this chapter at which time it shall be released. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-206: SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA PERFORMANCE SECURITY:
   A.   If mitigation for a wetland impact is required under this chapter and
the applicant chooses to mitigate within a wetland mitigation facility, the
applicant shall post:
      1.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install, monitor and
maintain the wetland mitigation facility required by the plan for five (5)
years which estimate is subject to the approval of the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter); and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the County (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter), or other adequate security upon approval by the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter), in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved
estimated probable cost.
   B.   If stream restoration is required under this chapter, the applicant
shall post:
      1.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install, monitor and
maintain the stream restoration required by the plan for three (3) years which
estimate is subject to the approval of the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer article VII of this chapter); and
      2.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the County (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter), or other adequate security upon approval by the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter), in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved
estimated probable cost.
   C.   If buffer (re)establishment is required under this chapter, the
applicant shall post:
      1.   For buffer (re)establishment areas less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet, cumulatively on-site:
         a.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install, monitor
and maintain buffer (re)establishment areas required by the plan for one year
which estimate is subject to the approval of the Director (or Administrator in
a community certified to administer this article); and
         b.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the County (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer this article), or other
adequate security upon approval by the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article), in an amount equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved estimated probable cost.
      2.   For buffer (re)establishment areas greater than five thousand
(5,000) square feet, cumulatively on the site:
         a.   A statement of the estimated probable cost to install, monitor
and maintain buffer (re)establishment areas required by the plan for three (3)
years which estimate is subject to the approval of the Director; and
         b.   An irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the County (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer this article), or other
adequate security upon approval by the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer this article), in an amount equal to one
hundred ten percent (110%) of the approved estimated probable cost.
   D.   The security required by this section shall be maintained by the
applicant in favor of the County (or Administrator in a community certified to
administer article VII of this chapter), until construction has been completed,
vegetation has been established and the wetland mitigation facility, stream
restoration, or buffer (re)establishment has been evaluated by the Director (or
Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter), and found to meet the performance standards of section
9-174 of this chapter at which time it shall be released. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-207: LETTERS OF CREDIT:
   A.   Letters of credit posted pursuant to this article shall be in a form
satisfactory to the Administrator.
   B.   Each letter of credit shall be drawn on an institution:
      1.   Acceptable to the Administrator;
      2.   Having assets of at least ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00);
      3.   Having an office in the Chicago metropolitan area;
      4.   That is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; or
      5.   As required by the Administrator.
   C.   Each letter of credit shall provide that:
      1.   It is irrevocable;
      2.   The consent of the applicant is not required prior to its
presentment for payment; and
      3.   If at any time it will expire within forty five (45) or any lesser
number of days, and if it has not been renewed and the renewal submitted to the
Administrator, and if any obligation of the applicant for which it stands as
security remains uncompleted or is unsatisfactory, then the Administrator may,
without notice and without being required to take any further action of any
nature whatsoever, present the letter of credit for payment and thereafter
either hold all proceeds as security for the satisfactory completion of all
such obligations or employ the proceeds to complete all such obligations and
reimburse the permitting authority for any and all costs and expenses,
including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred by the permitting
authority.
   D.   If the Administrator at any time determines that the amount of the
letter of credit is not, or may not be, sufficient to pay in full the remaining
unpaid cost of the construction of all stormwater facilities or the
installation and maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control
practices, then, within ten (10) days following a demand by the Administrator,
the applicant shall increase the amount of the letter of credit to the amount
determined by the Administrator to be sufficient to pay such unpaid costs.
Failure to increase the amount of the letter of credit shall be grounds for the
Administrator to present the letter of credit for payment.
   E.   If at any time the Administrator determines that the bank issuing the
letter of credit is without assets of at least ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00), is unable to meet any Federal or State requirement for
reserves, is insolvent, is in danger of becoming any of the foregoing, or is
otherwise in danger of being unable to honor such letter of credit at any time
during its term, or if the Administrator otherwise reasonably deems the
permitting authority to be insecure, then the Administrator shall have the
right to demand that the applicant provide a replacement letter of credit from
a bank meeting the requirements of this section. Such replacement letter of
credit shall be deposited with the Administrator not less than ten (10) days
following such demand. Upon such deposit, the Administrator shall surrender the
original letter of credit to the applicant.
   F.   If the applicant fails or refuses to fully meet any of its obligations
under this chapter then the Administrator may, in his or her discretion,
present the letter for payment and thereafter either hold all proceeds as
security for the satisfactory completion of all such obligations or employ the
proceeds to complete all such obligations or otherwise mitigate the effects of
such failure or refusal and may reimburse the permitting authority for any and
all costs and expenses, including legal fees and administrative costs, incurred
by the permitting authority. If as a result of such default, the remaining
amount of the letter of credit is less than the amount otherwise required to be
then maintained under this article, then the applicant shall, upon demand of
the Administrator therefor, immediately deposit with the Administrator such
additional funds as the Administrator determines to be required to be then
maintained. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-208 - 9-228: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE IX. LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
9-229: Long-Term Maintenance Regulations
9-230: Transfer To Permitting Authority Or Other Public Entity
9-231: Transfer To Homeowners' Or Similar Association
9-232: Conveyance To One Or More Persons
9-233: Incorporation Of Maintenance Obligations In Stormwater Management Permit
9-234: Funding Of Long-Term-Maintenance Of Stormwater Facilities
9-235 - 9-255: Reserved
9-229: LONG-TERM MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
The owner shall maintain all stormwater management measures, Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas, located upon his land or
within easements for off-site outfalls. With the approval of the Administrator
the stormwater management measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and
special management areas, or specified portions thereof, may be:
   A.   Dedicated or otherwise transferred to and accepted by the permitting
authority or other public entity; or
   B.   Conveyed or otherwise transferred to and accepted by a homeowners'
association, or similar entity, the members of which are to be the owners of
all the lots or parcels comprising the development; or
   C.   Conveyed to one or more persons or in one or more undivided interests
to one or more persons. Except for those portions of the stormwater management
measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and special management areas to
be dedicated or otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other
public entity, included in the application for a stormwater permit shall be a
plan for the long-term management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and special management
areas and a description of the sources of funding therefor. Amendments to the
plan must be approved by the Administrator. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-230: TRANSFER TO PERMITTING AUTHORITY OR OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY:
If any portion of the stormwater management measures, Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas are to be dedicated or
otherwise transferred to the permitting authority or other public entity under
section 9-229 of this article, appropriate easements for ingress and egress to
and maintenance of such portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such
entity on the final plat. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-231: TRANSFER TO HOMEOWNERS' OR SIMILAR ASSOCIATION:
If any portion of the stormwater management measures, major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas are to be conveyed or
otherwise transferred to a homeowners' or similar association under section
9-229 of this article then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of such association and the
permitting authority on the final plat;
   B.   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the association and its successors in interest
as a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the plan of
long-term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater management
permit, with approved amendments;
   C.   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the association does not do so and to place a lien against
the land for the cost thereof;
   D.   The association shall be duly incorporated and a copy of the
certificate of incorporation, duly recorded, and bylaws, and any amendment to
either of them, shall be delivered to the Administrator;
   E.   The bylaws of the association shall, at a minimum, contain:
      1.   A provision acknowledging and accepting the association's obligation
to maintain those portions of the stormwater management measures, Major and
Minor Stormwater Systems, and special management areas conveyed or otherwise
transferred to it under this chapter;
      2.   A mechanism for imposing an assessment upon the owners of all of the
lots or parcels comprising the development sufficient, at a minimum, to provide
for the maintenance of those portions of the stormwater management measures,
Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and special management areas conveyed or
otherwise transferred to it under this chapter, and the payment of all taxes
levied thereon;
      3.   An engineer's estimate of probable yearly maintenance costs for all
stormwater management measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, and special
management areas with a certification from the owner that Association
Covenants, Deeds and Restrictions will allow for sufficient funds to be
collected based on engineer's estimate with built in inflation not subject to
lot owner approval;
      4.   A provision adopting the plan of long-term maintenance set forth in
the application for a stormwater management permit, with approved amendments;
      5.   A provision identifying the officer of the association responsible
for carrying out the obligations imposed upon the association under this
chapter;
      6.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to any
amendment of the bylaws changing any of the provisions of the bylaws required
by this chapter; and
      7.   A provision requiring the consent of the permitting authority to the
dissolution of the association.
   F.   Any conveyance or other instrument of transfer delivered under section
9-229 of this article shall include a covenant affirmatively imposing upon the
association the obligations set forth in this section and the association's
affirmative acceptance thereof; and
   G.   The developer shall, when the homeowners' association is turned over to
property owners, provide two (2) hard copies of the stormwater plan and long-
term maintenance plan and one digital copy of both to the homeowners'
association. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-232: CONVEYANCE TO ONE OR MORE PERSONS:
If any portion of the stormwater management measures, Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas are to be conveyed to one or
more persons under subsection
9-229C of this article, then:
   A.   Appropriate easements for ingress and egress to and maintenance of such
portions shall be reserved for the benefit of the permitting authority on the
final plat;
   B.   The final plat shall contain a legend imposing the maintenance
obligations of this section upon the grantee and his successors in interest as
a covenant running with the land and incorporating by reference the plan of
long-term maintenance set forth in the application for a stormwater management
permit, with approved amendments;
   C.   The final plat shall contain a legend reserving the right of the
permitting authority to enter upon the land to perform the maintenance required
in this section if the owner does not do so and to place a lien against the
land for the cost thereof; and
   D.   Any conveyance delivered under subsection
9-229C of this article, and any subsequent conveyance, shall include a covenant
affirmatively imposing upon the grantee the obligations, restrictions and
provisions set forth in this section and the grantee's affirmative acceptance
thereof. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-233: INCORPORATION OF MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS IN STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PERMIT:
A long-term maintenance plan for stormwater management measures, Major and
Minor Stormwater Systems, off-site outfalls, and special management areas shall
be included in the stormwater management permit and the applicant's acceptance
of the permit shall be deemed to be the applicant's acceptance of these
obligations. The stormwater management permit and any associated maintenance
requirements shall be noted on the plat of easement, if required by this
chapter, or shall be recorded as a Declaration of Restriction and Covenant.
   A.   The long-term maintenance plan shall include the following:
      1.   Identification of the person or party responsible for all long-term
maintenance obligations;
      2.   A list of the stormwater management measures, Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas and associated features (e.g.,
restrictor in a detention storage facility) that are to be inspected and
maintained;
      3.   Identification of maintenance tasks for each of the areas referenced
in subsection A2 of this section and associated features, including but not
limited to:
         a.   Removal of debris;
         b.   Cleaning and repair of any underground stormwater infrastructure;
         c.   Repair and stabilization of any areas experiencing erosion;
         d.   Removal of accumulated sediment;
         e.   Manufacturer's maintenance specifications for all proprietary
features (e.g., permeable pavements, hydrodynamic separators, etc.);
         f.   Stewardship of native vegetated areas which may include, but is
not limited to: mowing, prescribed burning and herbicide application for the
purpose of non-native and invasive species management;
         g.   Performance criteria for which the native vegetated areas may not
fall below; and
         h.   An annual schedule for inspections, implementation and frequency
of maintenance tasks, and qualified persons responsible for each task.
   B.   Inspection, maintenance and repairs in accordance with the annual
schedule per subsection A3h of this section for the areas referenced in
subsection A2 of this section shall be completed. A report of the items in
subsection A of this section shall be submitted to the Administrator, at a
frequency determined by the Administrator, for all areas referenced in
subsection A2 of this section except category I BMPs. The report shall include:
the date of the inspection, the name and qualifications of the persons who
performed the inspection, the items inspected, deficiencies noted, maintenance
tasks required, and dates maintenance was or is to be completed.
   C.   If the person or party responsible for all long-term maintenance
obligations fails to adequately carry out its duties, the Administrator shall
levy the special service area (SSA) in accordance with section
9-234 of this article to perform the required maintenance tasks. (Ord. 19-151,
5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-234: FUNDING OF LONG-TERM-MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
Unless: a) a public entity has accepted primary maintenance responsibility for
the stormwater management measures (excluding category I BMPs), Major and Minor
Stormwater Systems, and special management areas to be constructed, installed
or preserved under the permit, or b) a public entity has agreed and so states
in the permit, to accept maintenance responsibility in the event the person
designated by the applicant as having primary maintenance responsibility fails
to adequately carry out its duties, the Administrator will require, as a
condition of approving of any application for a stormwater management permit,
the establishment of a special service area pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 200/27-5 et seq., either as the primary means of providing for the
long-term maintenance of these areas, or as a backup vehicle in the event the
person designated by the applicant as having primary maintenance responsibility
fails to adequately carry out its duties. If the establishment of a special
service area is required, the Administrator shall make a good faith estimate of
the tax rate required to produce a tax to be levied upon all taxable property
within the area, sufficient for the long term maintenance of these areas and
submit the same to the permitting authority which shall incorporate such rate
into its enactment of the ordinances necessary for the establishment of the
area. The ordinances to be enacted by the permitting authority shall be
substantially in the form set forth in article XVII, appendix D of this
chapter. On or before August 1st of each year thereafter, the Administrator
shall submit to the permitting authority a good faith estimate of the amount of
tax required to be levied upon all taxable property within the area for the
next fiscal year for the continued maintenance of the stormwater management
measures, Major and Minor Stormwater Systems, off-site outfalls and special
management areas. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-235 - 9-255: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE X. VARIANCES
SECTION:
9-256: Purpose
9-257: Application For Variance
9-258: Application Fee
9-259: Public Hearing
9-260: Granting Of Variances
9-261: Recommendations
9-262: Decision
9-263: Conditions
9-264 - 9-284: Reserved
9-256: PURPOSE:
To provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted when
strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter is impossible or
impracticable, variances from the specific provisions of this chapter may be
granted according to the standards set forth in this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-
7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-257: APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE:
An application for a variance, signed by at least one of the persons identified
in section
9-31 of this chapter with respect to the development to which it relates, shall
be filed with the Administrator. No application for a variance will be accepted
for filing unless it relates to a previously or contemporaneously filed
application for a stormwater management permit. Applications for a variance
shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Administrator may
designate by administrative order. No action will be taken on an application
for a variance unless it and the corresponding application for a stormwater
management permit to which it relates are complete as determined by the
Administrator. The Administrator shall send a copy of the complete application
to the Director and to all other communities within the same watershed.
Applications for a variance need not be made upon any specific form, but shall
contain the information set forth as follows:
   A.   Application For Variance: An application for variance shall set forth:
      1.   The common address(es) and legal description of the site;
      2.   The persons identified in section 9-31 of this chapter;
      3.   The names and addresses of all consultants retained in connection
with the application for a variance;
      4.   The names and addresses of all owners of record of land within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the site;
      5.   The specific feature or features of the development that require a
variance;
      6.   The specific provisions of this chapter from which a variance is
sought and the precise extent of the variance therefrom;
      7.   A statement of the characteristics of the development that prevent
compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
      8.   A statement that the variance requested is the minimum variance
necessary to permit the development; and
      9.   A statement as to how the variance requested satisfies the standards
set forth in section
9-260 of this article. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-258: APPLICATION FEE:
With the filing of the application for a variance, the applicant shall pay a
fee to be prescribed by separate ordinance by the certified community. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-259: PUBLIC HEARING:
When the application is complete, the Administrator will so notify the
applicant and will schedule a public hearing on the application before the
oversight committee. Notice of the hearing shall be published as provided in
section
9-317 of this chapter and served as provided in section
9-316 of this chapter upon the applicant, the Director, all owners of record of
land within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the site as disclosed in the
application, and upon each community within the same watershed as the
development. The notices given under this section shall set forth the common
name, address and legal description of the development and a brief description
of the variance as requested. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-260: GRANTING OF VARIANCES:
   A.   The oversight committee shall not recommend nor shall the decision-
making authority grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter unless
the variance is consistent with the purposes of this chapter and meets the
following standards based upon substantial evidence submitted at the hearing:
      1.   The variance will not increase the probability of flood damage or
create an additional threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
      2.   The variance is the minimum required considering each of the
following statements of policy underlying this chapter and there are no means
other than the requested variance by which the demonstrated hardship can be
avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit the reasonable
continuation of the development:
         a.   Detention storage facility shall also contribute to the
improvement of the quality of stormwater runoff.
         b.   The volume provided in open air vegetated detention storage
facilities is maximized consistent with other site constraints on land use,
including zoning requirements essential for the proposed development.
         c.   Conveyance of stormwater shall not disproportionately absorb the
design capacity of existing off-site conveyance facilities for any storm event
from the fifty percent (50%) design storm to the one percent (1%) design storm.
         d.   High quality natural areas shall be preserved on the site,
including, without limitation, stands of native trees, existing wetlands,
natural floodplain storage or other valuable environmental and biological
resources.
      3.   The variance is not requested solely for the purpose of increasing
the density of the development nor impervious areas on the site.
      4.   The variance is not requested solely as a result of economic
hardship.
      5.   If applicable, the variance is required due to unique, natural
topographical features of the site.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are not self-imposed.
   B.   Variances requested in connection with the restoration of a historic
structure may be granted using criteria more permissive than those set forth
above provided that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the historic structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure no
longer meeting the definition of a "historic structure" under this chapter.
   C.   No variance shall be granted for any development in the regulatory
floodway, or waters of the U.S. or wetlands, the effect of which would be to
create regulations less restrictive than the Federal or State minimum standards
applicable to development in such areas.
   D.   When a variance would lessen the degree of protection to any structure,
the Administrator shall notify the applicant that the variance, if granted, may
result in increased rates for flood insurance. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-
1-2019)
9-261: RECOMMENDATIONS:
   A.   The Administrator shall review the application for a variance and
present his or her written recommendations to the oversight committee at the
public hearing.
   B.   Not more than forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing, the
oversight committee shall forward the application with its written
recommendations to the decision-making authority. If the oversight committee
fails to act within forty five (45) days, it shall be deemed to have forwarded
the application with no recommendation to the decision-making authority. The
written recommendations of the oversight committee, when forwarded, shall be
accompanied by written findings of fact with respect to each of the elements
set forth in section
9-260 of this article with citations to the evidence taken at the public
hearing. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-262: DECISION:
The decision-making authority shall grant the variance, grant the variance with
modifications or conditions, or deny the variance in writing within forty five
(45) days after receipt of the application from the oversight committee. The
failure of the decision making authority to act within forty five (45) days,
absent the agreement of the applicant to any extension of the time, shall be
deemed to be a decision approving the variance. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-
1-2019)
9-263: CONDITIONS:
   A.   A variance less than or different from that requested may be granted
when the record supports the applicant's right to some relief, but not to the
relief requested.
   B.   In granting a variance, the decision-making authority may impose such
specific conditions and limitations on the applicant concerning any matter
relating to the purposes and objectives of this chapter as may be necessary or
appropriate.
   C.   Whenever any variance is granted subject to any condition to be met by
the applicant, upon meeting such condition, the applicant shall file evidence
to that effect with the Administrator. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-264 - 9-284: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
9-285: Inspection And Maintenance Authority
9-286: Required Inspections
9-287: Offenses
9-288: Offenses - Penalties And Remedies
9-289 - 9-309: Reserved
9-285: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to the authority granted by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1104 and
5/5-1062, the County may, upon thirty (30) days' notice to the owner or
occupant, enter upon any lands or waters within the County for the purpose of
inspecting and/or maintaining any stormwater facilities or causing the removal
of any obstruction to an affected watercourse. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-
1-2019)
9-286: REQUIRED INSPECTIONS:
Any development constructed pursuant to a stormwater management permit may be
periodically inspected by the Administrator or Director to ensure its
conformity with this chapter and the terms and conditions of its permit. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-287: OFFENSES:
   A.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter (chapter
violation), or any requirement or condition in any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter (permit violation), or any requirement or condition contained in
article VI of this chapter (floodplain violation), and, in the case of a permit
violation or a floodplain violation, fails to correct such violation, omission
or neglect, or cease such disobedience, refusal or resistance after notice and
reinspection as provided below, shall be guilty of an offense under this
chapter.
   B.   Whenever the Administrator or Director, as the case may be, determines
that a permit violation exists, he shall serve notice of the violation in the
manner prescribed in section
9-316 of this chapter on the permittee. Such notice shall state the nature of
the violation and fix a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice by which the violation shall be corrected and the site re-inspected,
except in the case of a violation of article III of this chapter, in which case
the notice may require the correction of the violation and reinspection of the
site within as little as two (2) days.
   C.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with or resists the substantial improvement/damage requirements as defined in
the NFIP regulations (44 Code of Federal Regulations, 59.1) and fails to
relocate, demolish or floodproof the structure within the FEMA standard of six
(6) years from the date of loss or improvement for which the substantial
damage/improvement determination was made. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-288: OFFENSES - PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
   A.   The Administrator or Director may pursue any one or more of the
following remedies against any person found by him or her to be guilty of an
offense under this chapter:
      1.   The Administrator or Director may impose a civil fine upon such
person in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each calendar day during which such
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
      2.   The Administrator or Director may revoke any stormwater management
permit issued to such person.
      3.   The Administrator or Director may issue an order requiring the
suspension of any further work on the site. Such stop work order shall be in
writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and shall specify the
action, if any, required to be taken in order to resume work. One copy of the
stop work order shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous place and one copy
shall be served in the manner prescribed in section
9-316 of this chapter upon the permittee, if any, or if none, upon the person
in whose name the site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records
of the Supervisor of Assessments.
      4.   The Administrator or Director may require that the area impacted be
fully restored to its condition existing prior to such development, disturbance
or impact. In the case of a wetland impact the area's preexisting condition
shall be determined by reference to a creditable wetland assessment performed
within two (2) years of such impact. In the event that a creditable wetland
assessment is not available, the FQI of the wetland impacted shall be
determined by the Director and mitigation shall be provided accordingly.
      5.   The Administrator or Director may require the person to apply "after
the fact" for the appropriate permits for an unpermitted development,
disturbance or impact.
   B.   In order to enforce any of the remedies set forth in the preceding
paragraph, the Administrator or the Director may bring any action, legal or
equitable, including an action for injunctive relief, deemed necessary. In any
such action, in addition to any fine or other relief, the Administrator or the
Director may recover all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees, incurred. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-289 - 9-309: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XII. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
9-310: Responsibility For Administration
9-311: Duties Of Director
9-312: Duties Of Administrator
9-313: Representative Capacity
9-314: Oversight Committee
9-315: Decision-Making Authority
9-316: Service
9-317: Publication
9-318: Procedures And Use Of Funds For Fee-In-Lieu Of Stormwater Management
Measures
9-319: Procedures And Use Of Funds For Fee-In-Lieu Of Wetland Mitigation
9-320 - 9-341: Reserved
9-310: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The oversight committee shall oversee the enforcement of this chapter.
   B.   The Director and Administrator shall administer this chapter. In
performing their duties, the Director and the Administrator may delegate
routine responsibilities to any named designee.
   C.   Each community shall remain solely responsible for its standing in the
National Flood Insurance Program, including:
      1.   The maintenance of all records and the submission of all reports
required for eligibility in the program, including Elevation Certificates,
Floodproofing Certificates, and lowest floor elevations;
      2.   The notification of the Director, FEMA, IDNR-OWR, USACE, NRCS, the
Kane DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District, the USFWS, the IEPA, and the
USEPA of any proposed amendment to this chapter; and
      3.   The adoption pursuant to subsection
9-344A of this chapter of the most current version of the maps adopted and
published by FEMA for regulation under the NFIP and the automatic adoption of
any amendments, additions, revisions or substitutions thereto or therefor.
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-311: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The Director shall:
   A.   Supervise the enforcement of this chapter;
   B.   Supervise the development, revision and implementation of the plan for
approval by the committee and the County;
   C.   Supervise the review of complex stormwater management permits for any
community that requests such assistance;
   D.   Notify all of the communities in the County, FEMA, IDNR-OWR, USACE,
NRCS, the Kane DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District, the USFWS, the
IEPA, and the USEPA of any amendments to the plan or to this chapter;
   E.   Administer the qualified engineer and qualified wetland specialist
programs;
   F.   Maintain a current list of all maps considered regulatory under this
chapter;
   G.   Administer article VII of this chapter except in those communities
certified under this chapter to administer article VII of this chapter; and
   H.   The Director shall recommend an appointment of a member of the
department staff to the County Board as Administrator to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter within the unincorporated areas of the County,
within any portion of an uncertified community that lies within the County,
and, pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, within any portion of an
uncertified community that lies outside the County. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-312: DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   The Administrator shall:
      1.   Ensure that all required stormwater related Federal, State, regional
and County permits and approvals are received prior to issuing any permit under
this chapter;
      2.   Ascertain whether any special management areas exist on any site
which is the subject of a stormwater management permit under this chapter;
      3.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be reviewed by a professional engineer under the
employ or contract of the community to ensure that the development meets the
provisions of this chapter;
      4.   Use of qualified wetland specialists for the review of permit
applications and consider their recommendations in granting or denying any
permit under this chapter, unless the review of the developer's qualified
wetland specialist indicates that there are no wetlands on-site in which case
the Administrator may rely upon that review without having it independently
verified. The review of wetland submittals by a qualified wetland specialist
may be waived if all on-site linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies and
wetlands are under the jurisdiction of the USACE and a USACE permit is
required;
      5.   Ensure that the required notice of an application for a variance has
been given and published in accordance with sections
9-316 and
9-317 of this article;
      6.   Notify an applicant for a variance that such variance may result in
increased rates for flood insurance, if applicable;
      7.   Notify the Director of an application for a CLOMR or LOMR;
      8.   Provide for inspections of developments as required by this chapter,
including projects before, during and after construction to assure proper
elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter;
      9.   Investigate complaints of violations of this chapter within his or
her community;
      10.   Notify violators within regulatory floodplains that failure to
comply with the provisions of the National Flood Insurance Program could make
them ineligible to receive flood insurance;
      11.   Initiate any other requirements necessary to enforce this chapter
within his or her community;
      12.   Advise, consult and cooperate with other governmental agencies to
promote the purposes of this chapter;
      13.   Maintain copies of all applications and submittals, Federal and
State permits, variances, CLOMR, LOMR, CLOMA, LOMA and all documentation
associated with any of the foregoing for public inspection;
      14.   Maintain documentation and data on the cost of any improvement to a
structure in the floodplain to enforce the provisions of this chapter
pertaining to substantial damage/improvements to such structures;
      15.   Notify adjacent communities and Drainage Districts in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a stormwater management permit
involving the alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Downstream communities
and Drainage Districts shall have a fifteen (15) business day review period of
any stormwater management permit application prior to its issuance;
      16.   Ensure that all wetland impacts have been mitigated; and
      17.   Maintain records of the lowest floor and floodproofing elevations
for new construction and substantial improvements in Zone A Floodplain where
BFE data is not provided in the FEMA Flood Insurance Study.
   B.   The County Engineer shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter
within all County or township rights-of-way. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-313: REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY:
In all cases when any action is taken by the Director or the Administrator, or
his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
such action shall be taken either in the name of the County or the certified
community, as the case may be, and neither the Director nor the Administrator,
nor his or her designee, in so acting shall be rendered personally liable.
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-314: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
The Corporate Authorities of each certified community within the County shall
establish an oversight committee to oversee the implementation and enforcement
of this chapter within its jurisdiction and to perform the duties assigned to
the oversight committee in this chapter. The oversight committee may be
comprised of the Corporate Authorities or any committee thereof, Plan
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or other existing body, or the Corporate
Authorities may, according to their own rules and procedures, establish a
separate oversight committee. The executive committee of the County shall
designate the oversight committee for the County. The oversight committee, when
considering an appeal or request for a variance under this chapter, may request
an opinion from a qualified engineer or qualified wetland specialist on
technical issues. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-315: DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY:
The Corporate Authorities of each certified community within the County shall
by separate resolution designate a decision making authority to perform the
duties assigned to the decision making authority in this chapter. The decision
making authority may be comprised of the Corporate Authorities or any committee
thereof, Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or other existing body, or
the Corporate Authorities may, according to their own rules and procedures,
establish a separate decision making authority. The Development Committee of
the County Board shall act as the decision making authority for the County. The
decision making authority, when considering an appeal or request for a variance
under this chapter, may request an opinion from a qualified engineer or
qualified wetland specialist on technical issues. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff.
6-1-2019)
9-316: SERVICE:
Unless otherwise provided herein, service of any notice or other instrument
under this chapter may be made upon any person:
   A.   By first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to address then on file
for such person, if any, or if none, to such person's last known address; or
   B.   By any method prescribed under the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-317: PUBLICATION:
Unless otherwise provided herein, publication of any notice or other instrument
under this chapter shall be made by publishing such notice or other instrument
once in a newspaper published within the community having jurisdiction over the
matter to which the publication relates (or, if no newspaper is published
within the community, then a newspaper published in the County and having a
general circulation within the community), such publication being not less than
fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing or other event
to which the publication relates. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-318: PROCEDURES AND USE OF FUNDS FOR FEE-IN-LIEU OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
MEASURES:
   A.   An applicant's request for approval of the payment of a fee- in-lieu of
stormwater management measures shall be submitted to the Administrator. The
Administrator shall grant or deny the request within forty five (45) days,
unless the applicant agrees to an extension.
   B.   The collected fee-in-lieu of stormwater management measures shall be
deposited by the certified community in a separate fund created for such
purpose. Provisions shall be made so that all receipts and disbursements of
such funds may be accounted for according to the major watershed in which the
development for which they were paid was located.
   C.   The collected fee-in-lieu of stormwater management measures may be
expended to plan, design, construct or improve stormwater management systems
within the major watershed in which the fee was collected. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-
2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-319: PROCEDURES AND USE OF FUNDS FOR FEE-IN-LIEU OF WETLAND MITIGATION:
   A.   An applicant's statement of its intention to satisfy the wetland
mitigation requirement by the payment of a fee in lieu of wetland mitigation
shall be in writing and filed with the Director (or Administrator in a
community certified to administer article VII of this chapter) along with the
estimates described in the preceding section.
   B.   Fees paid in lieu of wetland mitigation shall be deposited by County
(or Administrator in a community certified to administer article VII of this
chapter) in a separate fund created for such purpose. Provisions shall be made
so that all receipts and disbursements of such funds may be accounted for
according to the individual watershed in which the development for which they
were paid was located.
   C.   Fees paid in lieu of mitigation for wetland impacts within the County
shall be expended to plan, design, construct, improve, acquire, create or
enhance wetlands, wetland mitigation facilities and wetland mitigation banks,
in accordance with section
9-171 of this chapter. Fees paid in lieu of mitigation for wetland impacts
within any other county may be expended to plan, design, construct, improve,
acquire, create or enhance wetlands, wetland mitigation facilities and wetland
mitigation, within the same major watershed as the impact within such county or
within this County. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-320 - 9-341: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XIII. CERTIFIED COMMUNITY ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
9-342: Enforcement Authority
9-343: Petition For Certification And Waiver Of Enforcement
9-344: Filing And Contents Of Petition For Certification
9-345: Committee Consideration Of Petition For Certification
9-346: Standards For Certification
9-347: Certified Community Records
9-348: Committee Review Of Enforcement By Certified Community
9-349: Investigations And Compliance
9-350: Hearing On Complaint
9-351: Committee Decision
9-352 - 9-372: Reserved
9-342: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
   A.   The County shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter within:
the unincorporated areas of the County; the limits of any County highway,
County right-of-way or any highway or right-of- way upon which the County is
constructing or causing to be constructed a highway improvement or
appurtenance; in connection with the development of any site owned by the
County; any portion of an uncertified community that lies within the County;
and pursuant to intergovernmental agreement, within any portion of an
uncertified community that lies outside the County. For the purposes of this
section the terms "highway" and "right-of-way" shall have the meanings ascribed
to them under the Illinois Highway Code 1 .
   B.   Unless such community has been certified under this article to
administer article VII of this chapter before January 1, 2006, the County shall
enforce the provisions of article VII of this chapter within that portion of
any certified community that lies within the County and, pursuant to
intergovernmental agreement, within that portion of any certified community
that lies outside the County.
   C.   A community certified under this article shall enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter within the community for which it has received
certification. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
9-343: PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION AND WAIVER OF ENFORCEMENT:
Any community that wishes to enforce the provisions of this chapter within its
borders shall file a petition for certification and waiver of enforcement
(petition for certification), on or before January 8, 2002. After January 8,
2002, petitions for certification may be filed during the month of June of each
year. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-344: FILING AND CONTENTS OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION:
A petition for certification shall be filed with the Director. The petition
need not be on any particular form but, at a minimum, shall set forth and be
accompanied by:
   A.   The agreement of the corporate authorities of the community to adopt,
if certified, this chapter by reference, including in such chapter language
expressing the intent of the Corporate Authorities of the community to
automatically adopt by reference all amendments to this chapter adopted by the
County at any time in the future, and specifically to automatically adopt by
reference the most current version of the maps adopted and published by FEMA
for regulation under the NFIP;
   B.   While amendments to this chapter are required to be automatically
adopted by the certified communities as a condition of the certification, if
additional action is required by the Corporate Authorities of the community to
formally recognize the amendment, such action shall occur within three (3)
months following the effective date of any amendments to this chapter;
   C.   The community's plan for the implementation and enforcement of this
chapter, including proposed staffing;
   D.   The agreement of the Corporate Authorities of the community to include
in any new annexation agreement a provision requiring every other party to the
agreement to affirmatively agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
as amended from time to time;
   E.   The agreement of the Corporate Authorities of the community that the
community will follow the rules and procedures of the committee in any
proceeding concerning its certification and be bound by the decision of the
committee in granting or failing to grant, or suspending or revoking its
certification and reasserting County jurisdiction over the enforcement of this
chapter within the boundaries of the community;
   F.   If a portion of the community lies outside the County and the community
has not requested, or if requested does not receive, certification to
administer article VII of this chapter, the agreement of the Corporate
Authorities of the community to enter into, if certified to administer the
remaining provisions of this chapter, an intergovernmental agreement with the
County providing for the County's enforcement of article VII of this chapter
within those portions of the community lying outside the County;
   G.   Evidence of the community's ability to comply with article XIV of this
chapter pertaining to the use of qualified engineers and qualified wetland
specialists; and
   H.   The list of projects to which this chapter or some portion of this
chapter do not apply pursuant to the requirements of article XV of this
chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-345: COMMITTEE CONSIDERATION OF PETITION FOR CERTIFICATION:
The committee shall consider each properly filed petition for certification at
a regular or special meeting called for such purpose not later than sixty (60)
days after the filing of the petition. The meeting may be continued from time
to time. The committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and conduct
of such meetings. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-346: STANDARDS FOR CERTIFICATION:
Upon a finding of the committee that the community has complied with sections
9-343 and
9-344 of this article, that the community's plan for the implementation and
enforcement of this chapter is reasonably feasible, and that the community has
demonstrated the ability to comply with article XIV of this chapter, the
committee shall grant the petition for certification. The committee's decision
shall be in writing, and shall specify the reasons for granting or denying the
petition. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-347: CERTIFIED COMMUNITY RECORDS:
   A.   Every certified community shall maintain adequate records of every
stormwater management permit issued, and every variance granted under this
chapter for development within its borders.
   B.   Every certified community shall retain record drawings of all
improvements made pursuant to a stormwater management permit issued or variance
granted by such community.
   C.   The records of each certified community maintained under this chapter
may be periodically inspected by the department.
   D.   Every certified community shall report annually to the Director on
forms provided by the department concerning stormwater management permits
issued in the preceding year. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-348: COMMITTEE REVIEW OF ENFORCEMENT BY CERTIFIED COMMUNITY:
The committee shall periodically review the implementation and enforcement of
this chapter by each certified community. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-349: INVESTIGATIONS AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   The Director upon his own initiative or at the request of any person
may conduct an investigation into a certified community's implementation and
enforcement of this chapter. Such investigation may include, but is not limited
to, an examination of all relevant records maintained by the community and
field inspections of relevant developments, structures or stormwater
facilities. If upon such investigation, the Director determines that the
community has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly failed, to
implement or enforce this chapter, then he shall prepare a report of his
findings along with a complaint for the suspension, revocation or partial
revocation of the community's certification and file them with the committee.
The complaint shall contain a short and plain statement describing how the
certified community has failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly
failed, to implement or enforce this chapter.
   B.   Upon receipt of a written complaint, the committee shall serve a copy
thereof along with a copy of the report of the Director upon the community
named therein in accordance with section
9-316 of this chapter. A copy of the complaint and report shall also be served
upon IDNR-OWR, FEMA, all communities within the same watershed, and upon any
person who has requested an investigation of the community's enforcement of
this chapter by the Director within six (6) months immediately preceding the
filing of the complaint. The community may file a written answer to the
complaint within thirty (30) days after being served. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-350: HEARING ON COMPLAINT:
The committee shall conduct a hearing on the complaint not less than seventy
five (75) nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days after service of the
complaint upon the community. Notice of the hearing shall be served upon the
community and all parties which received a copy of the complaint and published
in accordance with section 9-317 of this chapter. The hearing may be continued
from time to time. The committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and
conduct of such hearings. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-351: COMMITTEE DECISION:
Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the committee shall
decide whether or not to suspend or to revoke in whole or in part the
certification of the community. The decision of the committee shall be in
writing and shall include the specific findings and conclusions supporting its
determination. A copy of the decision and order shall be served upon the
community and all parties which received a copy of the complaint in accordance
with section 9-316 of this chapter. The decision of the committee to suspend or
to revoke the certification of the community in whole or in part is final and
may not be appealed to any court. If the community's certification is
suspended, the community shall automatically become recertified upon the
expiration of the period of suspension. If the community's certification is
revoked in whole or in part, the community may reapply for certification at or
after such time as the committee shall specify in its order of revocation.
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-352 - 9-372: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XIV. QUALIFIED REVIEW SPECIALISTS
SECTION:
9-373: General
9-374: Requirements For Qualified Engineers
9-375: Requirements For Qualified Wetland Specialist
9-376: Review Of Qualifications
9-377: Investigation And Compliance
9-378: Hearing On Complaint
9-379: Committee Decision
9-380: Appeals
9-381 - 9-401: Reserved
9-373: GENERAL:
The review of an application for a stormwater management permit shall be
performed by a qualified engineer and a qualified wetland specialist. The
qualified engineer and qualified wetland specialist together with the
Administrator shall determine whether the permit application meets the
requirements of this chapter. The department shall maintain a list of qualified
engineers and qualified wetland specialists. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-374: REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED ENGINEERS:
   A.   In order to be included on the list of qualified engineers, an engineer
or engineering firm must be employed by the County or certified community or
must be under contract with the County or certified community to review permit
submittals. The engineer or engineering firm must be or employ a professional
engineer registered in Illinois that has expertise either by training or
significant experience in all of the following areas:
      1.   Design and permitting of stormwater management measures;
      2.   Identification of floodplains and floodways and familiarity with
FEMA and IDNR-OWR requirements, policies, and procedures;
      3.   Erosion and sedimentation control practices and procedures;
      4.   Construction practices and inspection procedures; and
      5.   A copy of the contract, letter from the community or resolution, or
proof of employment with the certified community.
   B.   Submit proof of the qualifications above and complete, sign, and
professionally seal the qualified professional engineer statement in the form
included as article XVII, appendix B of this chapter; and
   C.   File the qualifications and statement (article XVII, appendix B of this
chapter) with the department and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
engineer to a maximum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for engineering
firms, fifty dollars ($50.00) for individual engineers not associated with an
engineering firm, or twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the engineer is employed
by a unit of local government. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-375: REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED WETLAND SPECIALIST:
   A.   In order to be included on the list of qualified wetland specialists, a
wetland specialist must:
      1.   Complete a USACE approved or other wetland delineation course
approved by the Director; and
      2.   Be a professional wetland scientist (PWS) certified by the Society
of Wetland Scientists Professional Certification Program (SWSPCP); or
      3.   Have a bachelor's degree in an earth science, biological science or
engineering together with at least one of the following:
         a.   Three (3) years' (cumulative) full time experience in the Upper
Midwest region engaged in consulting on wetland related projects; or
         b.   Six (6) years' (cumulative) full time experience engaged in
consulting outside the Upper Midwest region on wetland related projects; or
         c.   The completion of one hundred (100) wetland delineations in the
Upper Midwest region; or
         d.   Three hundred (300) hours spent in field review of wetland
indications in the Upper Midwest region; and
         e.   Have personally been involved with the design of at least ten
(10) wetland mitigation areas.
   B.   Submit proof of the qualifications above and complete and sign the
qualified wetland specialist statement in the form included as article XVII,
appendix C of this chapter; and
   C.   File the qualifications and statement (article XVII, appendix C of this
chapter) with the department and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) or twenty
five dollars ($25.00) if the applicant is employed by a unit of local
government. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-376: REVIEW OF QUALIFICATIONS:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days of filing of the application, the Director will
notify the applicant of his/her or their inclusion on the list of qualified
engineers and/or qualified wetland specialists, as the case may be. If the
applicant is not accepted for inclusion in the list, the Director shall specify
the reasons for his decision. Within thirty (30) days of his receipt of the
decision of the Director, the applicant may appeal to the committee by filing a
notice thereof with the department. The committee shall conduct a hearing on
the appeal in the manner prescribed by section 9-378 of this article from which
the applicant may further appeal in the manner prescribed by section 9-379 of
this article.
   B.   Once accepted, the qualified engineer, engineering firm or qualified
wetland specialist, no later than March 31st of each year, shall resubmit the
qualified engineer statement and/or qualified wetland specialist statement
together with an annual maintenance fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
engineer and wetland specialist to a maximum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for engineering firms, fifty dollars ($50.00) for individual
engineers or wetland specialist not associated with an engineering firm, or
twenty five dollars ($25.00) if the engineer or wetland specialist is employed
by a unit of local government, in order to maintain his/her or their inclusion
on the list. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-377: INVESTIGATION AND COMPLIANCE:
   A.   In the event that the committee decides to suspend or to revoke in
whole or in part the certification of the community per section 9-351 of this
chapter the committee may also request that the Director conduct an
investigation into the qualifications of a qualified engineer, engineering
firm, or qualified wetland specialist, or his/her or their performance of
permit reviews under this chapter. Such investigation may include, but is not
limited to, an examination of all relevant records maintained by the community
and field inspections of relevant developments, structures or stormwater
facilities. If upon such investigation, the Director determines that the
qualified engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland specialist has
failed in some significant way, or has repeatedly failed to conduct such
reviews in conformance with this chapter, then the Director shall prepare a
report of his findings along with a complaint for the removal of the qualified
engineer, engineering firm or qualified wetland specialist from the qualified
engineer or qualified wetland specialist list and file them with the committee.
The complaint shall contain a short and plain statement describing how the
qualified engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland specialist has
failed in some significant way or has repeatedly failed to conduct such reviews
in conformance with this chapter.
   B.   Upon receipt of a written complaint, the committee shall serve a copy
thereof along with a copy of the report of the Director upon the qualified
engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland specialist named therein in
accordance with section 9-316 of this chapter. A copy of the complaint and
report shall also be served upon every community for whom the qualified
engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland specialist has conducted
permit reviews. The qualified engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland
specialist may file a written answer to the complaint within thirty (30) days
after being served. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-378: HEARING ON COMPLAINT:
The committee shall conduct a hearing on the complaint not less than seventy
five (75) nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days after the committee
decision to suspend or to revoke in whole or in part the certification of the
community under section 9-351 of this chapter. Notice of the hearing shall be
served upon the qualified engineer, engineering firm, or qualified wetland
specialist and all parties which received a copy of the complaint and published
in accordance with section 9-317 of this chapter. The hearing may be continued
from time to time. The committee may adopt rules for the taking of evidence and
conduct of such hearings. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-379: COMMITTEE DECISION:
Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing, the committee shall
decide whether to remove the qualified engineer, engineering firm or qualified
wetland specialist from the qualified engineer or qualified wetland specialist
list. The decision of the committee shall be in writing and shall include the
specific findings and conclusions supporting its determination. A copy of the
decision shall be served upon the qualified engineer, engineering firm or
qualified wetland specialist and all parties which received a copy of the
complaint in accordance with section 9-316 of this chapter. If the qualified
engineer, engineering firm or qualified wetland specialist is removed from the
list, he/she/they may appeal the decision in accordance with section 9-380 of
this article or may reapply for inclusion on the list at or after such time as
the committee shall specify in its order of removal. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-380: APPEALS:
   A.   The qualified engineer, engineering firm or qualified wetland
specialist may appeal a final decision of the committee to the courts under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-381 - 9-401: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XV. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-402: Committee's Determination Of Exemption
9-403: Community's List Of Proposed Exempt Developments
9-404: Interpretation
9-405: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
9-406: Choice Of Planning Jurisdiction
9-407: Severability
9-408: Repealer
9-409 - 9-429: Reserved
9-402: COMMITTEE'S DETERMINATION OF EXEMPTION:
   A.   Fifteen (15) days prior to the revision date, each community shall
submit to the Director a list of proposed exempt developments prepared and
adopted in accordance with section 9-403 of this article. At its next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring not less than fifteen (15) days after the
Director's receipt of the list, the committee shall hear public comment and
consider the developments listed therein. Any member of the committee may
remove a development from the list for further consideration. After such
removals, the developments remaining on the list shall be determined to be
exempt from the changes to this chapter effective at the revision date.
   B.   With respect to those developments removed from the list, the committee
shall determine each development to be exempt from the changes to this chapter
effective at the revision date if the stormwater management plan for such
development meets the January 1, 2002 effective ordinance.
   C.   Notwithstanding the committee's determination that a particular
development is exempt from the changes to this chapter effective at the
revision date, all mitigable wetland impacts from any development occurring
after the effective date shall be mitigated. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-
2019)
9-403: COMMUNITY'S LIST OF PROPOSED EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   A community may place a development on its list of proposed exempt
developments only if:
      1.   The stormwater management plan for such development meets the
January 1, 2002 effective ordinance;
      2.   A stormwater management plan has been submitted and substantially
approved by the community engineer; or
      3.   A contractual agreement, specifically exempting the development from
the changes to this chapter effective at the revision date, was entered into
before fifteen (15) days prior to the revision date of this chapter.
   B.   The Administrator shall approve the community's list of proposed exempt
developments. If required by the community the list shall be adopted by an
official action of the Corporate Authorities of the community.
   C.   Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the committee meeting, the
Director shall publish in accordance with section 9-317 of this chapter a
listing of the proposed exempt developments, the date and time of the meeting
at which formal action with respect to the approval of the list will be taken
and of the public's right to appear to be heard prior to such approval.
   D.   Once submitted, the list may not be changed except that a developer of
a development inadvertently omitted from the list by the community may apply
directly to the committee for a determination that the development meets all of
the requirements of this article for being exempt.
   E.   A community shall determine when exemptions expire for developments in
their jurisdiction listed on the approved exemption lists. This includes the
January 1, 2002 exemption list. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-404: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health,
welfare, safety, and the environment of the residents of the County and to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the enabling legislation.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to consent to license, permit
to locate, construct, or maintain any structure, site, facility or operation,
or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation, or activity.
   C.   When provisions of this chapter differ from any other applicable law,
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more stringent provision shall
apply.
   D.   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other laws,
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations which relate to the subject matter
hereof and, except as otherwise expressly provided herein, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as a limitation upon the application or enforcement
of any such law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent
with the provisions of such other laws, statutes, ordinances, rules or
regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be
given their fullest application. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-405: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   The degree of flood protection provided by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering experience and
scientific methods of study. Increased flooding may result from causes beyond
the control of any governmental authority. This chapter does not, therefore,
guarantee that areas outside the floodplain or permitted land uses within the
floodplain will be free from flooding and associated damages.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied in any manner to
create liability on the part of or a cause of action against the County, any
municipality or other governmental authority, or any elected official, or any
officer, agent, or employee of any of the foregoing, or any qualified engineer
or qualified wetland specialist for any flood damage resulting from reliance on
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-406: CHOICE OF PLANNING JURISDICTION:
Pursuant to 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1062(b), a community that is
located in more than one county may choose, at the time of the formation of the
committee, and based upon watershed boundaries, to participate in the
stormwater management planning program of either or both of the counties.
Unless the community, at the time of the formation of the committee, has chosen
to participate in the stormwater management planning program of another county,
the committee shall include such community within the scope of its planning and
enforcement jurisdiction. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-407: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be severable in accordance with
the following rules:
      1.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision
of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this chapter.
      2.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge to be invalid
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular parcel of
land, a particular structure, or a particular development, such judgment shall
not affect the application of said provision to any other land, structure or
development. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-408: REPEALER:
This chapter repeals the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to
meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to
replace any ordinance or resolution passed in order to establish initial
eligibility for the National Flood Insurance Program. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019,
eff. 6-1-2019)
9-409 - 9-429: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XVI. WATERSHED SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-430: Reference To Watershed Plans
9-431 - 9-451: Reserved
9-430: REFERENCE TO WATERSHED PLANS:
   A.   This chapter recognizes the integrated nature of the watershed system
and the need to study certain flood control alternatives and other stormwater
management functions on a watershed wide basis.
   B.   Individual Watershed Plans or Interim Watershed Plans which recognize
the unique attributes of each watershed may be prepared and periodically
updated for the major watersheds to identify management projects and establish
criteria for development.
   C.   Watershed Plans or Interim Watershed Plans may be adopted which contain
more or less stringent requirements than those of this chapter. Watershed
specific requirements established in such Watershed Plans or Interim Watershed
Plans will be set forth in sections 9-87 through 9-106 of this chapter. (Ord.
19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
9-431 - 9-451:   RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
ARTICLE XVII. APPENDICES
Appendix A - Watershed Boundaries
Appendix B - Qualified Engineer Statement
Appendix C - Qualified Wetland Specialist Statement
Appendix D - Sample Special Service Area Ordinances
Appendix E - Definitions
APPENDIX A - WATERSHED BOUNDARIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2953.jpg]
 
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
APPENDIX B - QUALIFIED ENGINEER STATEMENT
I,                                , of                               , with
professional licensure in the State of Illinois, do hereby state that I have
read and understand the Kane County Stormwater Ordinance and the Technical
Manual which accompanies it, and will obtain, read and abide by any amendments
thereto. I affirmatively state that I meet the requirements set forth in
article XIV of the ordinance. I will review projects for compliance with the
ordinance using my expertise in stormwater management measure design and
permitting, floodplain and floodway policies and procedures, erosion and
sedimentation control practices, and construction practices and inspections. I
will exercise professional judgment with respect to projects submitted for my
review in accordance with the customary standard of care applicable to persons
providing similar services in the same or similar communities in order to
insure substantial conformance with the ordinance. I understand that failure to
adequately discharge this obligation may, with due process, result in loss of
this status. It is my responsibility to provide the Director with any changes
to the information provided.
         Signed    
         P.E. Registration Number/Expiration Date
            
            
         Telephone:    
         Fax:    
         Email:    
(Seal)          Employer:    
Certified communities and each community's contact for whom you perform
reviews:
   
   
   
   
   
(Attach a one-page summary of your qualifications under article XIV of the
ordinance.)
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
APPENDIX C - QUALIFIED WETLAND SPECIALIST STATEMENT
I,                               , of                               , do hereby
state that I have read and understand the Kane County Stormwater Ordinance and
the Technical Manual which accompanies it, and will obtain, read and abide by
any amendments thereto. I affirmatively state that I meet the requirements set
forth in article XIV of the ordinance. I will submit permit applications or
review projects for compliance with those sections of the ordinance pertaining
to wetlands, including, without limitation, wetland delineation and the
calculation of buffer widths. I will use my expertise in wetland delineations
or field identification of wetland indicators in the Upper Midwest. I will
exercise professional judgment with respect to projects submitted for my review
in accordance with the customary standard of care applicable to persons
providing similar services in the same or similar communities in order to
insure substantial conformance with the ordinance. I understand that failure to
adequately discharge this obligation may, with due process, result in loss of
this status. It is my responsibility to provide the Director with any changes
to the information provided.
         Signed    
         SWSPCP PWS Number (if applicable)    
         Telephone:    
         Fax:    
         Email:    
         Employer:    
(Attach a one-page summary of your qualifications under article XIV of the
ordinance.)
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
APPENDIX D - SAMPLE SPECIAL SERVICE AREA ORDINANCES
 
[CITY/VILLAGE] OF             
 
ORDINANCE NO.             
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
             SPECIAL SERVICE AREA [or SPECIAL SERVICE AREA
NO.             ] OF             , ILLINOIS
AND THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COST
OF PROVIDING SPECIAL SERVICES IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
 
ADOPTED BY THE
[MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL/PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES]
OF THE
[CITY/VILLAGE] OF                          
[DATE]
   
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the [Mayor and City Council/
President and Board of Trustees] of the [City/Village] of
                       , Kane County, Illinois,
[Date].
 
[CITY/VILLAGE] OF   
      Page #
 
ORDINANCE NO.             
 
AN ORDINANCE PROPOSING THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
             SPECIAL SERVICE AREA [or SPECIAL SERVICE AREA
NO.             ]) OF             , ILLINOIS
AND THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING THE COST
OF PROVIDING SPECIAL SERVICES IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
 
 
   WHEREAS pursuant to the provisions of the 1970 Constitution of the State of
Illinois (the Constitution), the [City/Village] of             , Kane County,
Illinois (the [City/Village]), is authorized to create special service areas in
and for the [City/Village]; and
   WHEREAS special service areas are established by non-home rule 1  units
pursuant to Section 7(6) of Article VII of the Constitution, which provides
that-
[M]unicipalities...which are not home rule units shall have...powers...to levy
or impose additional taxes upon areas within their boundaries in the manner
provided by law for the provision of special services to those areas and for
the payment of debt incurred in order to provide those special services;
and are established "in the manner provided by law" pursuant to the provisions
of "AN ACT to provide the manner of levying or imposing taxes for the provision
of special services to areas within the boundaries of home rule units and non-
home rule municipalities and counties," approved September 21, 1973, as
amended, and pursuant to the Revenue Act of 1939 of the State of Illinois, as
amended; and
   WHEREAS it is in the public interest that the establishment of the area
hereinafter described as a special service area for the purposes set forth
herein and to be designated as the              Special Service Area [or
Special Service Area No.             ], of the [City/Village] (the Area) be
considered; and
   WHEREAS the Area is compact and contiguous, totally within the corporate
limits of the [City/Village]; and
   WHEREAS the Area will benefit specially from the municipal services to be
provided by the [City/Village] (the Services), and the Services are unique and
in addition to the services provided to the [City/Village] as a whole, and it
is, therefore, in the best interests of the [City/Village] that the
establishment of the Area be considered; and
   WHEREAS it is in the public interest that the levy of a direct annual ad
valorem tax upon all taxable property within the Area be considered for the
purpose of paying the cost of providing the Services; and
   WHEREAS the revenue from such tax shall be used solely and only for Services
for which the [City/Village] is authorized under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code, as amended, to levy taxes or special assessments or to
appropriate the funds of the [City/Village], all of the Services to be in and
for the Area and all of the necessary construction and maintenance to be on
property now owned or to be acquired by the [City/Village], or property in
which the [City/Village] will obtain an interest sufficient for the provision
of the Services; and
   WHEREAS said direct annual ad valorem tax shall be levied upon all taxable
property within the Area for an indefinite period of time beginning for the
year          and shall not exceed an annual rate of              of the
assessed valuation of each tax parcel within the Area and shall be in addition
to all other taxes permitted by law; and
   WHEREAS a public hearing will be held at             , on the              
day of              ,             , in the [City/Village] Hall,              ,
            , Illinois               (the Hearing), to consider the
establishment of the Area for the purpose of providing the Services and the
levy of an additional direct annual ad valorem tax for the purpose of paying
the cost thereof, all as described in the Notice of Public Hearing set forth in
Section 2 hereof (the Notice); and
   WHEREAS the Notice shall be given by publication and mailing. Notice by
publication shall be given by publication on a date, such date being not less
than 15 days prior to the Hearing, in a newspaper published within the [City/
Village] [or, of general circulation within the [City/Village], there being no
newspaper published therein]. Notice by mailing shall be given by depositing
the Notice in the United States Mail addressed to the person or persons in
whose name the general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on each lot,
block, tract, or parcel of land lying within the Area. The Notice shall be
mailed not less than 10 days prior to the time set for the Hearing. In the
event taxes for the last preceding year were not paid, the Notice shall be sent
to the person last listed on the tax rolls prior to that year as the owner of
said property.
   NOW, THEREFORE, Be it Ordained by the [Mayor and City Council/President and
the Board of Trustees] of the [City/Village] of             , Kane County,
Illinois, as follows:
§1. Incorporation of preambles
   The preambles of this ordinance are hereby incorporated into this text as if
set out herein in full.
§2. Notice
   The [Mayor and City Council/President and Board of Trustees] determine that
the Notice is in the proper statutory form as set forth as follows:
   NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
   [City/Village] OF             , KANE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
                SPECIAL SERVICE AREA [or NO.             ]
   NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on             , at             , in the [City/
Village] Hall,             ,             , Illinois, a public hearing (the
Hearing) will be held by the [Mayor and City Council/President and Board of
Trustees] of the [City/Village] of             , Kane County, Illinois (the
[City/Village]), to consider the establishment of the              Special
Service Area [No.             ], (the Area), of the [City/Village], consisting
of the following described territory:
   SEE ATTACHED EXHIBIT A
   Said territory consists of approximately       acres lying [insert general
description of location]. An accurate map of said territory is on file in the
office of the [City/Village] Clerk and is available for public inspection.
   The purpose of the establishment of the Area is to provide the following
special services (the Services) to the Area: the operation, maintenance,
repair, rehabilitation, replacement and reconstruction of any Stormwater
Management Measures, Major or Minor Stormwater System or Special Management
Areas; costs of design, engineering and other consulting services, surveying
and permits, public liability insurance, and all administrative, legal and
other costs or expenses incurred in connection therewith and with the
administration of the Area, including the repayment of any loan or debt
incurred for the provision of any of such Services, all of the Services to be
in and for the Area.
   All of the Services are to be on property now owned or to be acquired by the
[City/Village], or property in which the [City/Village] will obtain an interest
sufficient for the provision of the Services.
   The levy of a direct annual ad valorem tax upon all taxable property within
the Area for the purpose of paying the cost of the Services will also be
considered at the Hearing. The tax shall be levied upon all taxable property
within the Area for an indefinite period of time beginning for the year
             and shall not exceed an annual rate of              of the
assessed valuation of each tax parcel within the Area and shall be in addition
to all other taxes permitted by law.
   All interested persons affected by the establishment of the Area or tax
levy, including all owners of real estate located within the Area, will be
given an opportunity to be heard at the Hearing regarding the establishment of
the Area and the tax levy and an opportunity to file objections to the
establishment of the Area or the tax levy.
   At the Hearing, any interested persons affected by the Area may file with
the [City/Village] Clerk written objections to and may be heard orally in
respect to any issues embodied in this notice. The [Mayor and City Council/
President and Board of Trustees] shall hear and determine all protests and
objections at the Hearing, and the Hearing may be adjourned to another date
without further notice other than a motion to be entered upon the minutes
fixing the time and place of its adjournment.
   If a petition signed by at least 51% of the electors residing within the
Area and by at least 51% of the owners of record of the land included within
the boundaries of the Area is filed with the [City/Village] Clerk within 60
days following the final adjournment of the Hearing objecting to the creation
of the Area or the levy or imposition of a tax for the provision of the
Services to the Area, no such Special Service Area may be created or no tax may
be levied or imposed.
   By order of the [Mayor and City Council/President and Board of Trustees] of
the [City/Village] of             , Kane County, Illinois.
   DATED this        day of                 ,             .
         /s/   
   [City/Village] Clerk, [City/Village] of
                     , Kane County, Illinois
§3. Miscellaneous
   The [City/Village] agrees to produce or file such forms, statements,
proceedings and supporting documents as may be required and in a timely manner
in order to establish the Area and levy the taxes and, if deemed necessary or
advisable by its officers, to employ and pay fiscal agents, financial advisors,
attorneys and other persons to assist the [City/Village] in these endeavors.
§4. Repealer; effective date
   All ordinances, orders and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict
herewith be and the same are hereby repealed, and this ordinance be in full
force and effect forthwith upon its passage, approval and publication as
provided by law.
DATED:             .
Alderman/ Aye Nay Absent Abstain
Trustee                           Approved:
                              
                                     
                             [Mayor/President]

                              
                             Attested, Filed in my office, and published in pamphlet form on
                                         , 20    :

                              
                             Clerk of the [City/Village] of                 ,
Totals                        Kane County, Illinois
 
 
[CITY/VILLAGE] OF             
 
 
ORDINANCE NO.                    
 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE
                SPECIAL SERVICE AREA [OR NO.                ]
OF                , ILLINOIS
AND PROVIDING FOR THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PAYING THE COST OF PROVIDING SPECIAL SERVICES
IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
 ADOPTED BY THE
[MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL/PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES]
OF THE
[CITY/VILLAGE] OF                     
[DATE]
 
  
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the [Mayor and City Council/President and Board
of Trustees] of the [City/Village] of                        , Kane County, Illinois
[Date]
 
ORDINANCE NO.                
 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE
                SPECIAL SERVICE AREA [or NO.      ] OF
               , ILLINOIS
AND PROVIDING FOR THE LEVY OF TAXES FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PAYING THE COST OF PROVIDING SPECIAL SERVICES
IN AND FOR SUCH AREA
   WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of the 1970 Constitution of the State of
Illinois (the Constitution), the [City/Village] of                , Kane
County, Illinois (the [City/Village]), is authorized to create special service
areas in and for the [City/Village]; and
   WHEREAS, special service areas are established by non-home rule 2  units
pursuant to Section 7(6) of Article VII of the Constitution, which provides
that-
municipalities...which are not home rule units shall have only the powers
granted to them by law and the powers... (6) to levy or impose additional taxes
upon areas within their boundaries in the manner provided by law for the
provision of special services to those areas and for the payment of debt
incurred in order to provide those special services;
and
   WHEREAS, special service areas are established "in the manner provided by
law" pursuant to the provisions of "AN ACT to provide the manner of levying or
imposing taxes for the provision of special services to areas within the
boundaries of home rule units and non-home rule municipalities and counties,"
approved September 21, 1973, as amended (the Act), and pursuant to the
provisions of the Revenue Act of 1939 of the State of Illinois, as amended; and
   WHEREAS, it is in the public interest that the area hereinafter described be
established as the                 Special Service Area [or No.
               ] of the [City/Village] for the purposes set forth herein (the
Area); and
   WHEREAS, the Area is compact and contiguous and totally within the
boundaries of the [City/Village]; and
   WHEREAS, the Area will benefit specially from the services to be provided by
the [City/Village] (the Services), and the Services are unique and in addition
to the services provided to the [City/Village] as a whole, and it is,
therefore, in the best interests of the [City/Village] that the Area be
established; and
   WHEREAS, the cost of providing the Services shall be paid by the levy of a
direct annual ad valorem tax upon all taxable property within the Area; and
   WHEREAS, said direct annual tax shall be levied upon all taxable property
within the Area for an indefinite period of time beginning for the year
                and shall not exceed an annual rate of                  of the
assessed valuation of each tax parcel within the Area and shall be in addition
to all other taxes permitted by law; and
   WHEREAS, the establishment of the Area was proposed by the [City Council/
Board of Trustees] of the [City/Village] (the [Council/Board]) pursuant to
Ordinance No. _______________, entitled:
AN ORDINANCE proposing the establishment of the                 Special Service
Area [or No.                ] of                , Illinois, and the levy of
taxes for the purpose of paying the cost of providing special services in and
for such Area.
(the Proposing Ordinance), duly adopted on                , and was considered
at a public hearing (the Hearing) held by the [Council/Board] on
               ; and
   WHEREAS, notice of the Hearing was given by publication at least once not
less than 15 days prior to the Hearing in                , the same being a
newspaper published in the [City/Village] [or, of general circulation with the
[City/Village], there being no newspaper published therein]; and
   WHEREAS, mailed notice of the Hearing was given by depositing notice in the
United States mails addressed to the person or persons in whose name the
general taxes for the last preceding year were paid on each lot, block, tract
or parcel of land lying within the Area not less than 10 days prior to the time
set for the Hearing, and in the event taxes for the last preceding year were
not paid, the notice was sent to the person or persons last listed on the tax
rolls prior to that year as the owner or owners of said property; and
   WHEREAS, said notice complied with all of the applicable provisions and
requirements of the Act; and
   WHEREAS, all interested persons affected by the establishment of the Area or
the levy of the tax to pay the cost of providing the Services, including all
owners of real estate located within the Area, were given an opportunity to be
heard at the Hearing regarding the establishment of the Area and the levy of
said tax and an opportunity to file objections to the establishment of the Area
or the levy of said tax; and
   WHEREAS, at the Hearing, all interested persons affected by the Area were
permitted to file with the [City/Village] Clerk written objections to and to be
heard orally in respect to any issue embodied in the notice given of the
Hearing; and
   WHEREAS, the Council/Board has determined and does hereby determine that it
is in the public interest and in the interest of the [City/Village] and the
Area that the Area be established;
   NOW, THEREFORE, Be It Ordained by the [Mayor and City Council/President and
Board of Trustees] of the [City/Village] of                , Kane County,
Illinois, as follows:
§1. Incorporation of preambles
   The preambles of this ordinance are hereby incorporated into this text as if
set out herein in full.
§2. Final adjournment of Hearing
   The Hearing was finally adjourned on                .
§3. Establishment of Area
   a.   The                 Special Service Area [or No.           ] of the
[City/Village] is hereby established in and for the [City/Village] and shall
consist of the territory legally described in Exhibit A attached.
   b.   Said territory consists of approximately                 acres lying
[insert a general description of the location of the area] in the [City/
Village]. An accurate map of the Area is attached hereto and made a part
hereof.
§4. Purpose of establishing the Area
   The purpose of establishing the Area is to provide the Services to the Area,
including the operation, maintenance, repair, rehabilitation, replacement and
reconstruction of any Stormwater Management Measures, Major or Minor Stormwater
System or Special Management Areas; costs of design, engineering and other
consulting services, surveying and permits, public liability insurance, and all
administrative, legal and other costs or expenses incurred in connection
therewith and with the administration of the Area, including the repayment of
any loan or debt incurred for the provision of any of such Services, all of the
Services to be in and for the Area and all of said construction and
improvements to be on property now owned or to be acquired by the [City/
Village], or property in which the [City/Village] will obtain an interest
sufficient for the provision of the Services.
§5. Tax Levy
   The cost of the Services shall be paid by the levy of a direct annual ad
valorem tax upon all taxable property within the Area for an indefinite period
of time beginning for the year                 and shall not exceed an annual
rate of                  of the assessed valuation of each tax parcel within
the Area and shall be in addition to all other taxes permitted by law.
§6. Filing
   The [City/Village] Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
ordinance, including an accurate map of the Area, in the office of the Kane
County Clerk and in the office of the Kane County Recorder forthwith after its
adoption and approval.
§7. Repealer
   All ordinances, orders and resolutions and parts thereof in conflict
herewith be and the same are hereby repealed, and this ordinance be in full
force and effect forthwith upon its adoption.
DATED:                   .
Alderman/ Aye Nay Absent Abstain
Trustee                          Approved:
                             
                                    
                            [Mayor/President]

                             
                            Attested, Filed in my office, and published in pamphlet form on
                                        , 20    :

                             
                            Clerk of the [City/Village] of                 ,
Totals                       Kane County, Illinois
 
(Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
 
 
Notes
1 1. Home rule municipalities should alter this language accordingly.
2 1. Home rule units should alter this language accordingly.
APPENDIX E - DEFINITIONS
In this chapter:
AASHTO: Current publications from the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) providing design guidelines and maximum width
dimensions applicable to specific types of proposed linear projects.
ADID: Advanced identification of wetlands and aquatic resources under a study
authorized and funded by the USEPA and adopted by the County.
ADEQUATE DOWNSTREAM STORMWATER CAPACITY: A stormwater management system shall
be considered to have adequate downstream stormwater capacity if the system can
be shown to store or convey stormwater runoff from the storm event having a one
percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given year without increasing damage
to adjoining properties or to a point downstream known to the Administrator to
a restriction that causes significant backwater.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the permitting authority to administer
and enforce this chapter.
ADVERSE HYDRAULIC IMPACT: An increase of more than 0.10 foot to the modeled
flood profile for a given storm event due to a proposed development activity.
AGRICULTURAL LAND: Land predominantly used for agricultural purposes.
AGRICULTURAL SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A subsurface, water management system
driven by economic and safety concerns, where the rate at which surplus
groundwater should be removed is determined primarily by the moisture/air
requirements of the vegetation. Systems are often referred to as drain tiles
and may include observation structures or hickenbottom inlets.
ALLOWABLE RELEASE RATE: The maximum post-development release rate from a
development or redevelopment during the one percent (1%) chance design storm as
specified in section 9-84 of this chapter. The allowable release rate includes
the release rate from the restrictor and the unrestricted release from the
development.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application for a stormwater management
permit under this chapter.
APPROPRIATE USE: A use of the regulatory floodway permitted under article VI of
this chapter.
ATTACHED GARAGE: A garage attached, adjacent, and connected to a residential
structure. An attached garage does not include an enclosed area below an
elevated residential structure to meet the building protection standards.
AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL: The distribution of precipitation recorded during a
calendar year with an average amount of precipitation in comparison to
historically recorded years. An example average annual rainfall distribution
may be found in the Technical Manual.
BFE OR BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The highest water surface elevation that can be
expected during the base flood.
BMP OR BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE: See definition of stormwater mitigation/Best
Management Practice (BMP).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in a given year. The base flood is also known as the one percent (1%)
design storm or the 100-year design storm.
BUFFER: Predominantly vegetated upland areas within a defined width adjacent to
wetlands and waters of the U.S. that provide a function that eliminate or
minimize adverse impacts to those areas. Buffer functions include: reducing
flood flow rates, velocities and volumes; promoting bank stability; filtration
of sediment, nutrients and other pollutants; insulation and moderation of daily
water temperatures; and habitat for aquatic and terrestrial fauna and flora.
Areas that do not provide buffer functions include: impervious non-vegetated
surfaces, permanent structures or buildings, land in agricultural production
within the past five (5) years, and maintained turf or landscape areas as of
the effective date of this chapter or previously permitted.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof; a building includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home or prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles
and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days.
BULLETIN 70: "Frequency Distributions and Hydroclimatic Characteristics of
Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois", by Floyd Huff and James Angel of the Illinois
State Water Survey (1989) for permits received prior to January 1, 2020.
"Frequency Distributions of Heavy Precipitation in Illinois: Updated Bulletin
70," by James Angel and Momcilo Markus of the Illinois State Water Survey
(current edition) for permits received on or after January 1, 2020.
CLOMA OR CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT: A FEMA comment letter on a
development proposed to be located in, and affecting only that portion of, the
area of floodplain outside the regulatory floodway and having no impact on the
existing regulatory floodway or base flood elevations.
CLOMR OR CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION: A letter that indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective FIRM or FBFM, after the record drawings
are submitted and approved.
CERTIFIED COMMUNITY: A community certified under article XIII of this chapter.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainage way which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface, groundwater, effluent, or
industrial discharges flow either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks, and includes damming, riprapping
(or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining,
and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted vegetation, but does not
include the clearing of debris or removal of trash or dredging to previously
documented thalweg elevations and side slope.
COMMITTEE: The Kane County Stormwater Management Planning Committee.
COMMUNITY: The County or any municipality within the County.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An excavated, hydrologically and hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage created to offset the loss of existing flood storage when
fill or structures are placed within the floodplain or when a depressional
storage area is drained or filled.
COUNTY: Kane County, Illinois.
CRITICAL DURATION: The duration of a storm event that results in the greatest
peak runoff.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Critical facilities are those that are essential to a
community's ability to quickly and efficiently respond to floods, recover from
floods, meet the needs of its citizens and rebuild after floods. Typical
critical facilities include hospitals, fire stations, police stations, storage
of critical records, and similar facilities.
DAM: Any obstruction, wall embankment, or barrier, together with any abutments
and appurtenant works, constructed to store or divert water or to create a pool
(not including underground water storage tanks).
DEMOLITION: Removal of structures, impervious area, or utilities that return a
site to a natural or vacant state. Demolition must not increase the volume or
flow rate, or affect the drainage pattern, or composition of stormwater.
Demolition activities that change the use of the site or require any fill
within a floodplain or floodway are considered development.
DEPARTMENT: The Kane County Department that administers the Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
DEPRESSIONAL STORAGE: The volume contained below a closed contour on a one foot
(1') contour interval topographical map, the upper elevation of which is
determined by the invert of a surface gravity outlet. A surface gravity outlet
does not include a surface inlet or hickenbottom that connects to a Subsurface
Drainage System.
DESIGN STORM: A selected storm event, described in terms of the probability of
occurring once within a given number of years, for which stormwater or flood
control improvements are designed and built. The critical duration storm shall
be evaluated unless otherwise specified.
DETENTION STORAGE FACILITY: A manmade structure providing temporary storage of
stormwater runoff from a development with a controlled release rate during or
immediately after a storm. The detention storage facility includes a stormwater
storage basin, control structure (or restrictor), and the basin outlet,
emergency overflow and inflow pipes.
DEVELOPER: Any person who undertakes development or certifies development on
such person's behalf.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to the land undertaken by private or public
entities which includes:
   A.   The construction, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or an
addition to a building;
   B.   The installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges or
similar projects;
   C.   Dredging, drilling and mining;
   D.   The construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts;
   E.   Channel modifications, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
   F.   The storage of equipment and materials or the deposit of solid or
liquid waste;
   G.   The installation of a manufactured home on a site, the preparation of a
site for a manufactured home, or the placement of a recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;
   H.   Any wetland impact;
   I.   Any other manmade activity that increases the volume, height or
velocity of flood or surface water or changes the composition of stormwater,
direction, of flood or surface water, including the extensive removal of
vegetation; and
   J.   The alteration, subdivision or change in land use or practice (Plat Act
divisions) in which the proposed use will require a stormwater management
measure.
Development, however, does not include:
   A.   Site maintenance and repair of existing buildings or facilities located
outside of the floodplain;
   B.   Site maintenance of existing parking lots, pedestrian trails and
bikeways outside the floodplain provided that no new impervious areas are
added, there is no increase in peak flows, and there is no change in the
location of the stormwater discharge;
   C.   Site maintenance, including resurfacing of streets and highways outside
the floodplain;
   D.   Site maintenance, including resurfacing of publicly owned streets and
highways within the floodplain provided the difference between the elevation of
the road surface after resurfacing and the elevation of the road surface on the
effective date is not more than two inches (2");
   E.   Maintenance of existing stormwater management measures (e.g., sediment
removal, shoreline stabilization, etc.), to restore to or improve: 1) the
permitted function and condition, or 2) if completed prior to the effective
date of this chapter, the verifiable constructed function and condition;
   F.   Paving over an existing permitted or grandfathered impervious area,
provided no change in peak discharge or location of discharge;
   G.   For agricultural uses, maintenance of existing drainage systems for the
limited purpose of maintaining cultivated areas and crop production;
   H.   For agricultural uses, improvements undertaken pursuant to a written
NRCS conservation plan provided they are outside of the floodplain; and
   I.   Plowing, cultivation and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading or the construction of levees.
DIRECTOR: The person designated by the County Board to oversee the
administration of the Stormwater Management Ordinance.
DRAINAGE AREA: The land area above a given point that may contribute runoff
flow at that point from rainfall and/or snowmelt.
DRAINAGE DISTRICT: A Special District created by petition or referendum and
court approval. It has the power to construct and maintain drainage
improvements and to pay for the improvements with assessments on the land
within the district boundaries. An assessment on the land cannot be greater in
value than the benefits of the drainage improvements.
DRY FLOODPROOFED OR DRY FLOODPROOFING: Building protection measures designed
according to current FEMA guidelines to keep water out of the building. Dry
floodproofing measures are among the floodproofing measures described in the
current edition of the following FEMA publications: Engineering Principles and
Practices for Retrofitting Flood-Prone Residential Structures (FEMA P-259),
Homeowner's Guide to Retrofitting (FEMA P-312), Selecting Appropriate
Mitigation Measures for Flood Prone Structures (FEMA 551), Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damage (FEMA 348), Reducing Damage From Localized Flooding
(FEMA 511), Non-Residential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification
(FEMA TB 3), and Floodproofing Non-Residential Structures (FEMA 102).
EFFECTIVE DATE: January 1, 2002.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA used to certify the base flood
elevation and the lowest elevation of usable space to which a building has been
constructed.
EMERGENCY OVERFLOW: Stormwater runoff from the critical duration design storm
with a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year for the tributary
area assuming the detention storage facility is empty at the start of the storm
and assuming zero (0) release. The emergency overflow shall convey this runoff
without increasing flood heights on upstream, adjoining properties or resulting
in flood damage at the development.
EROSION: The process whereby soil is detached by the action of water or wind.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PRACTICES: A temporary or permanent measure
that stabilizes soil by covering and/or binding soil particles to prevent soil
particles from becoming detached by the forces of wind, water, or gravity and
filters sediment from runoff.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A development for the placement of
manufactured homes for which, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either the final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads was completed before the effective date.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: The installation of utilities, or
the construction of streets, or final site grading, or pouring of concrete pads
in connection with the development of additional lots within an existing
manufactured home park.
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59
- 79, effective September 29, 1989, as amended.
FIRM OR FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: The current version of a map published by
FEMA on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the
risk premium zones applicable to a community, together with any amendments,
additions, revisions or substitutions made thereto or therefor by FEMA at any
time.
FIS OR FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The current version of an examination, evaluation
and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations (or an examination of flood related erosion hazards) for a
community adopted and published by FEMA, together with any amendments,
additions, revisions or substitutions made thereto or therefor by FEMA at any
time.
FPE OR FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation to which a building must be
protected from flood damage, through elevation or floodproofing. The FPE is the
base flood elevation plus a recommended freeboard.
FQI OR FLORISTIC QUALITY INDEX: The parameter related to the number of native
plant species present, as defined by Floyd Swink and Gerald Wilhelm in "Plants
of the Chicago Region", 4th edition (1994) and calculated using the Chicago
Region Floristic Quality Assessment (FQA) Calculator.
FARMED WETLANDS: Wetlands that have been identified as farmed wetlands in
accordance with the current "National Food Security Act Manual" (NFSAM)
methodology and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers - Chicago District
methodology.
FEE IN LIEU OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES: A fee assessed to the applicant
by the permitting authority, commensurate with the costs and fee schedules
adopted by the County or certified community, paid "in-lieu-of" constructing
the required stormwater management measures for the development to meet the
ordinance requirements. Rules and procedures for fee-in-lieu of detention
storage facilities, Best Management Practices and watershed benefit measures
are contained in sections 9-85 and 9-318 of this chapter.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves or the unusual
and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A frequency normally expressed as a period of years, based
upon a percent chance of occurrence in any given year from statistical
analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be
equaled or exceeded, as in the 2-year flood frequency has a fifty percent (50%)
chance of occurrence in any given year and the 100-year flood frequency has a
one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any given year.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood including detached special flood hazard
areas, ponding areas and the like. The floodplain is also known as the special
flood hazard area (SFHA).
FLOODPLAIN VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be in
compliance with the floodplain management regulations of this chapter,
including the failure to have the Elevation Certificate, other certificates, or
other evidence of compliance required in article VI of this chapter until such
time as the required documentation is provided.
FLOODPROOF OR FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures or property which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the FPE.
FLOODWAY CONVEYANCE: The measure of the flow carrying capacity of the floodway
section and is defined using Manning's equation, K=1.49 AR2/3/n, where "n" is
Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and
"R" is the ratio of the wetted area to the wetted perimeter.
FLOODWAY OR DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and
that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or channel, as depicted on
the FEMA FIRM, which is needed to store and convey the critical duration base
flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth of a foot (0.10') increase in
flood stage due to the loss of floodway conveyance or storage, and no more than
a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities.
FREEBOARD: An increment of height added to the BFE, groundwater table or base
flood design water surface elevation to provide a factor of safety for
uncertainties in calculations, unknown local conditions, wave action and
unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
FUNCTIONAL: Refers to stormwater management measures and Major Stormwater
Systems which serve the primary purpose of meeting developed release rate
requirements, but does not meet all of the final design conditions. For
example, a detention storage facility, which has been excavated but has not,
had the side slopes graded, nor the final landscaping placed, may be considered
functional as a detention storage facility.
GROUNDWATER: Water that is located within soil or rock below the surface of the
earth.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
next to the proposed walls of a structure prior to construction.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure or site that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing in the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to a Historic District or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered Historic District;
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency; or
   D.   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE: Compensatory storage (either
adjacent to the floodplain fill or located off- site), which can be shown by
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be equivalent to compensatory storage
located adjacent to the development.
HYDRAULICS: The science and study of the mechanical behavior of water in
physical systems and processes.
HYDRIC SOIL: A soil that is saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during
the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.
HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED AREA: An area of land surface cleared, grubbed,
excavated, compacted or otherwise modified that changes stormwater runoff
volumes or rates.
HYDROLOGY: The science of the behavior of water, including its dynamics,
composition and distribution in the atmosphere, on the surface of the earth and
underground.
IDNR-OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources, or its duly authorized designee.
IEPA: The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
IMPERVIOUS AREA: Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb,
retain or infiltrate water, including but not limited to building roofs, non-
porous asphalt and concrete, areas of compacted structural clay, limestone
riding arenas, compacted graveled areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas.
Graveled surfaces may be counted as pervious provided the aggregate gradation
has a high porosity (such as CA-7). Open water shall be considered impervious
(at its normal water elevation), but vegetated wetlands and constructed wetland
basins shall not be considered impervious. Areas that are designed to promote
the infiltration of rainfall into the ground at rates at or above the
infiltration rate of naturally vegetated areas (given applicable soil types),
such as porous or permeable pavement areas, and bioretention areas (rain
gardens and bio-swales, composed of an engineered soil mix) shall not be
considered impervious.
INTERIM WATERSHED PLAN: A regional study of a watershed which does not address
the entire range of purposes, goals and objectives outlined in the plan.
ISOLATED WETLAND: A wetland that does not have an identifiable surface water
connection to other waters of the U.S. as determined by a USACE jurisdictional
determination.
LOMA OR LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT: The official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a regulatory floodplain and amends the effective
flood hazard boundary map, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or FIRM.
LOMR OR LETTER OF MAP REVISION: A letter from FEMA that revises the BFE, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective
flood hazard boundary map, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or FIRM.
LOMR-F: A Letter of Map Revision based on Fill.
LAKE: A body of water two (2) or more acres in size which retains water
throughout the year.
LINEAR WATERCOURSE: Ephemeral, intermittent and perennial creeks, streams,
rivers, and online impoundments.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a structure
(including basement) but does not include an unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure suitable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
in an area other than a basement, provided, however, that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable requirements
of article VI of this chapter.
LOWEST OPENING: The elevation at which water could enter a building through any
non-watertight opening such as a doorway threshold, a window sill, the top-of-
foundation, or a basement window well.
MAINTAINABLE OUTLET: A Major or Minor Stormwater System (such as a storm sewer
or overland flow path) that a stormwater management measure may outlet to that
provides positive drainage to an open channel or stormwater management system.
The downstream system shall have adequate stormwater capacity. Stormwater
management systems shall be within a recorded drainage easement or right-of-
way.
MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS: Activities including keeping spaces,
structures and infrastructure in proper operating condition in a routine,
scheduled, or anticipated fashion to prevent failure and/or degradation. These
tasks include, but are not limited to: re-roofing; replacement of windows,
water heaters and furnaces; the repair of existing plumbing; and the re-wiring
of an existing electric service. Maintenance does not include any tasks that
increase the outside dimensions of a building or changes the dimensions of a
structure.
MAJOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: All infrastructure including levees, bridges,
culverts, flood routes, storm sewer, swales and channels needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the Minor Stormwater System.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities and includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles on-site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days but does not include a recreational
vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A site (or contiguous sites) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: The value of a structure prior to substantial damages and/or
substantial improvement. FEMA accepts several methods to determine market
value. The method to determine market value shall be one approved by FEMA and
the Administrator.
MINOR STORMWATER SYSTEM: All infrastructure including curb, gutter, culverts,
roadside ditches and swales, and storm sewers intended to convey stormwater
runoff at less than a one percent (1%) design storm flood frequency.
MITIGATION: Measures taken to offset negative impacts from development in
linear watercourses, nonlinear waterbodies, wetlands or the floodplain.
NFIP OR NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM: The Federal program codified in title
44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
NRCS: The United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
NET BENEFIT IN WATER QUALITY: The institution of Best Management Practices as
part of a development that when compared to the predevelopment condition can be
judged to reduce downstream sediment or pollutant loadings.
NET NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA: The difference between the new impervious area and the
existing impervious areas on-site to be removed, as a result of the proposed
development, at the time of the stormwater management permit application or
other approved date, allowed at the discretion of the Administrator. Net new
impervious area is tracked cumulatively since the effective date. Open water
shall not be included in the net new impervious area calculation.
NET WATERSHED BENEFIT: A finding that, when compared to the existing condition,
the development will substantially reduce (more than 10 percent) downstream
peak discharges, will reduce downstream flood stages (more than 0.1 feet), or
will reduce downstream damage to structures occurring in the predevelopment
condition and must be demonstrated by detailed hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis of watersheds on a regional scale as approved by the Administrator.
NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA: Undetained impervious area created by development or
redevelopment after the effective date and impervious area defined as
development or redevelopment that is proposed after the revision date. For
redevelopment, the accumulation of new impervious area between the effective
date and the revision date will be reassessed to reflect the standards for
impervious areas as part of this chapter.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A development for the placement of manufactured
homes for which the installation of utilities and the construction of streets,
and either the final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads was completed
before the effective date.
NON-DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-line impoundments, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, not specifically
identified as a floodway on the FEMA FIRM, but which has a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area or a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in a rural area. The urban area or rural
area designations shall be determined by IDNR/OWR. Non-designated floodway is
also known as "Zone A".
NONLINEAR WATERBODY: Ponds and lakes that are not hydraulically connected to
surface water that meet the definition of waters of the U.S.
NONRIVERINE: Areas not riverine in character such as isolated depressional
storage areas, ponds and lakes.
NUISANCE FLOW: Primarily a dry weather flow resulting from groundwater pumped
by individual sump pumps, curtain drain systems, French drains not directly
related to rainfall events and surface runoff.
OHWM OR ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a
distinctive mark, such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristic.
OBSERVATION STRUCTURES: Structures built on an Agricultural Subsurface Drainage
System or other Subsurface Drainage System where the pipe inflow and outflow is
visible upon removal of a lid.
OPEN CHANNEL: A conveyance system with a definable bed and banks carrying the
discharge from field tiles and surface drainage including ditches, culverts,
streams, creeks, and rivers. An open channel does not include grassed swales or
cultivated swales within farm fields under agricultural production which are
ephemeral in nature.
OPEN WATER: Surface water in lakes, ponds, detention storage facilities,
impoundments and wetlands devoid of vegetative cover.
OUTFALL: Discharge or point of discharge of a culvert or other closed conduit
from a development at which stormwater can be released from the site without
causing scouring, erosion, flooding, sedimentation or produce any adverse
hydraulic impacts to the receiving system.
OVERLAND FLOW PATH: A design feature of the Major Stormwater System which
carries flows in excess of the Minor Stormwater System design capacity in an
open channel or swale, or as sheet flow or weir flow over a feature designed to
withstand the particular erosive forces involved.
PARCEL: A separate tract of land identified by its own legal description.
PERMEABLE PAVEMENT: Porous asphalt, pervious concrete, permeable pavers and
similar paving materials designed to promote stormwater infiltration. Permeable
pavement is not considered an impervious area, if it is constructed over soil
which can be shown by development site-specific soil data to be sufficiently
permeable to allow infiltration without a system of underdrains and provided
that the full depth of the pavement cross-section is above the elevation of the
seasonal high groundwater table and calculations are provided documenting
runoff will not occur.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY: The certified community having jurisdiction under this
chapter to issue permits.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
unincorporated association, trust, municipal corporation, unit of local
government or other government agency or authority, or any combination of any
of the foregoing.
PLAN: The Kane County Comprehensive Countywide Stormwater Management Plan
adopted by the County Board on October 13, 1998, as amended from time to time.
PLANT COMMUNITIES: Groups of plants with similar habitat requirements and
planting regimes.
POLLUTANTS OF CONCERN: Common pollutants generated by development or
redevelopment which include: total suspended solids (TSS); metals and oils; and
nutrients consisting of nitrogen and phosphorous.
POND: A body of water less than two (2) acres in size which retains a normal
water level year-round.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice professional engineering.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR: A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice professional land surveying.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency or public entity to reduce flood damage to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic
study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing,
in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are
not public agencies.
PUBLIC FLOOD EASEMENT: An easement acceptable to the appropriate jurisdictional
body that meets the regulations of IDNR-OWR, the department and the community
and provides legal assurances that all areas subject to flooding in the created
backwater of the development will remain open to allow flooding.
REASONABLE USE: Use of land to improve drainage such that the benefits of the
improved drainage outweigh the disadvantages to lands receiving additional flow
in compliance with Illinois Drainage Law (Uchtmann and Gehris, 1997).
RECORD DRAWINGS: Drawings prepared, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer or professional land surveyor representing the final record of the
actual in place elevations, locations of structures and topography.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational
camping, travel or seasonal use and not for use as a permanent dwelling.
REDEVELOPMENT: The process of developing land previously developed. The term
shall be understood to exclude site maintenance.
REGISTERED STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: A person licensed under the laws of the State
of Illinois as a structural engineer.
REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN: The floodplain depicted on maps recognized by IDNR-OWR
for regulatory purposes.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: Those portions of the floodplain depicted as floodway on
maps recognized by IDNR-OWR for regulatory purposes.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
RESTRICTIVE BRIDGE OR CULVERT: A bridge or culvert that crosses a floodplain
and cannot convey the base flood without causing increases in the upstream
flood profile.
RESTRICTOR: The physical mechanism or means for controlling the rate of
stormwater discharge from a detention storage facility or retention basin.
REVISION DATE: June 1, 2019.
RIVERINE: Related to, formed by or resembling a channel and includes creeks and
rivers.
ROADSIDE DITCH: A drainage ditch within twenty five feet (25') from the edge of
the outside travel lane or the median of a divided road.
RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within a tributary
drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of the soils of that
basin.
SFHA OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land in the floodplain within a
community that is subject the base flood and has special flood, mudslide or
mudflow, or flood related erosion hazards and is shown on an FBFM or FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M or E.
SEASONAL HIGH GROUNDWATER TABLE: The upper limits of the soil temporarily
saturated with water, being usually associated with spring wetness conditions
which may be indicated by soil mottles with a Munsell color of two (2) chroma
or less.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits hydraulically moved soils, debris and
other materials in flowing or standing water.
SEDIMENTATION TRAP: A structure or area that allows for the temporary deposit
and removal or disposal of sediment materials from stormwater runoff.
SITE: The parcel or contiguous parcels contemplated to be part of a single
development, coordinated development or redevelopment under single ownership or
control.
SITE MAINTENANCE: In kind replacement, restoration, or repair of existing
infrastructure, pavement, or facilities including, but not limited to, roadways
and parking lots such that they will perform the same functions for which they
were originally designed and constructed.
SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA: A floodplain, regulatory floodplain, floodway,
regulatory floodway, linear watercourse, nonlinear waterbody, wetland, wetland
mitigation bank or facility, or buffer.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as: the pouring of slab
or footings; the installation of piles; the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building. Construction of the structure does not include: land preparation such
as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and/or walkways;
excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; or the construction of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE: A man-made facility or naturally enhanced area
such as detention storage facilities, stormwater mitigation/BMPs and watershed
benefit measures, implemented to control stormwater runoff with the objectives
of providing controlled surface drainage by promoting infiltration, flood
control, enhanced water quality, and pollutant reduction in runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT: The permit issued under article II of this
chapter.
STORMWATER MITIGATION/BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): A measure used to control
the adverse stormwater related effects of development, designed to remove
pollutants, reduce runoff rates and volumes, and protect aquatic habitats.
Example practices include:
   A.   Infiltration-based BMPs such as infiltration trenches or dry wells,
permeable pavements, native vegetated rain gardens or bioswales with
quantifiable storage, and other BMPs, upon approval by the Administrator; and
   B.   Storage-based BMPs such as: native vegetated detention storage
facilities; native vegetated swales with quantifiable storage behind check
dams; and other BMPs, upon approval by the Administrator.
STRUCTURALLY DRY FLOODPROOFED OR STRUCTURAL DRY FLOODPROOFING: Building
protection measures designed and certified by a professional engineer to make
the building and its attendant utilities watertight and capable of resisting
the effects of the base flood. The building design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces,
the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Structural dry
floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without
an outside source of electricity. Levees, berms, floodwalls, and similar
building protection measures are forms of dry floodproofing which are not
structural dry floodproofing.
STRUCTURE: A manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground,
including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any
addition to a building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGES OR SUBSTANTIALLY DAMAGED: Damage of any origin (which may
include but is not limited to flood, fire, earthquake and wind) sustained by a
building located in the floodplain or floodway whereby the cumulative
percentage of damages, improvements and maintenance of existing building,
taking place on or after January 1, 2010 equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of
actual repair work performed. The market value of volunteer labor and materials
must be included in this determination. The cumulative total of damages,
improvements and maintenance of existing building shall be tied to the
property. The term includes repetitive loss buildings.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS OR SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED: Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure located in the
floodplain or floodway, in which the cumulative percentage of improvements,
damages and maintenance of existing building, taking place on or after January
1, 2010, equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or increases the floor
area by more than twenty percent (20%). The market value of volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The cumulative total of
damages, improvements and maintenance of existing building shall be tied to the
property.
   A.   Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   B.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.    Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.    Any alteration of a historic structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE SURVEY: An inventory of existing Agricultural Subsurface
Drainage Systems and other Subsurface Drainage Systems, typically based upon a
field investigation utilizing the slit trench method to locate existing
systems.
SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A water management system used to remove excess
groundwater to control water table levels at predetermined elevations for
structural, environmental or other reasons in areas already developed or being
developed for agricultural, residential, industrial, commercial or recreational
uses.
TECHNICAL MANUAL: The manual developed by the County which provides examples
and other helpful tools to assist applicants and certified communities in the
planning of developments and application for a stormwater management permit.
TEMPORARY WETLAND AFFECT: A disturbance to a wetland that would result in a
short-term loss of wetland function. Temporary affects do not include
relocation of a wetland, or conversion of a vegetated community to open water,
unless the conversion is part of an overall wetland restoration or wetland
mitigation facility that is submitted for review and approved. Additionally,
for the impact to be considered temporary, wetland soil profiles shall be able
to be restored to a similar pre-disturbance condition and elevation, vegetative
communities shall have the capability of being restored to same or higher
quality and function, and the restoration must occur within one year of the
disturbance.
TOPSOIL: The uppermost part of the soil, ordinarily moved in tillage, or its
equivalent in uncultivated soils.
TRANSITION SECTION: The reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows
from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section, or vice versa.
TRIBUTARY AREA: All of the land surface that contributes runoff to a given
point.
USACE: The United States Army Corps of Engineers.
USEPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USFWS: The United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
UNRESTRICTED RELEASE: Stormwater runoff from a development which is not
directed to the detention storage facility is unrestricted or uncontrolled
release or flow.
UPLAND: Terrain lying above the level where water flows, where flooding occurs,
or where soils are not saturated by groundwater at a frequency and a duration
to support wetland vegetation.
UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY FLOW: Stormwater runoff from tributary areas upstream of a
development.
USABLE SPACE: Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities or other beneficial
purposes and includes basements.
VOLUME REDUCTION: The volume of stormwater runoff from new impervious areas of
a development or redevelopment that is captured, retained, infiltrated,
evapotranspirated or re-used by BMPs.
VOLUME SENSITIVE WATERSHED: A depressional storage area or an area that retains
water due to the lack of an adequate outfall where an increase in the flood
elevation, volume, or duration will result in an adverse hydraulic impact or
deny the receiving property owner reasonable use of their land.
WATER DEPENDENT FACILITIES: Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or
requiring direct access to the water, shoreline or wetlands to accomplish their
primary function/purpose, whether it is recreational, commercial or industrial.
Examples include, but are not limited to, pumping facilities, modifications to
existing wastewater treatment plants and facilities, shoreline protection,
boating facilities and improvements, but does not include new wastewater
treatment plants or habitable structures at existing wastewater treatment
plants, long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
WATER QUALITY TREATMENT: Treatment of pollutants of concern generated by
development or redevelopment via physical, biological and chemical removal
processes by permanent BMPs.
WATERS OF THE U.S.: Is defined by USACE in 33 CFR 328.3 and, for purposes of
this chapter, includes wetlands, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, bogs, fens,
and ponds that are under the jurisdiction of the USACE.
WATERSHED: All land drained by, or contributing water to the same stream, lake,
stormwater management measure, or draining to a point. In Kane County, the
major watersheds shall be defined as the Fox River Watershed and the Kishwaukee
Watershed.
WATERSHED BENEFIT MEASURE: A Natural Resources Conservation Services (NRCS)
Conservation Practice, or other approved practice, used to mitigate the adverse
stormwater related effects of small development on large tracts of land. These
include practices that: stabilize swales, agricultural ditches and streams;
reconnect channels and wetlands to the floodplain; create or enhance wetlands,
buffers and riparian areas; improve and preserve natural upland areas such as
prairies and forest stands; and filter or remove pollutants from impervious
areas or agricultural practices. Examples of allowable NRCS conservation
practices include: bioreactors, channel bed stabilization, constructed wetland,
contour buffer strips, drainage water management plan implementation, filter
strips, grassed waterway, riparian forest buffer, riparian herbaceous cover,
saturated buffers, streambank and shoreline protection, stream habitat
improvement and management, wetland creation, wetland enhancement, and wetland
restoration.
WATERSHED PLAN: A study and evaluation of an individual drainage basin's
stormwater management, floodplain management, water quality and flood control
needs capabilities adopted by the County.
WET FLOODPROOFED OR WET FLOODPROOFING: Permanent or contingent measures applied
to a structure or its contents that prevent or provide resistance to damage
from flooding while allowing floodwaters to enter the structure or area.
Generally, this includes properly anchoring the structure, using flood
resistant materials below the base flood elevation (BFE), protection of
mechanical and utility equipment, and use of openings or breakaway walls. Wet
floodproofing measures are among the floodproofing measures described in the
current edition of the following FEMA publications: Wet Floodproofing
Requirements for Structures Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas (FEMA TB 7-
93), Selecting Appropriate Mitigation Measures for Floodprone Structures (FEMA
551), Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damage (FEMA 348), Reducing
Damage From Localized Flooding (FEMA 511), Non-Residential Floodproofing -
Requirements and Certification (FEMA TB 3), and Floodproofing Non-Residential
Structures (FEMA 102).
WETLAND: Is defined by the current U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetland
Delineation Manual, or other Federally recognized methodology. A wetland is an
area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions. A wetland is delineated based upon these three (3) attributes:
a) hydrology, b) hydric soil, and c) hydrophytic vegetation.
WETLAND IMPACT: Conversion of a wetland to a non-wetland via:
   A.   Direct impact caused by the dredging or filling of any wetland; or
   B.   Indirect wetland impact caused by a development activity that would
result in the wetland hydrology falling below eighty percent (80%), or
exceeding one hundred fifty percent (150%), of the existing condition storm
event runoff volume to the wetland for the 2-year, 24-hour storm event.
WETLAND MITIGATION: The establishment or re-establishment and long-term
maintenance of wetlands to offset wetland impacts from development.
WETLAND MITIGATION BANK: One or more parcels approved by USACE or the Director
where wetlands and/or other aquatic resources are established, re-established,
enhanced or, in exceptional circumstances, preserved expressly for the purpose
of providing compensatory mitigation in advance of authorized impacts to
similar resources.
WETLAND MITIGATION FACILITY: Land in the County specifically dedicated for the
establishment and re-establishment, rehabilitation and long term maintenance of
wetlands and other aquatic resources. This includes any area designated as a
compensatory storage facility or detention storage facility when such area is
used for wetland mitigation. (Ord. 19-151, 5-7-2019, eff. 6-1-2019)
CHAPTER 10
FIREWORKS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
10-1: Definitions
10-2 - 10-15: Reserved
10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, not for profit, government, or commercial entity
making application for a pyrotechnic display.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS: Those fireworks that must comply with the construction,
chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the U.S. consumer products
safety commission, as set forth in 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and classified
as fireworks UN0336 (1.4G) or UN0337 (1.4S); by the United States department of
transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. "Consumer fireworks" shall not include
snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads", and
"auto burglar alarms"; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25)
grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed
that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the
explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps that contain less than twenty
hundredths (0.20) grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall
be permitted at all times.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS DISPLAY OR CONSUMER DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or
deflagration of consumer fireworks to produce a visual or audible effect.
DISCHARGE SITE: The immediate area surrounding the fireworks mortars.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in
the pyrotechnic operator licensing act of Illinois.
DISPLAY SITE: The immediate area where a fireworks display is conducted and
includes the discharge site, the fallout area, and the required separation
distance from the mortars to spectator viewing areas.
FALLOUT AREA: The areas over which aerial shells are fired and is the location
where a typical aerial shell dud falls to the ground depending on the wind and
the angle or mortar placement.
FLAME EFFECT: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gases,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual, or
audible effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic operator
licensing act of Illinois.
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR: An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the pyrotechnic operator licensing act of Illinois.
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used for professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333 (1.1G), UN0334 (1.2G), or UN0335 (1.3G) by the
United States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
OWNER: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, not for profit, government, or commercial entity who
owns the property on which a pyrotechnic display will be held.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture, not for profit, government, or commercial entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
operator licensing act of Illinois. Pyrotechnic displays may include consumer
fireworks.
PYROTECHNIC DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, company, association, group of persons, or
corporation who distributes display fireworks for sale in the state of Illinois
or provides them as part of a pyrotechnic display service in the state of
Illinois or provides only pyrotechnic services.
SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS: Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical,
or other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as "intended for indoor use". "Special
effects fireworks" are classified as fireworks UN0431 (1.4G) or UN0432 (1.4S)
by the United States department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101. (Ord.
07-169, 5-8-2007)
10-2 - 10-15: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. PERMITS
SECTION:
10-16: Generally
10-17: Issuance
10-18: Notification
10-19: Transfer
10-20: Fees
10-21: Penalties
10-22: Severability
10-16: GENERALLY:
   A.   Consumer displays are hereby prohibited unless performed by a lead
pyrotechnic operator as part of a pyrotechnic display.
   B.   Permits for pyrotechnic displays shall hereafter be granted under the
following rules and regulations:
      1.   Every pyrotechnic display service must be provided by a pyrotechnic
distributor licensed in the state of Illinois, and every pyrotechnic display
shall be conducted by a lead pyrotechnic operator licensed by the state of
Illinois. Any and all assistants must be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
Every such pyrotechnic display shall be of such a character and so located,
discharged or fired by the person named in the application for a permit as not
to be hazardous to property or endanger person or persons; spectators must be
separated from the pyrotechnic display by suitable barrier; if the pyrotechnic
display is on an island, no boats carrying people shall be permitted within
five hundred feet (500') of the bank from which the pyrotechnic display takes
place. No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited or exploded within six hundred
feet (600') of any hospital, asylum or infirmary. Indoor pyrotechnic displays
and/or indoor special effects fireworks are prohibited. Sparklers and the use
of sparklers are prohibited.
      2.   Single event, one day permits may be granted hereunder to any
qualified person. Every such application and permit shall name both the person
sponsoring the event, the lead pyrotechnic operator conducting the display, and
the property owner if different than the applicant.
      3.   Multievent, one year permits may be granted hereunder to any
qualified person for a pyrotechnic display on behalf of any professional,
semiprofessional or amateur sporting organization that holds regularly
scheduled sporting events at an established outdoor sporting facility. Sporting
facilities include, but may not necessarily be limited to: baseball, football,
polo or soccer fields, racetracks, and golf courses. Every such application and
permit shall name the person sponsoring the events, the pyrotechnic
distributor, the lead pyrotechnic operator conducting the pyrotechnic displays,
and the property owner if different than the applicant.
      4.   Application for permits for pyrotechnic displays shall be made in
writing to the chairman of the county board at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display and action shall be taken on
such application within forty eight (48) hours after such application is made.
      5.   Application for a permit shall state the full name and address of
each person submitting an application; the date and exact location of the site
where the pyrotechnic display will be conducted and in the case of a single
event, one day permit, two (2) alternate dates on which said pyrotechnic
display may be conducted in case of cancellation due to inclement weather and
in the case of a multievent, one year permit the schedule of sporting events
shall be provided; the name and address of the owner of the site at which the
pyrotechnic display is to take place; the name and address of the person
conducting the pyrotechnic display and all persons who will handle the
pyrotechnic display; a statement that the pyrotechnic display will be conducted
in strict adherence to the county rules and regulations pertaining to
pyrotechnic displays and to state and federal laws pertaining to the use of
fireworks; a list of fireworks to be displayed to include the number, class,
division, and which shall at a minimum include the maximum size of the
fireworks to be displayed; a site plan showing details of the display area,
discharge site, and fallout area; the name and address of the fire department
or fire protection district servicing the site at which the pyrotechnic display
is to be conducted; and such other relevant information as the County Board
Chairman or his or her designee may reasonably require.
      6.   A multi-event, one year permit shall be purely a personal privilege,
good for and not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntary
or involuntary, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee. A multi-event, one year permit shall
stipulate the following:
         a.   That all displays of any nature whatsoever be concluded by eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.,
         b.   Shall not be permitted after seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. the
evening before the public schools located in the location of the pyrotechnic
display will be in session with the exception of Memorial Day and any
additional school days added to the originally published school calendar
because of scheduled school days that were cancelled for weather or other
reasons, and
         c.   Any further conditions or restrictions, including, but not
limited to, special provisions for audible and visual fireworks, as may be
reasonably determined by the County Board Chairman based upon the location of
the venue and the character of the surrounding area.
A multi-event, one year permit may be suspended or revoked by the Chairman of
the County Board upon good cause shown. In addition to or in lieu of any
suspension or revocation, the Chairman may impose a fine on the applicant,
owner, operator, or any or all of them, in the maximum amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any language herein to
the contrary, all multi-event, one year permits shall expire and may be renewed
commencing May 1st of each year.
      7.   Every applicant shall file with the application for a permit a
certificate of any insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in this
State certifying that it has issued to or for the benefit of the applicant and
the named person conducting the pyrotechnic display a liability policy or
policies covering any liability for money damages thereafter incurred by said
persons resulting from the conduct or operation of the pyrotechnic display for
which a permit is issued hereunder in the amount of at least, but not less
than, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of any
person and for damage to property conditioned upon compliance with the
provisions of State law and the regulations of the State Fire Marshal adopted
hereunder.
      8.   A copy of the application for a pyrotechnic display shall also be
submitted to the Fire Department or Fire Protection District servicing the site
at which the pyrotechnic display is to be conducted together with all of the
supporting documentation to ensure the public health and safety including, but
not limited to, a site plan and traffic, parking and crowd control plan. The
Fire Chief of the Fire Department or Fire Protection District or his/her
designee shall inspect the display site and ensure that the pyrotechnic display
can be performed in full compliance with the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) standards adopted and amended by the Office of the State
Fire Marshal rules for the type of pyrotechnic display to be performed and
shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. A copy of
the inspection report and/or a permit indicating the display can be performed
in full compliance with NFPA standards signed by the Fire Department or Fire
Protection District having authority to inspect the premises shall be filed
with the County upon completion of the inspection. In addition to the
regulations and requirements of this Code and any other State regulations,
every application for permit hereunder shall comply with the rules and
regulations of the local Fire Department or Fire Protection District servicing
the site at which a pyrotechnic display is to be conducted.
      9.   Every pyrotechnics display may be conducted under the supervision of
the Chief of the applicable Fire Department, or his designee, who is authorized
to suspend or terminate the pyrotechnic display if adverse conditions arise
from the improper handling or discharge of fireworks, crowd conditions, or
adverse weather conditions.
      10.   No single event one day pyrotechnic display shall be conducted
after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and shall not be permitted after seven thirty
o'clock (7:30) P.M. the evening before the public schools in the location of
the pyrotechnic display will be in session with the exception of Memorial Day.
Any further conditions or restrictions, including, but not limited to, special
provisions for audible and visual fireworks, as may be reasonably determined by
the County Board Chairman based upon the location of the venue and the
character of the surrounding area may be imposed. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007; Ord.
18-99, 4-10-2018; Ord. 19-99, 4-9-2019)
10-17: ISSUANCE:
Permits issued hereunder shall be issued by the Chairman of the County Board or
his/her designee and shall bear the signature of the Chairman of the County
Board or its facsimile. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007)
10-18: NOTIFICATION:
   A.   The permit holder shall notify the County within twenty four (24) hours
of any incidents as follows:
      1.   A fire;
      2.   An injury to any person resulting from the display;
      3.   Damage to property in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), in
the aggregate, resulting from the display.
   B.   The County shall notify the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal
of any fire, injury to person, or damage to property in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) that resulted from the pyrotechnic display by telephone or in
writing within three (3) days after learning of the incident. (Ord. 07-169, 5-
8-2007)
10-19: TRANSFER:
Permits issued hereunder are not transferable. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007)
10-20: FEES:
A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid by the
applicant to the County at the time of the filing of each application for a
single event, one day permit hereunder. A nonrefundable fee of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be paid by the applicant to the County
at the time of the filing of each application for a multievent, one year permit
hereunder. Applicant shall also pay any fees of the applicable Fire Department
or Fire Protection District. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007)
10-21: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter, including the operator, owner, and/or applicant, shall be fined not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, in addition to any
penalties or remedies provided by State law, and all such remedies shall be
cumulative. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007)
10-22: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, portion or provision of this chapter is construed to be invalid
or void it shall not affect the remaining sections, portions or provisions
which shall remain in full force and effect thereafter. (Ord. 07-169, 5-8-2007)
CHAPTER 10.5
FRANCHISE RULES AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
10.5-1 - 10.5-20: Reserved
10.5-1 - 10.5-20: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION
SECTION:
Division 1. Title
10.5-21: Short Title
Division 1A. Preamble
10.5-22: Preamble
Division 1B. Recitals
10.5-23: Recitals
10.5-24 - 10.5-30: Reserved
Division 2. Definitions
10.5-31: Definitions
Division 3. Franchise Required; Prompt Action
10.5-32: Franchise Required; Prompt Action
10.5-33 - 10.5-40: Reserved
Division 4. Issuance Of A Certificate Of Franchise
10.5-41: Contents Of Franchise Application
10.5-42: Review Of Franchise Application
10.5-43: Grant Of Franchise
10.5-44: Term Of The Franchise
10.5-45: Performance Evaluation Session
10.5-46: Area Of Jurisdiction; New Municipalities
10.5-47: Continuing Regulatory Jurisdiction
10.5-48: Development Department Jurisdiction
10.5-49: Reserved
Division 5. Areawide Interconnection Of CATV System
10.5-50: Interconnection With Other Franchises Or Video Providers
10.5-51: Interconnection To New Municipalities
10.5-52 - 10.5-60: Reserved
Division 6. Fees/Service Provider Fees
10.5-61: Franchise Fees/Service Provider Fees
10.5-62: Quarterly And Annual Reports
10.5-63: Audit Of Franchise Fee/Service Provider Fee
10.5-64: Late Or Delinquent Payments
10.5-65: Statements And Certifications Upon Termination
10.5-66: Fees For County Rights Of Way In Municipalities
10.5-67 - 10.5-70: Reserved
Division 7. Program Services
10.5-71: Established
10.5-72 - 10.5-79: Reserved
Division 8. Cable And Video Customer Protection Law
10.5-80: Customer Service And Privacy Protection
10.5-81: Applicability To All Cable And Video Providers
10.5-82 - 10.5-109: Reserved
Division 9. Rates
10.5-110: Nondiscrimination
10.5-111 - 10.5-119: Reserved
Division 10. Revocation Of Franchise; Material Breaches And Other Penalties
10.5-120: Revocation Procedure
10.5-121: Continuity Of Operations
10.5-122: Removal
10.5-123: Material Violations
10.5-124: Alternative Remedies
10.5-125: Nonenforcement
10.5-126 - 10.5-129: Reserved
Division 11. Records
10.5-130: Maintenance Of Records
10.5-131: Inspection Rights
10.5-132: Snow Drop And Temporary Drop Report
10.5-133: Corporate Report
10.5-134: Filing Of Governmental Documents
10.5-135: Filing Of Maps And Plans
10.5-136: Filing Of Monthly Progress Reports
10.5-137: Filing Of Rules And Regulations
10.5-138 - 10.5-139: Reserved
Division 12. System Standards
10.5-140: FCC Technical Standards
10.5-141: Operational Requirements
10.5-142: Line Extension
10.5-143: General Construction Standards
10.5-144: Antenna Structures
10.5-145: Aerial System Plant
10.5-146: Underground Plant
10.5-147: Standby Power
10.5-148: Interference With Nonsubscribers
10.5-149: Twenty Four Hour Operation
10.5-150: Work Force
10.5-151: Status Monitoring
10.5-152: Signal Interruptions And Routine Maintenance
10.5-153 - 10.5-159: Reserved
Division 13. Location Of Structures, Use Of Rights Of Way And Pole Attachments
10.5-160: Location Of Structures
10.5-161: Restoration And Replacement
10.5-162: Relocation Of Structures
10.5-163: Compliance With Highway Authority
10.5-164: Temporary Removal
10.5-165: Authority To Maintain Trees And Vegetation
10.5-166: Obligation To Avoid Damaging Personal Property
10.5-167: Poles And Pole Attachments
10.5-168: CATV System Relocation
10.5-169: Approval Of Construction
10.5-170: Security Bond
10.5-171 - 10.5-179: Reserved
Division 14. Services To County Facilities; Access Programming
10.5-180: Service To County Buildings
10.5-181: Government Access Channel
10.5-182: Public Access Channel
10.5-183: Educational Access Channel
10.5-184: Emergency Alert System
10.5-185 - 10.5-189: Reserved
Division 15. Governmental Approvals, Licenses And Permits
10.5-190: Application And Registration Required
10.5-191 - 10.5-199: Reserved
Division 16. Construction Timetable
10.5-200: Extension Of Services
10.5-201: Completion
10.5-202 - 10.5-209: Reserved
Division 17. Assignment Or Transfer
10.5-210: County Board Approval Required
10.5-211: Renegotiation
10.5-212: Foreclosure, Receivership
10.5-213 - 10.5-219: Reserved
Division 18. Equal Opportunity Employer
10.5-220: Policy Established
10.5-221 - 10.5-229: Reserved
Division 19. Indemnification And Insurance
10.5-230: Indemnification By Grantee
10.5-231: Grantee Insurance
10.5-232 - 10.5-239: Reserved
Division 20. Miscellaneous Provisions
10.5-240: Fairness Of Accessibility
10.5-241: Subscribers' Wiring And Antenna
10.5-242: Copyright Laws
10.5-243: Publication Costs
10.5-244: Waiver Of Provisions Of This Article
10.5-245: No Waiver Of Rights
10.5-246: General Filing And Notice Provisions
10.5-247: New Technologies
10.5-248: Severability
10.5-249: Sexual Harassment Policy
10.5-250: Compliance With OSHA Regulations
10.5-251: Compliance With Laws
10.5-252: Grantee May Promulgate Rules
10.5-253: Landlord And Tenant
10.5-254: Prohibited Acts
10.5-255: No Recourse Against County
10.5-256: Time Is Of The Essence
10.5-257: Force Majeure
10.5-258: No Waiver Of Rights Bestowed By Virtue Of Law
10.5-259: Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
10.5-260: Governing Law And Venue
DIVISION 1. TITLE
10.5-21: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known as the KANE COUNTY COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION
ORDINANCE and is passed pursuant to the authority set forth in 55 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-1095, as amended, which are incorporated herein and made
part hereof. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
DIVISION 1A. PREAMBLE
10.5-22: PREAMBLE:
Whereas, the county of Kane ("county") is granted the power to license,
franchise, and tax operators of community antenna television systems pursuant
to section 5/5-1095 of the Illinois statutes; and
Whereas, the county believes that it is in the best interest of the county and
the public to have competition in the provision of video programming services
within the county and the county desires to encourage competition among
providers of video programming to the extent permitted by law; and
Whereas, the county is granted the power to franchise operators of cable
systems and open video systems pursuant to title 47 of the United States Code,
as amended; and
Whereas, the public rights of way represent a limited resource, and the county
has a duty to ensure that they are used, repaired, and maintained in a manner
that best serves the public health, safety, and welfare and the public
interest; and
Whereas, cable systems and open video systems advance the public health,
safety, and welfare through the use of the rights of way, which are public
property, to provide video programming; and
Whereas, the purpose and intent of this chapter is for the county to exercise
its full and complete authority, granted by state and federal law, to license,
franchise, and tax the business of operating a community antenna television
system ("CATV system"). To the extent either state or federal law is found to
provide broader authority, the powers exercised herein shall be deemed to be
based on the broadest grant of authority; and
Whereas, requiring CATV system operators to obtain a franchise prior to
constructing such systems and also requiring the county to act expeditiously on
any franchise request, allows the county to ensure that the preceding
objectives and others which are in the public interest are met, while allowing
expanded competition and the prompt provision of service.
Now, therefore be it ordained by the president and board of commissioners of
the county of Kane, Illinois, as follows. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
DIVISION 1B. RECITALS
10.5-23: RECITALS:
The above recitals are incorporated as though fully set forth in this chapter
as material and substantive terms and provisions. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff.
9-1-2008)
10.5-24 - 10.5-30: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS
10.5-31: DEFINITIONS:
ACT: The communications act of 1934, the cable communications policy act of
1984 (PL 98-532), as amended by the cable television consumer protection and
competition act of 1992 (PL 102-835) and the telecommunications act of 1996 (PL
104-104) as now or hereinafter amended. This definition may also be referred to
as "cable act".
BASIC CABLE SERVICE: Any service offering or tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals regardless of means or
technology.
BOARD OR COUNTY BOARD: The Kane County board of commissioners.
CABLE ADMINISTRATOR: That individual who has been appointed by the county board
to oversee and administer the cable ordinance and any franchise agreement.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, OR SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of
a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include: a) a facility that serves only to
retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
b) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of way; c)
a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of title II of the act, except that such facility shall be
considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c)) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on demand services; d) an open video system that complies with section 653 of
the telecommunications act of 1996 (PL 104-104); or e) any facilities of any
electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons: a) who provide cable service
over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a
significant interest in such cable system, or b) who otherwise controls or is
responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such
a cable system.
CABLE PROVIDER OR VIDEO PROVIDER: Any person or entity providing cable service
or video service pursuant to authorization under: a) the cable and video
competition law of 2007; b) section 11-42-11 of the Illinois municipal code; c)
section 5-1095 of the Illinois statutes; or d) a master antenna television,
satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint
distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their
technology. A cable or video provider shall not include a landlord providing
only broadcast video programming to a single-family home or other residential
dwelling consisting of four (4) units or less.
CABLE SERVICE: One-way transmission to subscribers of: a) video programming or
b) other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is
required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service as provided in 47 USC section 522(6) and as amended from
time to time.
CHANNEL: A portion of the frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system
and which is capable of delivering a television channel (as television channel
is defined by the commission by regulation).
COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM OR CATV SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: Any facility
which is constructed in whole or in part in, on, under or over any right of way
or other public place and which is operated in whole or in part to perform for
hire the service of receiving and amplifying video programming and
redistributing such programming by wire, cable, or other means to members of
the public who subscribe to such service; except that such definition shall not
include: a) any system which serves fewer than fifty (50) subscribers, or b)
any system which serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings
under common ownership, control, or management, and commercial establishments
located on the premises of such dwellings. A CATV system is classified by
reason of the purpose and operation of the facilities; the technology by which
the signals are received, amplified and redistributed, except for necessarily
using the right of way, is not relevant to the determination of whether such a
system is a community antenna television system.
COMPETITIVE FRANCHISE APPLICANT: An applicant for a cable franchise in an area
served by another cable operator in accordance with 47 USC section 541(a)(1).
COMPLAINT: Any written or verbal communication from any person, individual,
business, unit of government, or institution, however communicated, to the
franchising authority regarding a matter or matters pertaining to the service
or other function of the CATV system or franchise.
CONSTRUCT: A. The installation of cables, lines, fiber optic cables or
facilities that are in or cross any right of way within the county for use as
part of a CATV system, or
   B.   The connection of other facilities directly or indirectly to previously
existing cables, lines, fiber optic cables or facilities that are in or cross
any right of way within the county for use as part of a CATV system.
CONVERTER: An electronic device provided by a grantee to subscribers for the
purpose of decoding digital and analog signals or changing the frequency of
midband, superband, or hyperband signals to a suitable channel or channels
which the television receiver is able to deliver at designated dial locations.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and the board of commissioners of the
county board of the county of Kane.
COUNTY: The county of Kane, a body politic and corporate as described in 55
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1001, as amended.
COUNTY BOARD: The president and board of commissioners of the county of Kane.
COUNTY UNINCORPORATED FRANCHISE AREA: Areas geographically defined by the Kane
County development department or its successor department, as areas within the
county of Kane, but outside the corporate boundaries of a "municipality" as
defined in this section.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION OR KDOT: The Kane County department of
transportation.
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: The Kane County development department.
DISTRIBUTION LINE: That part of the CATV system consisting of trunk and feeder
cables which are used to carry signals from the system headend to the
subscriber terminal.
DROP OR SUBSCRIBER DROP: The line from the feeder cable to the subscriber's
television or converter.
DWELLING UNIT: Any single-family or multiple-family residential building or
unit, any commercial building or unit and any noncommercial building or unit.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL: A noncommercial educational access channel or
channels set aside and so designated for the use of schools.
FCC: The federal communications commission and any legally appointed,
designated, or elected agent or successor agency with respect to federal
legislation and licensing in connection with the subject matter of this
article.
FEEDER CABLE: The cable that takes signals from the trunk line to a node,
digital subscriber line access module (DSLAM) or similar appurtenance that
serves a cluster of residential and/or commercial dwelling units and to which
subscriber taps are attached.
FRANCHISE: Has the same meaning as found in 47 USC 522(9), i.e., an initial
authorization or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which
has been granted subject to section 626), issued by a franchising authority,
whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes
the construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contractual agreement entered into between the county
and any grantee hereunder which is enforceable by the county and said grantee
and which sets forth the rights and obligations between the county and said
grantee in connection with the franchise.
FRANCHISE APPLICATION: An application to be completed by a cable operator or a
video programming provider for franchise consideration. Also referred to herein
as "grantee".
FRANCHISE AREA: The entire geographic area of unincorporated Kane County now or
in the future; or that portion of the county as defined in the franchise
agreement as the franchise area.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed hereunder by the
county on a grantee solely because of its status as a cable operator. The term
"franchise fee" does not include:
   A.   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against grantee);
   B.   In the case of any franchise in effect on October 30, 1984, payments
which are required by the franchise to be made by the cable operator during the
term of such franchise for, or in support of, the use of public, educational,
or governmental access facilities;
   C.   In the case of any franchise granted after October 30, 1984, capital
costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the cable operator
for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
   D.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the
franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
   E.   Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY: The county of Kane.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL: A noncommercial channel or channels set aside and so
designated for the use of units of local government, in accordance with
sections 602(1) and 611 of the cable act (47 USC sections 522, 531).
GRANTEE OR APPLICANT: Any CATV system operator granted a franchise hereunder,
its agents, employees, or subsidiaries.
GRANTOR: The county of Kane.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in kind contributions received by a
grantee or a holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide
cable service or video service within the grantee's or the holder's cable
service or video service area within the county's jurisdiction. Gross revenues
shall include the following:
   A.   Recurring charges for cable service or video service.
   B.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but
not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
   C.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
   D.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
   E.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
   F.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
   G.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the grantee or the holder
or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the grantee's or the holder's network to provide cable service or video
service within the county. The allocation shall be based on the number of
subscribers in the county divided by the total number of subscribers in
relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
   H.   Compensation received by the grantee or the holder that is derived from
the operation of the grantee's or the holder's network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as
compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the
holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to
subsection I of this definition.
   I.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the grantee's or the holder's revenue attributable to the other
services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in gross revenue
unless the grantee or the holder can reasonably identify the division or
exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the
regular course of business.
   J.   The franchise fee or service provider fee permitted under this article.
Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
   A.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt.
   B.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount
of gross revenues received by the grantee or the holder to the extent the
refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video
service.
   C.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunications
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the grantee or the
holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the grantee's
or the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of
business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
   D.   The sale of cable service or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the franchise fee or service provider fee from
the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing
that it will resell the service within the county and pay the franchise fee or
service provider fee with respect to the service.
   E.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or
the transaction by the county, a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the grantee or the holder and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
   F.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
   G.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable
service or video service. Revenue of an affiliate of a grantee or a holder
shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the
treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the grantee or
the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by this
article which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service
provider.
As used herein, "annual gross revenues" shall mean gross revenues attributable
to a twelve (12) month accounting period, or portion thereof. This definition
of gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fees imposed
pursuant to section 10.5-61 of this chapter.
Gross revenues shall be calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles ("GAAP"), to the extent not in conflict with this
chapter; provided however, that if GAAP, as of the effective date hereof, would
exclude a category of gross revenues which is specifically enumerated above,
then such category shall be included in gross revenues notwithstanding the
application of GAAP to the calculation.
HEADEND: The control center of a CATV system, where incoming signals are
amplified, converted, processed and combined into a common cable along with any
origination cablecasting, for transmission to subscribers. The headend by
illustration and not by limitation, may include antennas, preamplifiers,
frequency converters, demodulators, modulators, processors, and other related
equipment.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC OR COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the cable system from subscriber drop cables to
subscribers' terminals.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
LEASED ACCESS: The use of the system by any business enterprise or other entity
(whether profit, nonprofit or governmental) to render services to the citizens
of the county, and shall include, without limitation, all use pursuant to
section 532 of the act.
LOCAL UNIT OF GOVERNMENT: A city, village, incorporated town, or a county.
MUNICIPALITY: A county, village, or incorporated town as defined under Illinois
state statutes, which is located within or adjacent to Kane County. Unless
otherwise provided by the context of this chapter, "municipal" or
"municipality" does not include a township, town when used as the equivalent of
a township, incorporated town which has superseded a civil township, county,
district, sanitary district, or any other similar governmental district.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the
geographic area of the local unit of government are open to serve customers. In
all cases, must include some evening hours at least one night per week or some
weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions that are within the
control of cable or video providers. Those conditions that are not within the
control of cable or video providers include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions that are ordinarily
within the control of cable or video providers include, but are not limited to,
special promotions, pay per view events, rate increases, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable service or
video service network.
ORDINANCE: The Kane County community antenna television ordinance, as may be
amended from time to time.
PEG: Public, educational, and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this article and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by a holder to the county for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
PERSON: Individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies,
and any other form of legal entity.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL: A cable television channel or channels specifically
designated as a channel or channels available to the public for the production
of noncommercial programming as subject to applicable law.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including
utility easements, and air rights in which the county has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate, or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the county. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include
any real or personal county property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include county buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements regardless of whether they are situated in the right
of way.
SCHOOL: Any public or private elementary school, secondary school, community
college or junior college, four (4) year college or university which conducts
classes or provides instructional services and which has been granted a
certificate of recognition by the state of Illinois.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE CALL: Grantee's on site visits to a subscriber's residence regarding
cable service.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of either picture or sound or both for any
channel for single or multiple subscriber(s).
SERVICE LINE DROP: The point of connection between a premises and the cable or
video network that enables the premises to receive cable service or video
service.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid by a holder to the county for service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction, but under no circumstances shall the
service provider fee be paid to the county and more than one local unit of
government for the same portion of the holder's service area.
SHALL: As used herein is mandatory and not merely directory.
SNOW DROP: The temporary drop to the subscriber's house that is placed
aboveground during the winter months.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person who legally receives any one or more of the services
provided by the system.
SUBSCRIBER DROP: A cable which connects the tap of a feeder cable to a ground
block at the subscriber's premises.
USER: A party utilizing a cable system channel for purposes of production or
transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in
a subscriber capacity.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING: Programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by a television broadcast station, notwithstanding the
means for delivery or transmission of the programming.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider as defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
DIVISION 3. FRANCHISE REQUIRED; PROMPT ACTION
10.5-32: FRANCHISE REQUIRED; PROMPT ACTION:
   A.   No person may construct or otherwise obtain a permit to construct a
CATV system in the county to provide cable service without first obtaining from
the county a franchise authorizing the construction of such a system.
   B.   No person operating a CATV system may provide cable service to any
person in the unincorporated areas of the county unless a franchise from the
county authorizing same is in full force and effect at all times while cable
service is being provided.
   C.   Other than an incumbent provider of cable service on the effective date
hereof, any person required to obtain a CATV system franchise pursuant to this
chapter shall first submit a written application for a CATV system franchise to
the county demonstrating the applicant's financial, legal, and technical
qualifications to construct, maintain, and operate a CATV system to meet the
county's needs. Application requirements shall be specifically stated in
section
10.5-41 of this chapter.
   D.   Upon receipt of a complete application from the proposed grantee, the
county shall promptly consider and take such actions as may be necessary to
review and consider such application, including compliance with the written
notice and public hearing requirements of 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-
1095(e), if applicable. The county shall grant or deny the application for a
CATV system franchise within ninety (90) days after completion of the public
hearing or the receipt of a complete agreement, whichever is later; provided
however, that if an applicant does not have existing authority to access the
county rights of way in the geographic area that the applicant proposes to
serve, the county shall grant or deny the application for a CATV system
franchise within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date the application is
received by the franchising authority. The county and an initial franchise
applicant or a competitive franchise applicant may mutually agree in writing to
extend the ninety (90) or one hundred eighty (180) day time lines, whichever is
applicable.
   E.   In acting upon a CATV system franchise application, the county may
assess fees that do not exceed the reasonable, actual administrative costs
incurred by the county in processing the CATV system franchise application,
including costs incurred by the county in managing the public rights of way,
public highways, and other public places that are directly attributable to
reviewing the CATV system franchise application, approving and administering
the CATV system franchise application, and inspecting the CATV system
operator's plans, specifications, maps, and construction. The fee assessed to
each CATV system franchise applicant shall be competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory.
   F.   Any franchise for a CATV system issued by the county shall contain
provisions which address at least the following issues:
      1.   Standards for construction in the right of way;
      2.   Construction schedule;
      3.   Permit requirements;
      4.   Uniform customer service and subscriber privacy standards as
established by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501;
      5.   Public, educational, and governmental programming and access
channels;
      6.   Term;
      7.   Payments based on gross revenues;
      8.   Indemnity and insurance;
      9.   Type of service offered;
      10.   Emergency alert system;
      11.   Backup power, system testing and monitoring;
      12.   Free services to public buildings;
      13.   Transfer of ownership and control of the grantee and transfer of
the franchise;
      14.   Procedures for violations, including suspension, liquidated
damages, revocation, and termination;
      15.   Security fund;
      16.   Acquisition or removal of system;
      17.   Access to books and records, including audit;
      18.   Nondiscrimination; and
      19.   Any such other terms, conditions, and provisions that the county
deems to be in the public interest.
   G.   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall contain an
acknowledgment and agreement by the grantee: 1) that all notices, meetings and
hearings have been properly given and held by the county with respect to the
approval of the franchise agreement and 2) not to challenge such approval on
the grounds of any procedural infirmity or of any denial of any procedural
right. The grantee shall also agree to hold harmless and indemnify the county,
its corporate authorities, and all county elected or appointed officials,
officers, employees, agents, representatives, engineers, and attorneys, from
any and all claims that may be asserted at any time against any of such parties
in connection with the county's review and approval of the franchise and the
franchise agreement and to pay all expenses, including legal fees and
administrative expenses, incurred by the county in defending itself with regard
to any and all such claims. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-33 - 10.5-40: RESERVED:
DIVISION 4. ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE OF FRANCHISE
10.5-41: CONTENTS OF FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
   A.   Applications for a franchise by an initial franchise applicant or by a
competitive franchise applicant shall be provided on a form issued by the
county under this article and shall include at a minimum:
      1.   The applicant's name;
      2.   The names of the applicant's officers and directors, or in the case
of a partnership, any general or limited partners;
      3.   The business address of the applicant;
      4.   The name and contact information of a designated contact for the
applicant;
      5.   A description of the geographic area that the applicant proposes to
serve, including a map or maps;
      6.   The PEG channel capacity and capital support proposed by the
applicant;
      7.   The term of the agreement proposed by the applicant;
      8.   Whether the applicant holds an existing authorization to access the
public rights of way in the subject franchise area as described in subsection
A5 of this section;
      9.   The amount of the franchise fee that the applicant offers to pay
based on the definition of "gross revenues";
      10.   The expected date that cable service will be initially offered in
the area identified in the proposed franchise area. In the event that an
applicant does not offer cable services within three (3) months after the
expected date, it shall amend its application and update the expected date
service will be offered and explain the delay in offering cable services;
      11.   Plans and specifications relating to all aspects of the applicant's
proposed system as are applicable to the building and zoning laws of the
county, including a layout of proposed construction on the maps required under
subsection A5 of this section and a tentative construction progression
schedule;
      12.   Projected financial information in a pro forma format covering a
period of no less than five (5) years for system revenue and operation, and
evidence of financial responsibility;
      13.   The application shall include the applicant's general standards
related to customer service required by division 8 of this article, which shall
include, but not be limited to, installation, disconnection, service and repair
obligations; appointment hours, employee ID requirements; customer service
telephone numbers and hours; procedures for billing, charges, deposits,
refunds, and credits; procedures for termination of service; notice of deletion
of programming service, changes related to transmission of programming or
changes or increases in rates; use and availability of parental control or
lockout devices; complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute
resolution, and a description of the rights and remedies available to consumers
if the holder does not materially meet their customer service standards; and
special services for customers with visual, hearing or mobility disabilities;
      14.   Additional information as may be required by applicable laws of the
county and the state of Illinois.
   B.   For the purposes of this article, the term "principal of any partner"
shall mean any limited partner owning directly or indirectly five percent (5%)
or more interest in the partnership; or if a partner is a corporation, each and
every director, officer, and shareholder owning directly or indirectly five
percent (5%) or more of the stock of such corporation. For purposes of this
division, the term "principal stockholder" shall mean each and every one of the
directors, officers, and shareholders owning directly or indirectly, five
percent (5%) or more of the stock of the grantee of a corporation. Except for
circumstances which have been disclosed by the grantee in writing to the county
prior to the adoption of this article, on accepting the franchise, the grantee
shall represent and warrant with respect to the grantee the following:
      1.   No general partner, any principal of any partner, or principal
stockholder has ever been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or is
presently under indictment charging such a crime.
      2.   No general partner, any principal of any partner, or principal
stockholder has ever been punished or censured in any jurisdiction by a court
or administrative agency for any violation or attempted violation of any law,
rule, or order relating to CATV system operation.
      3.   No general partner, any principal of any partner, or principal
stockholder has ever filed for or been principal or officer of any company,
business, partnership, or corporation which has filed for bankruptcy.
      4.   Representations made by the grantee in its documents submitted to
the county required in this article are true, correct, and complete in all
material respects.
      5.   The grantee is not a party to any pending or threatened litigation
in any court of law or proceeding by the securities and exchange commission,
the FCC, or any other governmental body in which any franchise held by the
grantee is being challenged.
      6.   The grantee has never held a franchise which has been revoked.
      7.   The grantee has never been held by a court of law to be in breach of
any contract in connection with a cable television franchise held by the
grantee.
      8.   The grantee is in compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations concerning the offer and sale of its respective securities.
      9.   The grantee shall disclose to the county in writing, any
circumstances which may render any of the representations made herein untrue in
any material respect. In the event of transfer or sale of the franchise, this
requirement shall be applicable to the successor grantee or its assigns.
      10.   The grantee and its principal officers shall submit and file a
statement of economic interest pursuant to the Illinois governmental ethics
act.
   C.   Administrative processes regarding the issuance of a franchise to an
initial franchise applicant or a competitive franchise applicant shall not
begin until the applicant has filed its application with the county.
   D.   The applicant may designate information that it submits in its
application or subsequent reports as confidential or proprietary, provided that
the applicant states the reasons the confidential designation is necessary. The
county shall provide adequate protection for such information. If the county,
or any other party seeks public disclosure of information designated as
confidential, the county shall consider the confidential designation in
accordance with the Illinois freedom of information act, and the burden of
proof to demonstrate that the designated information is confidential shall be
upon the applicant.
Designated information shall remain confidential pending the county's
determination of whether the information is entitled to confidential treatment.
Information designated as confidential under this section or determined to be
confidential upon review by the Kane County state's attorney's office shall
only be disclosed pursuant to a valid and enforceable subpoena or court order
or as required by the freedom of information act. Nothing herein shall delay
the application approval time frames set forth in this article. Information
regarding the location of cable services that have been or are being offered to
the public shall not be designated or treated as confidential.
   E.   In the event that the county is unable to grant or deny an application
within the time limits identified in subsection
10.5-32D of this chapter to a competitive franchise applicant, a competitive
franchise applicant will be authorized to offer service pursuant to an interim
franchise in accordance with the terms of its application submitted under
subsection A of this section. If, after the ninety (90) day or one hundred
eighty (180) day period for review and approval of the applicant's franchise
application, the county denies the application, the applicant must discontinue
operating under the interim franchise unless the county provides consent for
the interim franchise to continue for a limited period of time. The applicant
may seek judicial review of the denial in accordance with 47 USC section 555.
   F.   If, after expiration of the time limit specified in subsection
10.5-32D of this chapter, the county and an initial franchise applicant or a
competitive franchise applicant agree on the terms of a franchise, upon the
effective date of that franchise, the interim franchise shall end, and the new
franchise shall govern. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-42: REVIEW OF FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
   A.   Review of franchise applications shall be conducted pursuant to rules,
regulations, and procedures consistent with applicable state and federal law,
as adopted by the Kane County development department. The department shall:
      1.   Review the application and all information submitted therewith, as
to both completeness and competency thereof.
      2.   Request and evaluate supplemental documentation which may be
required as a function of the thorough review of the application and plans and
specifications submitted therewith.
      3.   Request and review all documentation necessary for verification of
the applicant's compliance with all appropriate laws and county codes and
regulations.
      4.   Give prompt public notice of said applications as requested pursuant
to the cable act and state statutes and may seek such public comment as
necessary to determine whether granting the application is in the public
interest.
      5.   Require any supporting documentation or studies to augment or
clarify information required under subsection
10.5-41A1 through A14 of this chapter, particularly with regard to CATV system
technology and performance, programming and services offered, customer service
and service provision policies, and financial responsibility. This section
should not be construed as a condition by the county on any particular
technology or technological format provided by an applicant.
      6.   Collect from the applicant a fee for all incidental expenses arising
from the review and evaluation of the application as such are described under
47 USC section 542.
   B.   After the department's review of the application and all further
materials under this section, the application shall be referred to the county
board no later than sixty (60) days from the date of submission of the
application, with an appropriate recommendation thereon to the county board for
action with this article. In no event shall an application be approved or
denied by the county board more than ninety (90) days after the date of
submission, or, in the event that the county and the applicant have agreed to
an extension of time for review, the county board shall either approve or deny
the application no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of
submission.
   C.   A decision shall be made by the county after the filing of a franchise
application based upon the evaluation. The county may grant one or more
franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008,
eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-43: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
   A.   The county may grant a franchise for all or any defined portion of the
county; provided, however, that where a second CATV franchise is granted, the
boundaries of the second CATV franchise shall be the same as those of an
incumbent.
   B.   An incumbent CATV grantee may, upon demonstrated good cause based upon
commercial impracticability, and provided in writing to the county board, may
decline to serve a portion of its franchise area. In order to serve those areas
of the county not served by the incumbent CATV grantee, the county may grant a
franchise to a different incumbent CATV grantee serving areas adjacent to the
unserved area in question, or it may also grant a franchise to a competitive
franchise applicant seeking to serve the unserved area.
   C.   The franchise area shall be the entire area defined in the franchise
agreement. The development department shall define a particular geographic area
in which an individual franchise is to be exercised. Such geographical area
shall be within a county unincorporated franchise area. In the event of an
annexation of all or part of a particular county unincorporated franchise area,
the provisions of 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1095, as amended, shall
apply.
   D.   A grant of franchise shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of
all members of the county board then holding office on a resolution authorizing
execution of the franchise agreement.
   E.   In the event that the county shall grant a nonexclusive, revocable
franchise to construct, operate, maintain, and reconstruct a CATV system within
the franchise area, said franchise shall constitute both a right and obligation
to provide the services of a CATV system as required by the provisions of this
article and the franchise agreement. Any franchise granted under the provisions
hereof shall be consistent with state and federal laws and regulations to the
extent constitutionally required, and shall be consistent with local ordinances
and regulations from time to time enacted and amended.
   F.   In the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement and the statutes of the county applicable to the granting
of a franchise, then the statutory requirements shall, without exception,
control interpretation, amplification, and clarification of statutory
requirements found in the franchise agreement and shall not be considered a
conflict.
   G.   No CATV system shall be allowed to occupy or use the rights of way
located in the franchise area other than in accordance with this article and a
franchise granted pursuant hereto. A CATV system shall, at all times, be in
compliance with the policies for use of the rights of way as such policies are
promulgated by the Kane County department of transportation (KDOT).
   H.   The requirements for the granting of franchises established by this
article may be modified from time to time to reflect changes in law,
regulation, or technology. Such requirements shall be applied to franchises
then in effect at the time such modified requirements are enacted pursuant to
police powers or as permitted by the franchise agreement. Any modified
requirements shall be applicable to any renewed franchise agreement. Any CATV
franchise shall be nonexclusive. The county specifically reserves the right to
grant, at any time, and in a manner consistent with then applicable law, such
additional franchises in the same geographical area granted to an incumbent
grantee in accordance with the provisions of 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-
1095(e)(1-5), or for any other geographical area within unincorporated Kane
County. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-44: TERM OF THE FRANCHISE:
   A.   The term of any new or renewed franchise and all rights, privileges,
obligations, and reservations pertaining thereto shall be as established in the
franchise agreement, unless terminated sooner as hereafter provided.
   B.   A franchise shall take effect and be in full effect from and after
acceptance by the grantee, and the same shall continue in full force and effect
for the term specified in the franchise agreement unless otherwise terminated
or revoked as allowed pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 08-252,
8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-45: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSION:
   A.   The county and grantee may hold performance evaluation sessions at any
time during the term of the franchise agreement. All such evaluation sessions
shall be open to the public. At such time that the county seeks to hold a
performance evaluation session, it shall notify the grantee in writing at least
sixty (60) days in advance of each of the specified performance evaluation
meetings. In the event that any such performance evaluation session is not
held, for any reason, as scheduled, it may be held at such a later date as the
county shall select, after thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee.
   B.   Special evaluation sessions may be held from time to time during the
term of the franchise for just cause, at the request of the county or the
grantee.
   C.   All evaluations shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation at least once ten (10) days prior to said
session. Where possible, the county shall notify subscribers of all evaluation
sessions, by announcements on local government access channels on the system
that serve the unincorporated areas of the county for five (5) consecutive days
immediately preceding each meeting.
   D.   Topics to be addressed may include issues related to the grantee's CATV
system performance and franchise requirements. A grantee may request a copy of
the agenda for any such session to the extent that said agenda is available to
the public. In addition, the county may provide to the grantee, in advance of
the publication of the agenda, a review of topics or a listing of questions in
order to solicit specific questions from the grantee and enable the grantee to
provide more complete answers than would have been possible without advance
prompting.
   E.   During a review and evaluation by the county, the grantee shall
cooperate with the county and shall provide such information and documents as
the county deems necessary to reasonably perform its review.
   F.   If at any time during its review, or within thirty (30) days of a
scheduled review, the county determines that reasonable evidence exists of
inadequate CATV system performance, it may require the grantee to perform tests
and analyses directed toward the suspected inadequacies in accordance with the
standards set forth in section
10.5-140 of this chapter.
   G.   If, at the conclusion of the performance evaluation, the county makes
specific, written findings of fact that show that the grantee has not fully
complied with the requirements of this chapter, or a franchise agreement, and
has failed to correct such violation after a written notice and opportunity to
cure has been provided, the county may assess penalties under this chapter for
such violation or violations of this chapter so identified by the performance
evaluation. Such penalties shall be assessed in accordance with the procedure
for ordinance violations established in section
10.5-123 of this chapter. In the event that a violation or violations of a
franchise agreement have been identified, any sanctions or liquidated damages
shall be assessed in accordance with the procedures for franchise violations as
described in the franchise agreement.
   H.   The county and the grantee may jointly discuss the cost of performance
sessions. The parties may split the cost of such performance sessions equally.
Costs may include, but are not limited to, legal fees, publication costs, costs
for financial review of the grantee's books and records, system technical
analysis, subscriber surveys, and other costs directly attributable to the
performance sessions. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-46: AREA OF JURISDICTION; NEW MUNICIPALITIES:
   A.   This article shall apply to all areas of the county which are
unincorporated at the time of enactment or which may become unincorporated
thereafter and to all unincorporated areas of any territory that hereafter may
be annexed to the county.
   B.   In the event that the residents of a specifically defined section of
the unincorporated area of the county determine through a valid referendum
election to incorporate a municipality under the laws of the state of Illinois,
this article shall continue to apply to such newly created municipality until
the governing body of the newly created municipality has adopted the following:
      1.   An ordinance providing the municipality the authority to franchise a
CATV system and grant authority to a cable provider or video provider for the
use of the municipality's rights of way, and
      2.   An ordinance governing the activities of cable providers and video
providers in the municipality to the extent that such ordinances take the place
of this article if enacted.
A single ordinance embodying the requirements of subsections B1 and B2 of this
section may comply with the conditions of this section. This article shall be
considered to remain in effect in the municipality until the effective date of
the ordinance or ordinances enacted by the governing body of the municipality.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-47: CONTINUING REGULATORY JURISDICTION:
The county shall have continuing regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over
any franchise agreement granted hereunder and may from time to time adopt such
reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the conduct of
the business contemplated hereunder, provided, however, that such rules and
regulations do not affect the material provisions of a franchise agreement
after such has been adopted. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-48: DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT JURISDICTION:
The county hereby confers and delegates the regulatory functions referred to in
section
10.5-47, "Continuing Regulatory Jurisdiction", of this chapter upon the Kane
County development department, or its successor. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff.
9-1-2008)
10.5-49: RESERVED:
DIVISION 5. AREAWIDE INTERCONNECTION OF CATV SYSTEM
10.5-50: INTERCONNECTION WITH OTHER FRANCHISES OR VIDEO PROVIDERS:
Subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the state of Illinois and
the FCC, in the event that two (2) different incumbent cable providers serve
contiguous franchise areas within the county, an incumbent cable provider and a
competitive cable provider serve the same franchise area, or a holder and an
incumbent cable provider serve the same territory of the county, then the
affected parties shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks,
if needed, for the purpose of providing public, education, and government
programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave
link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. The affected parties
shall provide interconnection of the public, education, and government channels
on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection.
If the affected parties cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection
agreement, the county may require the incumbent grantee to allow the other
grantee or the holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent grantee's
network at a technically feasible point on their networks. If no technically
feasible point for interconnection is available, the other grantee or the
holder and an incumbent grantee shall each make an interconnection available to
the public, education, and government channel originators at their local
origination points and shall provide the facilities necessary for the
interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the other
grantee or a holder unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. The
interconnection required by this section shall be completed within ninety (90)
days from the receipt of written notice from the county that the systems of
both grantees or the incumbent grantee and the holder must be interconnected.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-51: INTERCONNECTION TO NEW MUNICIPALITIES:
The requirements of section
10.5-50 of this chapter shall apply to the interconnection of public,
education, and government channels and emergency communications serving a newly
created municipality.
Such requirements shall be effective until such time as the municipality enters
into a franchise agreement with a cable provider and such agreement contains
conditions regarding interconnection that are not consistent with the
provisions of section
10.5-50 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-52 - 10.5-60: RESERVED:
DIVISION 6. FEES/SERVICE PROVIDER FEES
10.5-61: FRANCHISE FEES/SERVICE PROVIDER FEES:
As compensation for the use of the county's rights of way in its unincorporated
areas, and for the franchise granted herein, a grantee shall be liable for and
pay the franchise fee and a holder shall be liable and pay for the service
provider fee to the county. This chapter shall comply with a county ordinance,
or any applicable federal or state law requiring the adoption of this fee.
Other than an incumbent cable provider, a holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month that is at least thirty (30)
days after the grantee receives the ordinance codified herein. The county shall
notify the grantee by U.S. mail, return receipt requested, of the existence of
the ordinance codified herein, and a copy of the ordinance codified herein
shall be enclosed. The fee authorized by this division shall be five percent
(5%) of gross revenues or the same as the fee paid to the county by any
incumbent cable operator providing cable service. The payment of the franchise
fee or service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45)
days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered
paid on the date it is postmarked. Except as provided in this chapter, or a
franchise agreement, the county may not demand any additional fees or charges
from the grantee and may not demand the use of any other calculation method
other than allowed under this division. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-62: QUARTERLY AND ANNUAL REPORTS:
The grantee or a holder shall file with the county within forty five (45) days
after the expiration of each of the grantee's or holder's fiscal quarters, a
financial statement clearly showing in detail the gross revenues by category
received by the grantee or holder during the preceding quarter, and shall
simultaneously tender payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee or
service provider fee. The grantee shall also file, within one hundred twenty
(120) days following the conclusion of the grantee's fiscal year, a financial
report prepared and audited annually by a certified public accounting firm
acceptable to the county, clearly showing the yearly accumulated total gross
revenues and amount of franchise fees or service provider fees paid to the
county during the prior fiscal year. The statement of revenue shall be
accompanied by a statement from an authorized financial officer of the grantee
or the holder certifying that the statement is true, complete, and correct.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-63: AUDIT OF FRANCHISE FEE/SERVICE PROVIDER FEE:
   A.   Audit Procedures: Upon reasonable prior written notice, during normal
business hours, at grantee's or holder's principal business office in the
county, the county or its designee shall have the right to inspect and audit in
accordance with generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS), the grantee's
financial records used to calculate the grantee's franchise fees or a holder's
service provider fees; provided, however, that any such inspection or audit
shall take place within five (5) years from the date the county receives such
payment, after which period any such payment shall be considered final.
Information on individual subscribers necessary for the conducting of franchise
fee audits shall not be subject to the disclosure limitations of 47 USC section
551.
   B.   Audit Report: Upon completion of any such audit by the county or its
designee, the county shall provide to the grantee or the holder a final report
setting forth the county's findings in detail, including any and all
substantiating documentation. In the event of an alleged underpayment, the
grantee shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the report to provide
the county with a written response agreeing to or refuting the results of the
audit, including any substantiating documentation. Based on these reports and
responses, the parties shall agree upon a "finally settled amount".
   C.   Finally Settled Amount(s): For purposes of this section, the term
"finally settled amount(s)" shall mean the agreed upon underpayment or
overpayment, if any, to the county by the grantee or the holder as a result of
any such audit. If the parties cannot agree on a "finally settled amount",
either party may bring an action to have the disputed amount determined by a
court of law. The grantee, the holder, or the county shall pay any "finally
settled amount(s)" as a result of such audit within thirty (30) days from the
date the parties agree upon the "finally settled amount". Once the parties
agree upon a "finally settled amount" and the grantee, the holder, or the
county pays such amount, the parties shall have no further rights to audit or
challenge the payment for that period.
   D.   Time Of Availability; Expense Of Audit: The audit of books and records
must be available for audit within thirty (30) days of the grantee or the
holder receiving notice of the audit by the county. The county shall bear the
expense of its audit of the grantee's or the holder's books and records,
however if the amount due by grantee is greater than five percent (5%) then
grantee or holder shall pay the expense of the audit.
   E.   Payment: No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance
of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the county may have for
further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this section. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-64: LATE OR DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
Any franchise fee, service provider fee, or other fee which remains unpaid in
whole or in part after the date specified herein shall be delinquent. For any
franchise fee or service provider fee payments, owed by the grantee or the
holder, respectively which are not made on or before the due dates, the grantee
shall make such payments including interest at an annual rate of twelve percent
(12%) or two percent (2%) over prime lending rates as quoted by the "Wall
Street Journal" (currently in the "Money Rates" column) as of the last day of
each month, whichever is higher, computed daily from time due until paid.
If an additional amount is due as a result of the recomputation, the county
shall send grantee or holder a written notice and an opportunity to cure in
accordance with the provisions included in this chapter. Any overpayments made
by the grantee or holder to the county shall be returned or credited upon
discovery of such overpayment and shall be payable within thirty (30) days of
the receipt of written notice from the grantee or the holder. (Ord. 08-252, 8-
12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-65: STATEMENTS AND CERTIFICATIONS UPON TERMINATION:
Upon termination of a franchise at the expiration of its term provided thereof
or otherwise, the grantee shall continue to make the quarterly/yearly
statements and certifications and the annual reports as provided under this
article until such time as all payments due the county under this article have
been paid and accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the county. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-66: FEES FOR COUNTY RIGHTS OF WAY IN MUNICIPALITIES:
In those cases where the county rights of way are fully or partially located in
municipalities and such rights of way are not maintained by the municipality,
but are instead maintained by the county, the grantee or the holder shall pay a
franchise fee or a service provider fee based upon the following schedule:
   A.   Right of way is located one hundred percent (100%) within the
boundaries of a municipality: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per right of way
per year.
   B.   Right of way is located seventy five (75) to ninety nine percent (99%)
within the boundaries of a municipality: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
per right of way per year.
   C.   Right of way is located fifty (50) to seventy four percent (74%) within
the boundaries of a municipality: Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per right of
way per year.
   D.   Right of way is located twenty five (25) to forty nine percent (49%)
within the boundaries of a municipality: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
per right of way per year.
   E.   Right of way is located twenty four percent (24%) or less within the
boundaries of a municipality: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per right of way
per year.
The Kane County development department shall identify those rights of way that
are fully or partially located within the boundaries of a municipality, develop
a map of those rights of way that distinguishes those rights of way levels
based upon the percentages expressed in subsections A through E of this
section, and notify the grantee and the holder in writing no less than one
hundred twenty (120) days prior to the start of the grantee's or the holder's
next fiscal year of the county's policy of collection of franchise fees or
service provider fees within municipalities. Such notification shall include
the map of rights of way as stated herein. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-67 - 10.5-70: RESERVED:
DIVISION 7. PROGRAM SERVICES
10.5-71: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Standard Of Allocation: A grantee shall provide, at a minimum, cable
programming in the following broad categories: children, general entertainment,
family oriented, ethnic/minority, arts, culture, sports, weather, educational
and performing arts, news and information. Except as expressly permitted by
law, the grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over the content of
programming on the access channels.
   B.   Universal Subscriber Service: Unless otherwise required by applicable
law, or a franchise agreement, a grantee shall make cable service available
throughout unincorporated Kane County in accordance with section
10.5-142, "Line Extension", of this chapter. Where density and proximity
requirements provided in section
10.5-142 of this chapter have been met and applicable right of entry agreements
have been received, a grantee shall not exclude any multiple dwelling unit
facilities located in unincorporated Kane County from having the ability to
receive cable services, including, but not limited to, apartment buildings,
mobile home parks, condominium complexes (including duplexes, townhouses and
row houses), co-ops, and senior citizen congregate housing. Nothing prevents a
grantee from recouping from a property management firm the reasonable expenses
necessary to serve the facility. The county acknowledges that a grantee cannot
control the dissemination of particular cable services beyond the point of
demarcation for a multiple dwelling unit. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
grantee may introduce new or expanded cable services on a geographically phased
basis, where such services require a change in technology of the cable system.
   C.   Access Programming: Use of channel capacity for access programming
shall be provided on the most basic tier of service offered by grantee in
accordance with section 611 of the cable act (47 USC section 531), or on a
mutually agreed upon tier of service. A grantee shall designate one channel on
its CATV system for the use of the county for the purpose of providing
government access programming if the county requests a channel during the term
of a franchise agreement. In the event that the county ceases programming on
the government access channel in its entirety, the county shall recognize a
grantee's proprietary interest in and control of the channel, and shall, at the
written request of a grantee, relinquish the use of the channel to the grantee
in accordance with section 612 of the cable act (47 USC section 532(b)(4))
within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such notice by the county.
   D.   Educational Access: An "educational access channel" is a channel
designated for noncommercial use by schools. In the event a grantee is
cablecasting educational access programming to subscribers in unincorporated
Kane County, the grantee shall continue to cablecast such programming
throughout the term of a franchise agreement or until such programming ceases.
   E.   Public Access: A "public access channel" is a channel designated for
noncommercial use by the residents of Kane County or by not for profit
organizations serving the residents of Kane County. In the event a grantee is
cablecasting public access programming to subscribers in unincorporated Kane
County, the grantee shall continue to cablecast such programming throughout the
term of a franchise agreement or until such programming ceases.
   F.   Government Access: A "government access channel" is a channel
designated for noncommercial use by the grantor.
   G.   Subscriber Survey: The county may, at any time, conduct a subscriber
survey to determine the cable related needs and interests of county residents
regarding the programming offered. The results of the survey may not be binding
upon the grantee, but shall serve as a reflection of the county's needs and
interests. A copy of such survey shall be made available to the grantee. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-72 - 10.5-79: RESERVED:
DIVISION 8. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
10.5-80: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION:
This division and section are adopted pursuant to the cable and video customer
protection law 1  authorizing a county to enforce all of the customer service
and privacy protection standards of this law. The county shall enforce the
customer service and privacy protections with respect to complaints received
from residents as provided by the cable and video customer protection law.
Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes
effective after the effective date of this division and section shall be
incorporated into this division and chapter by reference and shall be
applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the boundaries
of the unincorporated area of Kane County. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by the county shall not be incorporated
into this division and section by reference without formal action by the county
board.
The county does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protections of the cable and video customer
protection law as set forth below with respect to complaints received from
residents within the unincorporated areas of Kane County. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/22-501.
10.5-81: APPLICABILITY TO ALL CABLE AND VIDEO PROVIDERS:
This section applies to all cable and video providers in the county, including,
but not limited to, those operating under a franchise as that term is used in
47 USC section 522(9), and those operating under authorization pursuant to
section 5-1095 of the Illinois statutes. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-82 - 10.5-109: RESERVED:
DIVISION 9. RATES
10.5-110: NONDISCRIMINATION:
The grantee shall not, in its rates, fees or other charges, or in the
availability of the services or facilities of its CATV system, or in any other
respect, discriminate against any persons or group of persons protected by any
applicable nondiscrimination laws. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-111 - 10.5-119: RESERVED:
DIVISION 10. REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE; MATERIAL BREACHES AND OTHER PENALTIES
10.5-120: REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   The franchise granted to a grantee pursuant to a franchise agreement is
subject to revocation in the event of any breach of a franchise agreement or
violation of this chapter. The following events, acts or omissions on the part
of the grantee are a substantial breach and may be considered cause for
revocation of the franchise and termination of a franchise agreement and
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   The grantee repeatedly violates any covenant, agreement, or
condition of its grant, and such violation shall not have been cured within
such reasonable period of time after written notice has been given by the
county authorities pursuant to the provisions of this article.
      2.   Material fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a franchise.
      3.   Repeated failure to pay taxes, franchise fees, costs or penalties
when and as due the county after failure to respond after repeated notice and
opportunity to cure.
      4.   Failure to provide or maintain in full force and effect required
insurance coverage or required security instruments, including a surety bond or
a letter of credit, or to provide required indemnification to the county as
required by this chapter or a franchise agreement.
      5.   Failure to restore systemwide service in the franchise area after
seventy two (72) consecutive hours provided the grantee's failure to restore
systemwide service is not caused by circumstances or events beyond the
grantee's reasonable control.
      6.   Transfer of the franchise without county approval pursuant to
division 17, "Assignment Or Transfer", of this article.
      7.   Any order is entered in any proceeding against the grantee decreeing
the dissolution or split up of the grantee and such order remains in effect for
sixty (60) days or more.
      8.   The grantee fails to establish, construct, or operate a CATV system
substantially in compliance with the terms of a franchise agreement, with due
consideration given to the nature and cause of any delays.
      9.   The grantee abandons the franchise. The grantee shall be deemed to
have abandoned its franchise if it wilfully refuses or is unable to operate the
cable system as granted by a franchise agreement, when there is no event beyond
the grantee's control that prevents the operation of the CATV system, and where
operation would not endanger the health or safety of the public or property.
      10.   Any other material breach of this article or any violation of an
applicable franchise agreement.
   B.   "Repeated failure" shall mean failure of a material breach or violation
that occurs more than twice a calendar year.
   C.   In the event of a breach of a franchise agreement or violation of this
chapter, the county shall give written notice to the grantee setting forth:
      1.   The nature of the breach or violation by the grantee;
      2.   A written demand that the grantee correct the breach or violation;
      3.   Notice that any failure to correct the breach or violation within
thirty (30) days, or as the parties may agree in a franchise agreement, or by
other mutual agreement, may be cause for revocation of the franchise.
   D.   The grantee shall respond within thirty (30) days in writing to the
county after receipt of a notice of breach or violation and shall provide any
and all information and documentation in support of its response. The grantee's
response may include a statement:
      1.   That it contests the county's notice of breach or violation and
requests an opportunity to be heard as provided herein.
      2.   That corrective action has been implemented by the grantee and the
breach or violation has been cured.
      3.   That corrective action has been implemented by the grantee and is
being actively and diligently pursued, accompanied with a written corrective
action plan that includes the estimated time period in which the breach or
violation will be cured.
      4.   If requested by the grantee, or if the county is not satisfied that
sufficient corrective action is being actively and diligently pursued by the
grantee to remedy the breach or violation, the county shall schedule a public
hearing to hear and determine the issues and to consider whether sufficient
cause exists to revoke the franchise. The county shall give the grantee not
less than fourteen (14) days' written notice specifying the county's intent to
consider the revocation of the grantee's franchise, and the date, time and
place of the public hearing to be held before the county board or a hearing
officer appointed by the county board.
If a hearing officer has been designated, the hearing officer shall hear the
relevant evidence, preserve a record and submit written findings and a
recommendation to the county board for the board to make the appropriate
determination.
      5.   If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the grantee shall
be entitled an opportunity to present to the county board a summary, orally or
in writing, of its position in response to the hearing officer's findings and
recommendations, but the grantee shall not have further opportunity to present
facts or evidence in support of its position. The county board shall receive
and consider the record and the hearing officer's findings and recommendations,
and shall consider the grantee's summary of its position, and shall determine
whether or not a breach or violation by the grantee has occurred, whether it
has been cured or a satisfactory corrective action plan has been submitted and
is being actively and diligently pursued and whether cause exists to initiate
revocation of the franchise or to impose some lesser sanction. The county board
may continue the hearing in order to allow the grantee to comply with any
lesser penalty imposed by the county board in order to correct any breaches or
violations.
In the event that the county board determines that cause exists to revoke the
franchise, it shall send notice of revocation within a reasonable time after
said determination.
      6.   If the county board determines that cause exists to revoke the
franchise, it may, by ordinance, declare a grantee's franchise to be terminated
and revoked consistent with applicable law, provided that the county may grant
a grantee an additional period of time to remedy the substantial breach or
violation before such ordinance becomes effective or grant a time period in
which the grantee may reinstate the revoked franchise.
      7.   No provision of this section shall be deemed to bar or otherwise
limit the right of the county to seek or obtain judicial relief to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement.
      8.   In the event that a franchise has been revoked by the county and the
county acquires ownership of the CATV system, or effects a transfer of
ownership of a grantee's CATV system to another person, any such acquisition or
transfer shall be governed under section 627 of the cable act (47 USC section
547) or its successor provision.
      9.   Failure by a grantee to comply with a timetable for corrective
action as required by the county board pursuant to the requirements of this
section shall be considered to be a breach of this chapter and may result in a
cause for revocation of the franchise.
      10.   The county board may, upon good cause shown, and upon its own
motion, impose any lesser sanction permitted by this chapter, a franchise
agreement, or as such lesser sanction is permitted at law or in equity.
      11.   If the county board adopts an ordinance under this section which
terminates the franchise, grantee shall have all further legal remedies
available to it by law. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-121: CONTINUITY OF OPERATIONS:
In the event of revocation of the franchise, expiration of the franchise, or
transfer of the franchise between the existing grantee and a successor grantee,
the existing grantee (prior to the revocation, transfer or expiration) shall
continue to provide cable service to its subscribers for a period of time until
a successor cable operator operates the cable system in the same manner and
with the same types of programming, customer service, and repair capabilities
and under the same terms and conditions as provided by a franchise agreement
and this chapter prior to the change in status of the franchise. (Ord. 08-252,
8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-122: REMOVAL:
   A.   Upon expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not
renewed, the cable operator is not using the cable for telecommunications
services as defined by the telecommunications act of 1996, and/or for
information services as defined by the telecommunications act of 1996, and if
neither the county nor an assignee purchases the CATV system, the grantee may
remove any underground cable from the rights of way which has been installed in
such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other openings of the
rights of way along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not
remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other
opening of the rights of way along the extension of cable to be removed, except
as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Any order by the county engineer to remove cable or conduit shall be
mailed to the grantee not later than thirty (30) days following the date of
expiration or termination of the franchise. A grantee shall file written notice
with the county engineer not later than thirty (30) days following the date of
expiration or termination of the franchise of its intention to remove cable
intended to be removed and a schedule for removal by location.
   C.   A grantee shall file written notice with the development department not
later than thirty (30) days following the date of expiration or termination of
the franchise of its intention to remove cable intended to be removed and a
schedule of removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be
subject to approval and regulation by the county engineer.
   D.   Removal shall be completed not less than twelve (12) months following
the date of expiration or termination of the franchise. Underground cable and
conduit in the rights of way which is not so removed shall be deemed abandoned
and title thereto shall be vested in the county.
   E.   Upon expiration or termination of a franchise, if the franchise is not
renewed or transferred to a new owner or to the county, the grantee, at its
sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the county, remove
from the rights of way all aboveground elements of the CATV system used
exclusively for video programming. The county shall not require the grantee to
remove any cabling, aboveground fixtures, or utility devices that provide
telecommunications services or information services as such are defined in the
telecommunications act of 1996; provided, however that a grantee shall
deactivate all portions of its plant and appurtenances that deliver cable
services if it is required to do so as a result of expiration or termination of
a franchise.
   F.   The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits,
licenses, authorizations, or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such
security as required by county division of transportation permit regulations
and access control regulations.
The grantee shall conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with
the aforementioned permit and access control regulations, and shall restore the
rights of way to the same condition they were in before the work of removal
commenced. The work of removal shall be completed not later than one year
following the date of expiration or termination of the franchise; otherwise,
the county may complete such work and charge the expense thereof against the
security and/or surety bond required to be provided by the grantee. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-123: MATERIAL VIOLATIONS:
   A.   In the event that the county determines that a grantee has violated any
material provision of the franchise, the county may make a written demand on
grantee that it remedy such violation and provide a period in which the
violation must be cured or remedied. If the violation is not cured or remedied,
or in the process of being cured or remedied to the satisfaction of the county,
within thirty (30) days following any such demand, the county shall determine
whether or not such violation by grantee was excusable or inexcusable as
follows:
      1.   The county shall conduct an administrative hearing to review the
alleged violation, and grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be
heard upon thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee of the time and the
place of the hearing; the allegations of franchise violations; and the remedy
sought by the county.
      2.   If, after notice is given and a hearing is held, the county
determines that such violation by grantee was excusable, the county shall
direct grantee to correct or remedy the same within such additional time, in
such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the county may reasonably
direct. If the county determines that such violation was inexcusable under a
like analysis, then it may impose a remedy in accordance with this chapter.
      3.   A hearing reviewing the administrative findings may be conducted by
a hearing officer appointed by the county board on the appeal of either the
county or the grantee. Such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to
practice under the laws of the state of Illinois.
      4.   The cost of either hearing, if any, shall be borne by the ultimate
nonprevailing party. The costs incurred by the parties for attorney fees,
expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party
incurring the costs.
      5.   In any hearing conducted by a hearing officer, the officer shall,
upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare a recommended decision which includes
findings of fact and conclusions.
The recommended decision shall be filed with the county clerk and mailed to the
parties not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the
hearing. Upon receipt of such a recommended decision, the county board may,
without holding a further hearing, either:
         a.   Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and
conclusions submitted by the hearing officer;
         b.   Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the
recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the recommended decision
as so revised;
         c.   Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of
fact, conclusions or decisions, and adopt the recommended decision as so
revised; or
         d.   Reject the recommended decision and order that a new hearing be
held.
      6.   In the event that the county board determines that a remedy is
warranted, the county may impose a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per day per occurrence from the date upon which the violation or
violations were to have been cured. All fines levied are to be paid within
thirty (30) days and if not, such nonpayment after thirty (30) days could
constitute an additional breach or cause for revocation of the franchise. In
the event that there is a violation of customer service standards under the
provisions of section 10.5-80 of this chapter, the county may impose penalties
up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material
breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each
occurrence of a material breach per customer. Monetary penalties pursuant to
this section shall apply on a competitively neutral basis to all providers of
cable service or video service within the county's jurisdiction and in no event
shall monetary penalties be assessed for a material breach if it is out of the
reasonable control of the cable or video providers or its affiliate. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-124: ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES:
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the county to
seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the
franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated
thereunder.
Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this chapter nor the
exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the
county to recover, monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are
otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the grantee, or judicial
enforcement of the grantee's obligations by means of specific performance,
injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy available at law or
in equity. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-125: NONENFORCEMENT:
Subject to the provisions of the act, a grantee shall not be relieved of any
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the franchise or any rule,
regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder by reason of any
failure of the county or its officers, agents or employees to enforce prompt
compliance nor shall such be considered a waiver thereof. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-126 - 10.5-129: RESERVED:
DIVISION 11. RECORDS
10.5-130: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, all records pertaining to
subscribers, cable system operations, and finances of the grantee shall be
maintained in a local office, or in a regional office in the Chicago
metropolitan area to facilitate county regulatory oversight. This section shall
not apply to records generated by a third party with respect to CATV system
programming or operations. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-131: INSPECTION RIGHTS:
Upon reasonable notice to the grantee, the county shall have the right at
reasonable times, during normal business hours, dates, and frequency, to
inspect all or any of the grantee's records, documents, and engineering records
and documents of any kind in connection with the grant of franchise, the CATV
system, the system facilities, and the grantee's undertakings with respect to
this article necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, or a franchise
agreement. The grantee shall fully cooperate in allowing the county to conduct
such inspections. Such records shall be held in an office of the grantee which
shall be located in the metropolitan Chicago area. If such records are not
located in the metropolitan Chicago area and travel to review such documents is
necessary, the county shall have the right to seek and obtain reimbursement for
all documented expenses reasonably incurred by the county or its designee for
inspection of the grantee's records. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-132: SNOW DROP AND TEMPORARY DROP REPORT:
Upon request, or as provided for in a franchise agreement, grantee will provide
a monthly report for all temporary subscriber drops installed, including "snow
drops", including location, the date of installation, and the date of burial.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-133: CORPORATE REPORT:
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, if a grantee is a
corporation, the grantee's annual corporate report shall be filed with the
county and shall contain a listing of all grantee's directors, officers and
major shareholders. Where a grantee or its parent is a publicly traded stock
company, the filing by the grantee with the franchising authority of a copy of
the annual report to stockholders shall constitute compliance with the
provisions of this section. Where a grantee or its parent is a publicly traded
stock company subject to security and exchange commission (SEC) reporting
requirements, the availability of its SEC filings on the internet shall
constitute compliance with this section. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-134: FILING OF GOVERNMENTAL DOCUMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, grantee shall maintain the
following records for the amount of time as specified hereunder:
   A.   FCC form 325 or its successor, where applicable, shall be maintained
for the life of the franchise.
   B.   Public files for the time specified as required by the FCC.
   C.   FCC form 395-A, or its successor form, or any supplemental forms
related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies.
   D.   All other reports required herein and not set forth in this section
shall be maintained for a period of no less than three (3) years.
In accordance with the ex parte rules of the FCC, the grantee shall file with
the Kane County development department a copy of all petitions, applications,
reports, or communications filed or submitted by the grantee with the FCC.
The grantee shall also file with the Kane County development department any
other petitions, applications, reports, and communications filed with the
securities and exchange commission, or any other federal or state governmental
entity having jurisdiction with respect to any matter specifically affecting
the CATV system, its facilities, or the grantee's undertakings with respect to
this section. Said document shall be filed with the Kane County development
department at the same time that they are filed with any other agency. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-135: FILING OF MAPS AND PLANS:
   A.   At least twenty one (21) days prior to construction or repair of any
part of the CATV system or system facilities upon rights of way, the grantee
shall file with the development department two (2) copies of all strand maps
which shall accurately show the nature of the proposed construction or
improvements. Within thirty (30) days of completion of such construction, the
grantee shall submit to the development department two (2) "as built" plans
which shall show cable installations, alterations, or improvements as
completed.
   B.   A grantee shall, during the term of a franchise agreement: 1) maintain
up to date "as built" plans, and 2) provide, in the event of a system upgrade,
plant extension or new development, copies of such plans to the development
department without charge.
   C.   Strand maps and "as built" maps shall be provided in a digital format
that are compatible with the county's geographic information system ("GIS").
   D.   A grantee shall acknowledge that the county's records are subject to
disclosure upon request pursuant to the Illinois freedom of information act, 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 et seq. Therefore, if in the grantee's opinion
such plans contain information which grantee considers to be trade secrets or
otherwise confidential, grantee shall specify in writing to the county at the
time such maps are provided, the information which is so regarded. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-136: FILING OF MONTHLY PROGRESS REPORTS:
During the initial construction of a CATV system, a grantee shall file with the
Kane County development department monthly reports on the first day of each
month until completion of construction is reached as defined in division 16 of
this article.
Thereafter, the grantee shall file with the county a semiannual report for the
period preceding January 1 and July 1 of each year until the second year after
the CATV system is fully constructed and serving subscribers, the areas of the
county in which construction is completed, the areas of the county in which
construction is under contract but is not completed, together with a projected
completion date for construction in such areas, and such other information as
may from time to time be requested, in writing, from the Kane County
development department.
Grantee shall provide to the Kane County development department two (2) copies
of any report required by this section. Should the grantee seek to maintain
confidentiality of the aforementioned reports under the Illinois freedom of
information act, the grantee shall follow the process set forth in subsection
10.5-135D of this chapter. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-137: FILING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The grantee shall from time to time, as promulgated, file with the Kane County
development department copies of all current rules, policies, terms, and
conditions established or imposed by the grantee in connection with the
establishment, construction, operation, and maintenance of the CATV system.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-138 - 10.5-139: RESERVED:
DIVISION 12. SYSTEM STANDARDS
10.5-140: FCC TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
   A.   The grantee shall construct and operate the cable system to comply with
the FCC technical standards contained in part 76, subpart K of the commission's
rules and regulations, as updated and amended from time to time (47 CFR part
76, subpart K).
   B.   The grantee shall perform all tests necessary to determine compliance
with the FCC technical standards. Tests shall include, at minimum, proof of
performance tests required by FCC rule section 76.601 (47 CFR part 76.601) and
such additional or repeat tests involving specified subscriber terminals as may
be required to determine compliance with the FCC technical standards. Within
fifteen (15) days following a written request, the county shall have the right
to review the testing records required to be maintained by the grantee pursuant
to the FCC's rules.
   C.   Where there exists recurring evidence, which in the judgment of the
county, casts doubt upon the reliability or quality of cable service, the
county shall have the right and authority to require the grantee to test,
analyze, and report on the performance of the cable system. The grantee shall
fully cooperate with the county in performing such testing and shall prepare
results, and a report, if requested, within thirty (30) days after notice. Such
report shall include the following information:
      1.   The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the special
tests;
      2.   The system component(s) tested;
      3.   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      4.   The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem is resolved;
and
      5.   Any other information pertinent to the tests and analyses, which may
be required.
   D.   The county may require that an independent experienced professional
observe tests. A person shall be deemed an independent experienced professional
if he or she is not an employee of the county and has participated in similar
tests for other local franchising authorities or cable operators in the state
of Illinois. The professional shall be given records of any required tests and
shall forward to the county and grantee such records with a report interpreting
the results of the tests. The grantee shall conform to the FCC proof of
performance standards (47 USC section 76 subpart K). In the event that the
county should require that tests conducted by the grantee be supervised or
readministered, the county shall be responsible for the costs of an independent
experienced professional. In the event that the results of the test show that
the grantee is at fault, or that the grantee's tests were not conducted in
accordance with FCC technical standards, the grantee shall be responsible for
assuming the costs of the professional and the tests performed.
   E.   The county may, at a minimum, require tests, analyses, and reports
covering specific subjects and characteristics based on complaints concerning
CATV system performance tendered by the public, or other evidence when and
under such circumstances, the county has reasonable grounds to believe that
complaints or other evidence require that tests be performed in order to assure
that the CATV system is operating in compliance with FCC technical standards.
   F.   Not later than ninety (90) days after any new or substantially rebuilt
portion of a CATV system is made available for service to subscribers,
technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate
full compliance with FCC technical standards.
Such tests shall be performed by, or under the supervision of an engineer with
proper training and experience. A copy of the report shall be submitted to the
cable administrator describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and
test procedure, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the
tests. In the event that the semiannual FCC proof of performance testing of the
CATV system occurs during the aforementioned ninety (90) day period, the proof
of performance test results from the new or substantially rebuilt portion of
the CATV system shall meet the requirements of this subsection. At the option
of the county, reasonable additional tests may be required, at the expense of
the grantee, if the grantee is unable to meet FCC technical standards based
upon the results of technical performance tests or proof of performance tests.
Any additional tests shall be conducted under the supervision of an engineer
with proper training and experience.
   G.   RF leakage shall be checked at locations for emergency radio services
in the longest feeder line or at trunk line extremities, not less than twice
per month, so as to prove no interference signal combinations are possible.
Radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or
communication radio sites to prove that no interference to air navigational
reception is possible. Upon request, reports of grantee's cumulative leakage
index (CLI) performance data shall be filed with the Kane County development
department.
   H.   At any time after commencement of service of subscribers, the county
may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests
complying with the procedures of 47 CFR section 76, subpart K, involving a
subscriber's terminal, at the grantee's expense to the extent that such tests
may be performed by the grantee's employees using existing facilities and
equipment; provided, however, that the county reserves the right to conduct its
own tests upon reasonable notice to a grantee and if noncompliance is found,
the expense thereof shall be borne by the grantee. The county shall endeavor to
arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or
inconvenience to the grantee or to the subscriber.
   I.   If the FCC should delete the requirements of 47 CFR section 76, subpart
K, the county hereby reserves the right to amend this article and any franchise
agreement to incorporate similar standards, and every franchise granted
pursuant to this article shall be subject to such reserved power whether or not
expressly so conditioned.
   J.   Pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1001(a), the foregoing
conditions of subsections A through I of this section shall apply to a holder
of a state issued authorization to provide video service in the unincorporated
areas of the county. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-141: OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The grantee shall at all times during the term of the agreement comply with the
following:
   A.   National electrical safety code of the Institute Of Electrical And
Electronic Engineers (IEEE) (latest edition).
   B.   National electrical code of the National Fire Protection Association
(latest edition).
   C.   Underwriters Laboratories (UL) code (latest edition).
   D.   Any electrical code adopted and provided to the grantee by the county
that may include standards at variance with the codes referenced in subsections
A, B, and C of this section.
   E.   Tower standards:
      1.   EIA-RS-222A.
      2.   Federal aviation administration ("FAA") tower lighting standards.
   F.   The county reserves the right to review a grantee's construction plans
prior to the commencement of construction. The county shall not, however, be
required to make inspections or approve the grantee's system and plans, and
specifically disclaims such obligation. A grantee shall be solely responsible
for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with such laws and
regulations and the safety of its system as installed.
   G.   A grantee shall design, construct, operate and maintain the CATV system
so that signals carried are delivered to subscribers without material
degradation in quality.
   H.   In no event shall the CATV system endanger or interfere with the safety
of persons or property within the county. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-142: LINE EXTENSION:
   A.   Whenever the density of dwelling units in newly established
subdivisions of the county equals or exceeds twenty (20) dwelling units per
cable route mile, service will be provided at the same rates as other areas of
the county, within three (3) months, weather permitting, provided that grantee
will not be required to service a new subdivision until twenty five percent
(25%) of the homes in such subdivision, or in any platted unit of the
subdivision have been built.
   B.   A grantee shall extend and make service available to any potential
subscriber within the limits of the franchise area of the county in accordance
with the timetable and geographic specifications as designed in a franchise
agreement.
   C.   A grantee shall extend and make cable service available to any resident
not meeting the standard of this section, and requesting connection at the
standard connection charge, if the connection to the resident would require no
more than a standard one hundred twenty five foot (125') drop line.
   D.   The grantee may elect to provide service to areas not meeting the above
density and distance standards. The grantee may impose an additional reasonable
charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service
installation requiring a drop or line extension in excess of the above
standards.
   E.   Grantee will make every effort to offer services to the commercial
establishments within the franchise area, provided that the installation is
economically reasonable. The commercial establishment shall be responsible for
the total cost of installation as determined by the grantee.
   F.   Upon deannexation by a municipality located within the county of any
territory contiguous to unincorporated Kane County and upon assumption of
control of such territory by the county where no cable service exists, the
grantee shall, at the request of the county in this agreement, provide service
to said areas where there exists an average of twenty (20) occupied residential
dwelling units per cable mile, whether located in single- or multi-family
buildings. In the event that a municipality annexes territory of unincorporated
Kane County, the county shall retain franchise fees and video service provider
fees from subscribers located in that territory for a period of time as
prescribed by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1095(a). (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-143: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Construction, installation, and maintenance of a CATV system or a
system constructed under a state issued authorization to provide video service
shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the county following
accepted construction practices and procedures.
   B.   All cables and wires shall be installed where possible, parallel with
electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be
arranged in parallel and bundled together with proper lashing or conduit with
due respect for engineering and safety considerations.
   C.   A grantee shall identify its CATV system, and a holder shall identify
its video service system and drops by either color coding, stamping, engraving,
or tagging so as to distinguish its cables from those of other utilities and
telecommunications providers serving the franchise area or the area within the
unincorporated areas of the county authorized by the ICC to be served by a
holder.
   D.   All contractors and subcontractors of a grantee or a holder must be
properly licensed under all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations. The grantee or holder shall be solely and completely responsible
for all acts or omissions of any and all of the grantee's or holder's
contractors or subcontractors in the construction, installation, maintenance or
operation of the grantee's cable system, or the holder's video service system.
   E.   A grantee or a holder shall follow the procedures set forth from time
to time by the Kane County division of transportation permit regulations and
access control regulations for the siting and construction of any CATV system
or video service system structure on county property.
   F.   A grantee shall provide a construction schedule, timetable, and plans
calculated and drawn upon the best of its estimation to the cable administrator
prior to rebuilding, reconstruction, or upgrading of the CATV system or the
video service system. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-144: ANTENNA STRUCTURES:
Any antenna structure used in the CATV system or video service system shall
comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structures required
by the U.S. department of transportation or the federal aviation
administration. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-145: AERIAL SYSTEM PLANT:
   A.   Aerial cable shall be located at the height minimums established by the
national electrical code (IEEE, 2005 edition), currently fifteen and one-half
feet (15'6") over a public roadway or driveway, and ten feet (10'0") over a
pedestrian area, such as a sidewalk, bicycle path, or trail.
   B.   Construction and placement of an aerial subscriber drop or service line
drop connected to a dwelling unit shall be at the direction of the subscriber
or the county. Grantee or holder shall be responsible for securing the written
authorization for the method employed and shall keep said authorization on file
until the expiration of its franchise agreement or state issued authorization.
   C.   A subscriber shall have the option to have the grantee or holder
connect a standard drop to the dwelling unit by either:
      1.   Connection of the aerial drop to the dwelling unit at a minimum of
twelve feet (12') above the ground level; or
      2.   Attachment of the drop to the side of the utility pole and buried
from the base of the utility pole to the dwelling unit at a depth of no less
than six inches (6"). (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-146: UNDERGROUND PLANT:
   A.   In all sections of the franchise area or the unincorporated areas of
the county authorized to be served by a holder where the cables, wires, or
other like facilities are placed underground, the grantee or holder shall place
its cables, wires, or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent
that existing technology reasonably permits the grantee or holder to do so.
Utility facilities mounted aboveground, including, but not limited to,
pedestals, power supply boxes, copper fiber cross circuit boxes, nodes, and
amplifier boxes may be placed aboveground if existing technology reasonably
requires them to be placed aboveground. With regard to any aboveground utility
facility located in a county right of way, a grantee or holder shall comply
with the requirements of the Kane County division of transportation permit
regulations and access control regulations. With regard to any aboveground
utility facility located on private property, a grantee or holder shall comply
with the requirements of the Kane County zoning ordinance.
   B.   Burial standards shall be as follows:
      1.   Longitudinal lines within a county right of way shall be buried in
accordance with the Kane County division of transportation permit regulations
and access control regulations.
Trunk lines buried on private property shall be buried no less than forty two
inches (42") deep.
      2.   All underground feeder cable plant on private property shall be
buried no less than twelve inches (12") nor more than eighteen inches (18")
deep.
      3.   All underground drops on private property shall be buried six inches
(6") to twelve inches (12") deep.
      4.   All underground plant located under driveways shall be buried thirty
six inches (36") below the surface of the driveway.
   C.   To the extent possible, amplifier boxes, mounted pedestals, node boxes,
fiber copper cross circuit boxes, copper circuit boxes, and power supply boxes
shall be located not more than four feet (4') from the aboveground facilities
of any other existing utility located in an easement or right of way.
   D.   In areas of new construction or property development where utilities
are to be placed underground, the county shall require the developer or
property owner to give the grantee or holder reasonable notice of such
construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching
will be available for the grantee's or holder's installation of conduit,
pedestals, and/or vaults and laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense
or holder's expense. The grantee or holder shall provide specifications as
needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring
service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner;
except that if the grantee or holder fails to install its conduit, pedestals
and/or vaults and laterals within ten (10) working days of the date the
trenches are available, as designated in the notice given by the property owner
or developer to the grantee or holder, then the cost shall be borne by the
grantee or holder if the trenches are closed after the ten (10) day period.
   E.   A grantee or holder shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any
underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the rights of way along
the extension thereof or which is otherwise ordered to be removed by the Kane
County department of transportation based upon a determination, in the
discretion of the county engineer, that removal is required in order to
eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the
rights of way for public purposes. The schedule and timing of removal shall be
subject to approval and regulation by the county engineer.
   F.   With respect to any cables, wires and other like facilities constructed
and installed by a grantee or holder aboveground, the grantee or holder shall,
at its sole expense, reconstruct and reinstall such cables, wires or other
facilities underground pursuant to any project under which the cables, wires or
other like facilities of all like utilities are placed underground within an
area. Tap and feeder connections installed underground shall be protected by a
weather resistant cover that is mounted flush with the surrounding ground or
pavement.
   G.   At the request of any property owner, a grantee or holder shall place
the particular CATV system or video service system facilities underground,
provided that all reasonable costs exceeding aboveground installation shall be
borne by the property owner making the request.
   H.   All underground work required by the county in concert with other
utilities shall be done in a coordinated fashion. Grantee or holder shall
participate in any joint conferences for each project to bring all utilities
including grantee's or holder's plant, from an aerial to an underground status.
   I.   Grantee or holder shall share both map prints and locating information
to help minimize any disturbance to either grantee's, holder's and/or another
entity's underground distribution network. A grantee or holder shall be
responsible for contacting joint utility locating information for excavators
(JULIE) for all of its construction and for responding in a timely manner to
requests from JULIE to locate its cables. Neither the county nor residents
shall be liable for damage to grantee's or holder's unmarked or erroneously
marked plant. All work shall be done in accordance with the JULIE
specifications and a record of all locate and dig requests shall be maintained
by grantee at its principal offices. All underground construction shall be done
by directional boring, except where safety or other conditions preclude it or
render it unnecessary. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-147: STANDBY POWER:
Each CATV system or video service system shall include the equipment capable of
providing standby and backup powering. Standby power equipment shall provide
standby powering for a minimum of three (3) hours for transportation and trunk
amplifiers, and forty eight (48) hours at the headend. The system shall
incorporate safeguards necessary to prevent injury to linemen resulting from a
standby generator powering a "dead" utility line. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff.
9-1-2008)
10.5-148: INTERFERENCE WITH NONSUBSCRIBERS:
A grantee's CATV system or a holder's video service system shall be operated in
such a manner as to avoid causing interference with reception of over the air
signals by nonsubscribers. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-149: TWENTY FOUR HOUR OPERATION:
Any CATV system or video service system shall be designed, constructed,
operated, and maintained for twenty four (24) hours a day continuous operation,
except during those times where all or part of the system is subjected to
repair, maintenance, construction or reconstruction. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008,
eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-150: WORK FORCE:
A grantee or a holder shall employ a work force capable of providing
maintenance and repair of the CATV system or video service system having proper
vehicles and equipment necessary to adequately maintain and operate the CATV
system or video service system. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-151: STATUS MONITORING:
Each CATV system or video service system shall have the capacity to identify
system faults through electronic status monitoring equipment installed at
locations consistent with a grantee's or holder's engineering practices. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-152: SIGNAL INTERRUPTIONS AND ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
A grantee or holder shall not interrupt all or any part of the services of its
system in the absence of absolute need or emergency circumstances, except for
routine maintenance of the system. Routine maintenance involving the use of
power generation equipment, such as gas powered generators, shall be conducted
during the daylight hours. Routine maintenance in subscriber easements by a
grantee, a holder or its subcontractors is limited to daylight hours. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-153 - 10.5-159:   RESERVED:
DIVISION 13. LOCATION OF STRUCTURES, USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY AND POLE ATTACHMENTS
10.5-160: LOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
All transmission and distribution structures, line and equipment erected by a
grantee within the franchise area shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of rights of way and other public ways and
places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin county rights of way. (Ord. 08-252,
8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-161: RESTORATION AND REPLACEMENT:
In case of any disturbance of any portion of a county right of way, a grantee
shall follow the procedures of the utility permit policy as set forth in the
Kane County division of transportation permit regulations and access control
regulations. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-162: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES:
If at any time during the period of a franchise, the Kane County division of
transportation, any township highway department, or the Illinois department of
transportation shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any right
of way, a grantee shall follow the procedures of the utility permit policy as
set forth in the Kane County division of transportation permit regulations and
access control regulations. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-163: COMPLIANCE WITH HIGHWAY AUTHORITY:
Any poles or other fixtures placed in a county right of way shall be placed in
such manner as to comply with Kane County development department regulations
and Kane County division of transportation permit regulations and access
control regulations, or the standards and regulations of any other lawful
highway authority. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-164: TEMPORARY REMOVAL:
A grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit
issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving
of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be
given not less than seventy two (72) hours' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-165: AUTHORITY TO MAINTAIN TREES AND VEGETATION:
A grantee shall obtain permission from the Kane County division of
transportation to trim or cut trees upon and overhanging county rights of way.
Where such right of way is located in a historic district or on a thoroughfare
designated by the county as a "rustic road", permission from the development
department shall be required. At the option of the county, tree trimming or
cutting may be done by the county or under county supervision and direction at
a grantee's expense. In any case, a grantee shall make every effort to preserve
shrubs and trees and shall be responsible for and indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the county and its officers, agents, and employees from and against
any and all damages arising out of or resulting from the removal, trimming,
mutilation, or injury to any trees or shrubs proximately caused by the grantee,
or its officers, agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. A grantee
shall follow the requirements set forth for tree cutting in the Kane County
division of transportation permit regulations and access control regulations.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-166: OBLIGATION TO AVOID DAMAGING PERSONAL PROPERTY:
A grantee shall make every effort to avoid damaging underground structures or
systems on any county right of way, public easement, or private easement during
construction, maintenance, repair, or removal of a CATV system. A grantee shall
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the county and its officers, agents, and
employees from any and all damages arising out of or resulting from any of the
grantee's activities which damage or interfere with underground structures or
systems. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-167: POLES AND POLE ATTACHMENTS:
   A.   No poles or other wire holding structures that are to be located in a
right of way owned by the county shall be erected without approval of the Kane
County division of transportation and shall be erected in accordance with the
division's permit regulations and access control regulations.
Removal of poles from a county right of way shall be at the expense of a
grantee in the event that the division of transportation determines that
removal of the pole is necessary for reasons of public safety or convenience.
   B.   The division of transportation shall have the right to require a
grantee to locate aerial plant on poles or other wire holding structures
currently in existence and where such poles serve the county if the division of
transportation finds that use by a grantee of such poles would be necessary for
reasons of public safety or convenience, and the terms for use of the poles or
other wire holding structures are just and reasonable in accordance with
applicable federal and state law.
   C.   Poles owned by a grantee shall not infringe on any other properly
existing use within a county right of way.
   D.   The county will not be responsible or have any duty to obtain consent,
licenses, permission or easements where the county has no jurisdiction or
authority to grant such consent, licenses, permissions or easements. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-168: CATV SYSTEM RELOCATION:
   A.   The grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground
cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the rights of way along the
extension thereof or which is otherwise ordered to be removed by the county
engineer based upon a determination, at the discretion of the county engineer
that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition
or promote further utilization of the rights of way for public purposes.
   B.   If the grades or lines of any county right of way are lawfully changed
at any time during a franchise agreement term, then a grantee shall, upon
reasonable advance written notice from the county, protect or promptly alter or
relocate the CATV system, or any part thereof, at the grantee's expense, so as
to conform with any such new grades or lines. In the event utilities using a
public right of way are required to relocate and compensation is paid by the
county to the users of such public right of way, all grantees shall be treated
equally with respect to such compensation. At such time that a grantee must
relocate its CATV system plant due to road or highway improvement, it shall
relocate its plant in accordance with timetables established by the county and
shall relocate its lines in a manner as to avoid interference with road
improvements and other utilities at no cost to the county. Relocations may be
subject to the provisions of 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-113. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-169: APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   A grantee shall not, within the franchise area, run any line, make any
attachment, nor shall any construction of any kind be commenced without the
necessary permits and the prior approval of the Kane County division of
transportation and the county engineer.
   B.   Action on requests for permits shall be taken on any request for
approval of a permit in accordance with the time frames and procedures
established by the Kane County division of transportation permit manual. A
grantee shall be able to make emergency repairs as needed. The county shall
have and maintain the right to inspect the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the CATV system by a grantee to ensure the proper installation
thereof under the terms of this article. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-170: SECURITY BOND:
   A.   Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise agreement, upon grant of a
franchise the grantee shall file and shall maintain at all times thereafter in
full force and effect, an acceptable surety bond issued by a surety licensed to
do business in the state of Illinois, in the amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) during periods of construction or major reconstruction
and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) at all other times.
   B.   The bond may be drawn upon by the county or the surety bond called upon
after affording the grantee due process, as outlined in section 10.5-123 of
this chapter, with respect to alleged violations, for purposes including, but
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Failure of a grantee to pay the county undisputed sums due under the
terms of the agreement;
      2.   Reimbursement of costs borne by the county to correct violations of
this chapter or a franchise agreement not corrected by the grantee;
      3.   Monetary remedies of undisputed damages assessed against a grantee
due to default or breach of requirements of this chapter or a franchise
agreement;
      4.   Failure to relocate or remove CATV system plant or appurtenances in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, or a franchise
agreement, or failure to reimburse the county for such removal.
   C.   If the grantee fails within fifteen (15) days after the notice of
failure to pay on the due date, to pay the Kane County treasurer any franchise
fees, assessment, or taxes lawfully due that the county determines can be
remedied by a call upon the surety bond, the county may thereafter call upon
the surety for payment under the bond. Upon such withdrawal, the county shall
notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof, as estimated by the county
based upon prior payments by the surety.
   D.   If, during the term of the agreement, the grantee fails to renew the
surety bond, the county may, after providing grantee thirty (30) days' notice
of intent to do so, call upon the surety not more than five (5) days before
such expiration date.
   E.   The county shall give the grantee written notice of any payment from
the surety under this section, specifying the amount and the specific reason
for such payment. Within thirty (30) days following receipt by the grantee of
written notice from the county that any amount has been paid out by the surety,
the grantee shall restore such surety bond to the amount required under the
agreement. Failure by the grantee to restore the surety bond shall be
considered a material violation of this chapter.
   F.   The rights reserved by the county with respect to the surety bond are
in addition to all other rights of the county whether reserved by this chapter
or authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a
right with respect to surety bond shall constitute a waiver of any other right
the county may have. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-171 - 10.5-179:   RESERVED:
DIVISION 14. SERVICES TO COUNTY FACILITIES; ACCESS PROGRAMMING
10.5-180: SERVICE TO COUNTY BUILDINGS:
A grantee and a holder shall provide service to county buildings pursuant to
the requirements of section
10.5-80 of this chapter, which are also found in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/22-501(f)(1-2). (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-181: GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL:
   A.   Upon request of the county, each grantee or holder shall provide
channel capacity for access programming on the most basic cable or video
service tier offered by grantee or holder in accordance with section 611 of the
cable act (47 USC section 531), and the cable and video competition act of 2007
1 , or on a mutually agreed upon tier of service. The grantee shall designate
one channel on its CATV system and a holder shall designate one channel for the
use of the county for the purpose of providing government access programming.
This channel shall be made available to unincorporated as well as incorporated
county residents. In the event that the county ceases programming on the
government access channel in its entirety, the county shall recognize the
grantee's or the holder's desire to place commercial programming on the
channel, and shall, at the written request of the grantee or the holder,
relinquish the use of the channel to the grantee or the holder in accordance
with section 612 of the cable act (47 USC section 532(b)(4)) within sixty (60)
calendar days of the receipt of such notice by the county.
   B.   In the event that grantee or the holder is required to relocate the
numeric position of an access channel or channels, the grantee shall give the
county advance reasonable notice with regard to the timing and logistics of the
relocation. A grantee or holder and the cable administrator shall meet to
determine the best and most practicable methods of notifying customers of the
pending channel relocation. Changing of an access channel numeric location
shall not occur without the approval of the county. The grantee or holder shall
not exercise editorial control over any governmental use of channel capacity
and is not responsible for the program content. The county shall be responsible
for developing, implementing, and enforcing policies for the use of its
government access channel.
   C.   In lieu of establishing its own government access channel, the county
reserves the right to develop government access programming in conjunction with
municipalities located in Kane County for cablecasting over municipal
government access channels. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/21-601.
10.5-182: PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL:
   A.   Upon request of the county, each grantee or holder shall provide
channel capacity for public access programming on the most basic cable or video
service tier offered by grantee or holder in accordance with section 611 of the
cable act (47 USC section 531), or on a mutually agreed upon tier of service.
The grantee or holder shall designate one channel on its CATV system or video
service system for the use of the county for the purpose of providing public
access programming. This channel shall be made available to unincorporated as
well as incorporated county residents.
   B.   A public access channel shall be made available to the residents of the
county or to not for profit organizations that serve the residents of the
county, on a first come, first served, nondiscriminatory basis, consistent with
the goal of maximum availability of access. Where a grantee or a holder
operates a studio for public access programming, a grantee or holder may not
charge for the use of the channel itself by an individual or organization,
however, a grantee or holder may, at its discretion, impose reasonable charges
for training, materials, or the production time of its professional staff.
   C.   The public access channel shall not be used for commercial purposes in
accordance with 47 USC section 611, nor shall the channel be used for the
promotion of political candidates, lottery information, and obscene, indecent,
or other programming that contains unprotected speech under federal law.
   D.   In the event that the operator of a public access studio is an entity
other than the county, the county shall have the right to review the operator's
access rules and requirements upon reasonable written notice to the operator.
Where the county determines that a change in the access rules is necessary, the
county shall notify the operator in writing and informally meet and confer with
the operator to implement the proposed rule change.
   E.   The county may provide for the creation of a public access corporation
as a condition of a franchise agreement, and for funding the same in the
franchise agreement. A holder shall be subject to providing equivalent funding
for the public access channel in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
video service provider fee ordinance that includes provisions for access
channel funding in accordance with 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d).
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-183: EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL:
   A.   Upon request of the county, a grantee or a holder shall provide channel
capacity for educational access programming on the most basic cable or video
service tier offered by grantee in accordance with section 611 of the cable act
(47 USC section 531), or on a mutually agreed upon tier of service. The grantee
or holder shall designate one channel on its CATV system or video service
system for the purpose of providing educational access programming.
This channel shall be made available to unincorporated as well as incorporated
county residents.
   B.   The educational access channel shall be made available for the use of
schools, including colleges or universities at no charge. A school, college, or
university operating the educational access channel shall adopt operating rules
for the educational access channel to be filed with the county prior to
activation of the channel.
   C.   The educational access channel shall not be used for commercial
purposes in accordance with 47 USC section 611, provided, however, that a
school may impose a charge for telecourses carried on the educational access
channel that are directly related to the educational mission of the school.
Such charges shall be used to cover the cost of providing the telecourse and
shall not be used for profitmaking purposes.
   D.   An educational access channel shall not be used for the promotion of
political candidates, lottery information, and obscene, indecent, or other
programming that contains unprotected speech under federal law. (Ord. 08-252,
8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-184: EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM:
A grantee shall comply with all applicable requirements of the federal
communications commission involving the distribution and notification of
federal, state, and local emergency messages over the emergency alert system
applicable to cable operators. The grantee will provide the county with
sufficient information regarding how to submit, via telephone or web listing, a
local emergency alert for distribution over its cable network. To the extent
that the county requires incumbent cable operators to provide emergency alert
system messages or services in excess of the requirements of this section, the
grantee shall comply with any such additional requirements within the
jurisdiction of the county.
The grantee may provide a local emergency alert to an area larger than the
boundaries of the unincorporated areas of the county. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008,
eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-185 - 10.5-189: RESERVED:
DIVISION 15. GOVERNMENTAL APPROVALS, LICENSES AND PERMITS
10.5-190: APPLICATION AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
A grantee shall apply for all necessary federal, state, and county governmental
permits, licenses, and other required authorizations with the establishment,
construction, operation, and maintenance of the CATV system and the system
facilities and shall register the franchise with the FCC within thirty (30)
days of the effective date of the franchise. No system shall be constructed,
nor any system construction commenced unless all such permits, licenses, and
authorizations have been obtained. A franchise agreement grant shall not
include a grant of any county permit, license or authorization, other than the
authority granted by the franchise itself. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-191 - 10.5-199: RESERVED:
DIVISION 16. CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE
10.5-200: EXTENSION OF SERVICES:
   A.   A grantee that is a cable operator shall be required to offer the
services of a CATV system to potential subscribers within the franchise area
within twenty four (24) months of the effective date of the franchise agreement
or as may be otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.
   B.   Failure to complete construction within the time frames set forth
herein shall constitute a breach of the terms of any franchise agreement.
However, in locations in which the density of residential dwelling units,
adverse terrain, or other factors render construction of the system and the
offering of services impracticable or technically unfeasible, or create an
undue economic burden, the Kane County development department may, upon the
written request of the grantee, either waive the construction of the system
into such areas, or allow the construction and offer of service on such special
terms, conditions, and provisions as are reasonable and fair to the county, the
grantee, and the potential subscribers in such areas.
   C.   Upon completion of the construction and provision of services required
within the time frames of completion set forth in this section or a franchise
agreement, a grantee shall file with the Kane County development department a
notice of completion as provided in subsection 10.5-201D of this chapter. (Ord.
08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-201: COMPLETION:
   A.   A final order of completion shall be issued by the Kane County
development department when:
      1.   Construction of the system has been completed within the franchise
area in compliance with construction standards and the design and other
requirements of this article.
      2.   Cable service has been made available to one hundred percent (100%)
of the dwelling units within the franchise area unless a waiver has been
approved or unless the grantee is a video service provider following the build-
out requirements of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1101.
      3.   Any and all channels, equipment, and other programming facilities,
services, resources or benefits, including financial support, for access
programming purposes have been completed and made available, except for those
items or funds that are to be provided at a later date.
      4.   Complete and accurate "as built" plans pursuant to the provisions of
division 11 of this article have been filed or made available by the grantee to
the county and applicable townships; and
      5.   A notice of completion has been filed by the grantee as provided
herein.
   B.   For purposes of this article, cable service shall be deemed to be made
available when it is offered on a nondiscriminatory basis for immediate usage
to the owner, or representative of the owner empowered to consent to use, of
the property of each home within the franchise area.
   C.   For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
article and of determining completion under this section, the total number of
dwelling units within each franchise area shall be deemed to be the actual
number of units available for occupancy as of a date forty five (45) calendar
days in advance of the date of filing by the grantee of the notice of
completion; provided that the grantee files the notice of completion with a
good faith belief that it has in fact achieved completion as of the date of
filing.
   D.   A grantee who asserts completion shall file a written notification with
the Kane County development department. The notice of completion shall state
the total number of homes available for occupancy within the franchise area
forty five (45) calendar days in advance of the filing of the notice, the total
number of dwelling units to which cable service has been made available in the
franchise area of the date of filing and shall otherwise certify completion as
defined by subsection A of this section. Neither the notice of completion nor
the statements, assertions, or certifications contained therein shall be deemed
to be binding upon the county.
   E.   During the period of the construction of the system within the sixty
(60) day period following filing of the notice of completion, all elements and
components thereof, and all equipment and studio facilities required by the
franchise agreement shall be subject to inspection by county employees or
authorized agents or representatives thereof, for the purpose of determining
whether the system and related facilities comply with the franchise agreement
and the provisions of this article. The grantee shall authorize such inspection
and provide such information and cooperation as is required in order to permit
an adequate investigation to determine the existence or nonexistence of such
compliance.
   F.   The grantee shall offer to install, make operational, and render cable
services to all homes within the franchise area in accordance with this article
and the franchise agreement, within the time period specified in the franchise
agreement. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-202 - 10.5-209: RESERVED:
DIVISION 17. ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER
10.5-210: COUNTY BOARD APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the CATV system
shall not be sold, assigned, leased, sublet, sold or leased back, hypothecated
or mortgaged, either in whole or in part, disposed of, transferred in trust,
pledged in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, sale and leaseback
consolidation or otherwise, or by forced or involuntary sale, nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to
or vest in any party without the prior written consent of the county expressed
by ordinance and then on such conditions as therein may be prescribed. Any
sale, transfer, or assignment not made according to the procedures set forth in
this chapter shall render the franchise agreement void.
The sale, transfer, or assignment in bulk of the major part of the tangible
assets of a grantee shall be considered an assignment and shall be subject to
the provisions of this section.
   B.   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the county will not
approve any such transfer of control or ownership prior to substantial
completion of construction or reconstruction of the CATV system.
Notwithstanding the foregoing a grantee may transfer ownership or control of
the franchise or the CATV system, after notice to the county, to an entity
controlling, controlled by, or under common control with grantee, where such
transfer does not result in a change in the management, operation or ultimate
controlling entity of the franchise or the system without any release of the
liability of the grantee. The recipient of a transferred franchise for said
system shall not be subject to the requirements for new franchises, nor shall
the recipient be considered a new franchise for any other purpose provided by
law, provided that the transferee agrees in writing to abide by all of the
terms and conditions of the franchise agreement with the transferor. In no
event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the
successor(s) in interest to the franchise agreement agreeing in writing to
comply with the terms, obligations, and conditions of the franchise agreement
for the remainder of the franchise term. The grantee as transferor, shall
promptly cure any present or ongoing franchise violations or defaults prior to
the county's granting of consent for the transfer of control or ownership of
the franchise.
   C.   Whenever any transfer subject to county approval under subsection A of
this section is proposed, a grantee and any proposed assignee or transferee of
the franchise shall submit an FCC form 394, or its successor at least one
hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer containing or
accompanied by such information as is required in accordance with applicable
law and FCC regulations. In addition, the grantee and/or the transferee shall
provide any and all information and documentation of the legal, financial,
managerial, technical, and character qualifications of the prospective
transferee or controlling party to operate and maintain the cable system. The
grantee and the prospective transferee or controlling party shall provide all
other reasonable information as allowed under applicable law requested by the
county in connection with such inquiry within the time frames established by
the FCC, and that addresses the effect of the proposed transfer or assignment
upon the public.
   D.   Prior approval of the county shall be required where ownership or
control of more than twenty five percent (25%), or such other percentage as may
be agreed to in a franchise agreement, of the right of control of a grantee
acquired, is transferred or during the term of the franchise in any transaction
or series of transactions by a person or group of persons acting individually
or collectively, on the effective date of the franchise agreement. The word
"control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but also includes
actual working control in whatever manner exercised. By its acceptance of the
franchise agreement, a grantee specifically acknowledges and agrees that any
such acquisition occurring without a prior approval of the county shall render
the franchise void.
   E.   Subject to any limitations set forth in the franchise agreement, any
transfer of the grantee's cable system, or any part thereof, subject to the
county's right of approval pursuant to subsection A of this section shall also
be subject to the county's right to elect to acquire the grantee's cable
system, or the part thereof proposed to be transferred, for the consideration
specified in a bona fide purchase offer based upon valuations from a qualified
firm specializing in cable system appraisals acceptable to the grantee. The
county shall exercise this right by written notice to a grantee within thirty
(30) days following its receipt of the notice required in subsection B of this
section. Except for the consideration, the county shall be obligated in
exercising this right to accept all other terms of the proposed transfer. The
county's rights hereunder shall in no way affect its independent rights under
any other provision of this chapter or under the franchise agreement.
   F.   The county shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer if
the county fails to render a final decision on the request for approval of the
proposed transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days following the county's
receipt of the completed written application containing such information as
required in subsection C of this section, unless the county and the applicant
agree in writing to extend the time for the county to review the application
and to grant or deny its consent. The consent of the county for the extension
of time shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   G.   Any transfer approved by the county shall be made by a document
evidencing closing of the transaction, an executed copy of which shall be filed
with the city within sixty (60) days after any such transfer.
   H.   Any sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or
other encumbrance of whatever kind or nature made in violation of the
provisions of this section shall be void.
   I.   The transferee shall reimburse county for any incidental administrative
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees, and fees for advisory or other
assistance provided on behalf of county that has been expended under this
section.
   J.   The consent or approval of the county to any transfer of the grantee,
franchise, or other control thereof, shall not constitute a waiver or release
of the rights of the county in and to the use of public streets and public
rights of way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subordinate
to the terms and conditions of the franchise being transferred. (Ord. 08-252,
8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-211: RENEGOTIATION:
The county shall have the option of renegotiating any term of a franchise
agreement prior to the county's consent to any assignment, sale, transfer, or
other change of ownership to the franchise. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-212: FORECLOSURE, RECEIVERSHIP:
   A.   Foreclosure: Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a
substantial part of the system, or upon the termination of any lease covering
all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the county of
such fact. Such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change
in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this division,
governing the consent of the board to such change in control of the grantee
shall apply.
   B.   Nonbankruptcy Foreclosure: In the event of a nonbankruptcy foreclosure,
or, in the event of a foreclosure involving bankruptcy where the county's right
to cancel a franchise is allowed by the U.S. bankruptcy court, or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the county shall have the right to cancel a franchise
one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee,
to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of
one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:
      1.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his/her election or
appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the
provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
      2.   Such receiver or trustee, within the one hundred twenty (120) days,
shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having
jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and
agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the
franchise granted to the grantee. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-213 - 10.5-219: RESERVED:
DIVISION 18. EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER
10.5-220: POLICY ESTABLISHED:
A grantee hereby agrees that it will not refuse to hire or employ, nor will it
bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in
compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of
age, race, creed, color, national origin, gender, or disability, and will
comply with the FCC requirements relating to employment. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-221 - 10.5-229: RESERVED:
DIVISION 19. INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE
10.5-230: INDEMNIFICATION BY GRANTEE:
A grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the county and its
commissioners, officials, employees and agents from and against any liability
or claims that arise out of the grantee's installation, construction,
operation, or maintenance of the CATV system under a franchise agreement;
breach of a franchise agreement, or violation of this chapter by the grantee;
copyright, trademark, service mark, or patent infringements, or of any other
right of any person, or a failure by the grantee to secure consents from the
owners, authorized distributors, or franchisees of programs to be delivered by
the CATV system (but not including claims arising from any county produced
programming); the conduct of the grantee's business in the county; or in any
way arising out of the grantee's enjoyment or exercise of the franchise,
regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed,
or prohibited by applicable local, state, or federal law or a franchise
agreement. This also includes, but is not limited to, any claim against the
grantee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person or as a
result of the county's making, or declining to make any information or
documents provided to the county pursuant to this chapter or a franchise
agreement available pursuant to the Illinois freedom of information act 1 .
The county shall give the grantee prompt and timely written notice no later
than thirty (30) days after receipt of any claim or the commencement of any
action, suit, or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. If
the county reasonably believes separate counsel to be necessary due to a
conflict of interest between the county and the grantee, the grantee shall have
the right to approve such counsel, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, and shall pay all reasonable costs for such counsel.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the county from cooperating with the
grantee and participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel
at its own cost and expense, provided, however, that after consultation with
the county and subject to the county's consent, grantee shall have the right to
defend, settle, or compromise any claim or action arising hereunder.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to waive the tort immunity of the
county. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
10.5-231: GRANTEE INSURANCE:
   A.   As part of the indemnification provided by the provisions of this
article, but without limiting the foregoing, upon award of a franchise and
prior to commencement of the system, each grantee shall file with the Kane
County development department, and at all times thereafter maintain in full
force and effect at its sole expense, evidence of an acceptable policy or
policies of liability insurance, including comprehensive general liability
insurance, products/completed operations liability, personal injury liability,
owners and contractors protective liability, broad form property damage,
contractual liability, automobile liability, including owned, nonowned, and
hired automobiles, workers' compensation, and employer liability. The policy or
policies shall specifically recognize and cover the indemnification provisions
of this article and shall name as primary insured the county, and in their
capacity as such, its officers, agents, and employees. The grantee and the
county and officers, agents and employees shall be named as coinsureds, and the
policy or policies shall contain cross liability endorsements. Policies of
insurance shall be in the minimum single limit amount of five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) per occurrence. Said insurance shall provide that the insurance
provided by the grantee shall be primary and that any provision of any contract
of insurance or other risk protection benefit or self-insurance policy
purchased or in effect or enacted by the county and any other insurance shall
be in excess thereof.
   B.   The insurer or insurers shall be authorized to write the required
insurance and shall be approved therefor by the state of Illinois. All
insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and
of a class size of "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. The form and substance
of the policy or policies of insurance shall be subject to approval by the
county.
   C.   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the grantee
in full force and effect during the entire term of a franchise agreement. Each
policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will
not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the grantee or for other
reasons, except after thirty (30) days' advance written notice by insurer sent
by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the Kane County development
department.
   D.   A grantee shall file with the Kane County development department
certified copies of all insurance policies required upon the written request of
the county.
   E.   In the event of the cancellation of any insurance policy required
herein or upon grantee's failure to procure said insurance, the county shall
have the right to terminate a franchise agreement, or alternatively, to procure
such insurance and charge the cost thereof to the grantee. Such costs may be
paid from the security bond or construction bond as set forth in section 10.5-
170 of this chapter, or by any other means deemed appropriate by the county.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-232 - 10.5-239: RESERVED:
DIVISION 20. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10.5-240: FAIRNESS OF ACCESSIBILITY:
The entire network of a grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with
the principles of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities,
equipment, channels, studios, and other services to all citizens, businesses,
public agencies, or other entities having a legitimate use for the network. No
one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. Allocation of the use of said
facilities shall be made according to the rules, policies, or decisions of the
grantee and any regulatory agencies affecting the same. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-241: SUBSCRIBERS' WIRING AND ANTENNA:
A grantee is expressly prohibited from deliberately removing, requiring the
removal of or from offering to remove or to provide any inducements for removal
of any wiring or antenna equipment belonging to the subscriber as a condition
for provision of service by a grantee. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-242: COPYRIGHT LAWS:
A grantee shall comply with all copyright laws, rules, and regulations,
including, but not limited to, FCC requirements. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff.
9-1-2008)
10.5-243: PUBLICATION COSTS:
In the event that publication of a franchise agreement is required by law, a
grantee shall assume any cost of publication and such is payable upon the
request of the county. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-244: WAIVER OF PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE:
The county shall have the right to waive or modify any provision of this
article. However, any waiver shall be restricted to the particular subject
matter of the waiver, and in no way shall be considered precedent for any other
waiver, nor shall the county be obligated to consider any request for a similar
waiver. Further, the county reserves the right to deny any waiver. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-245: NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS:
The failure of the county or grantee on one or more occasions to exercise a
right or to require compliance or performance under this chapter or any other
applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a
waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right, compliance or
performance has specifically been waived in writing. No delay or omission of
the county or grantee to exercise any right or remedy shall be considered to be
a waiver of or acquiescence in any default. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as a waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, grantee or
county may have under federal or state law unless such waiver is expressly
stated herein. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-246: GENERAL FILING AND NOTICE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, all documents and notices
or other franchise related material required by this article shall be filed
with the Kane County development department at the Kane County Governmental
Center, Building A, 4th Floor, 719 Batavia Avenue, Geneva, IL 60134. All
notices and franchise fee or video service provider fee payments shall be sent
by certified mail. Other documents may be sent by overnight mail services, such
as Federal Express, with a confirmation signature, or by facsimile transfer
("fax") and electronic mail ("e-mail").
   B.   Except as provided elsewhere in this article, the county shall not take
any final action involving the modification, renewal, revocation, or
termination of a grantee's franchise unless the county has: 1) advised a
grantee in writing at least thirty (30) days prior to a meeting where such
action is contemplated as to its time, place, and purpose; and 2) published a
notice, at least once, fourteen (14) days before the meeting in a newspaper of
general circulation within the county; provided such notice need not be given
of any adjourned or continued meeting where notice was given of the original
meeting. The grantee and interested persons shall be entitled to be heard at
such meeting. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-247: NEW TECHNOLOGIES:
   A.   If, as a result of technological developments during the term of a
franchise agreement, the quality or quantity of programming or services
available to subscribers of the grantee's CATV system in municipalities
immediately adjacent to unincorporated areas of Kane County become subject to
upgrade or are benefiting from new services or technologies not available in
the immediately adjacent unincorporated area or areas of the county, a grantee
shall, at the request of the cable administrator, investigate the feasibility
of implementing such new developments.
The grantee shall implement such technological developments if such
implementation: 1) can be accomplished without adding an unwarranted financial
burden to subscribers and 2) is economically and technically feasible and
viable for the grantee.
   B.   In determining whether or not a grantee shall be required to implement
such new developments, the cable administrator and a grantee shall consider,
among other factors, and consistent with federal law, the remaining term of its
agreement, performance demonstrating the operational feasibility of the new
developments, construction costs, the adaptability of such developments to the
grantee's system or any part thereof and the potential marketability of the new
services and other factors affecting the economic feasibility and viability of
implementation of such new technologies. In the event that an investigation of
the foregoing determines, through a written report by the grantee to the cable
administrator, that implementing said new services or technologies does not add
an unwarranted financial burden to subscribers and is economically and
technically feasible and viable for the grantee, said new services or
technologies shall be implemented no later than ninety (90) days from the date
of the receipt of the report by the cable administrator. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-
2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-248: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any federal or state court or
administrative or governmental agency of competent jurisdiction, including, but
not limited to, the FCC, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter, which shall be applied and construed as
reasonably as possible in the absence of the invalidated provision. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-249: SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY:
Any grantee holding a franchise on the effective date hereof, or which is
awarded a franchise under the conditions of this chapter, shall be required to
have in force a written policy regarding sexual harassment which complies in
all respects with the Illinois human rights act, 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/2-105(A)(4) (1997). (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-250: COMPLIANCE WITH OSHA REGULATIONS:
A grantee shall comply with the standards of the occupational safety and health
administration (OSHA), and safety standards established by the department of
labor of the state of Illinois in maintaining its operational facilities,
working conditions, and work procedures utilized as a part of the construction,
upgrade, installation, repair and maintenance of the CATV system. Grantee's
equipment shall bear all FCC and appropriate safety agency markings. (Ord. 08-
252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-251: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
The county and the grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws
and regulations of federal, state and local governments, or any administrative
agencies thereof, as such applicable laws and regulations may be amended now or
hereafter. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-252: GRANTEE MAY PROMULGATE RULES:
A grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms, and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to
enable it to exercise its rights and perform its services under this chapter
and the rules of the FCC, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all
of its subscribers. Such rules and regulations shall not be deemed to have the
force of law. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-253: LANDLORD AND TENANT:
   A.   No owner, or owner's agent or representative, of any multiple- unit
residential dwelling shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful
resident thereof to receive cable service or video service, installation or
maintenance from a grantee regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid
and existing franchise issued by the county or a holder regulated by and
lawfully operating under a valid and existing authorization to provide video
service issued by the ICC.
   B.   No owner, or owner's agent or representative of any multiple- unit
residential dwelling shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident
or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or
discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or
receives cable service or video service from a grantee operating under a valid
and existing franchise issued by the county or a holder regulated by and
lawfully operating under a valid and existing authorization to provide video
service issued by the ICC.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring that
system facilities conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions
necessary to protect safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or
the convenience and safety of persons or property.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from requiring a
grantee or a holder to agree to indemnify the owner, or his agents or
representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by the
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable system or video system
facilities. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-254: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, attach, wire, program,
or connect, or cause to be installed, attached, wired, programmed, or connected
any equipment, device, or computer hardware or software, which enables the use
of cable television or data signals transmitted by a grantee without
compensation to said grantee for said cable service signals. This section shall
not prohibit the recording of programming or downloading of data as allowed
under applicable state and federal laws.
   B.   No person receiving within the franchise area any cable service,
program, or signal transmitted by any grantee operating under a franchise
issued by the franchising authority shall resell such service, program, or
signal without the expressed, written consent of the grantee.
   C.   Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day per occurrence, and
where applicable, incarceration as so prescribed by statutory provisions
concerning theft of services. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-255: NO RECOURSE AGAINST COUNTY:
To the extent that the local government tort immunity act and any other laws
immunize the county and its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or
employees, a grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county or
its officials, boards, commissions, agents, or employees for any loss, costs,
expense, or damages arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter
or franchise agreement. A grantee shall expressly acknowledge that upon
accepting the right, privilege and franchise granted pursuant to this chapter,
it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power
and authority of the county. By the acceptance of a franchise, a grantee shall
agree it will not at any time set up against the county in any claim or
proceeding any provision, condition or term of this chapter or the franchise
agreement as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the county had no power or
authority to make such provision, term or condition as part of or pursuant to
this chapter, except as to those matters preempted by federal or state law.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-256: TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE:
Whenever any provision of this chapter, or a franchise agreement, shall set
forth any time for any act to be performed by a grantee, such time shall be
deemed to be of the essence. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-257: FORCE MAJEURE:
Whenever a period of time is provided for in this chapter, or a franchise
agreement, for either the county or a grantee to do or perform any act or
obligation, neither party shall be liable for any delays due to war, riot,
insurrection, rebellion, unavoidable casualty or damage to personnel,
materials, or equipment, fire, flood, storm, earthquake, tornado, orders of a
court of competent jurisdiction, any act of nature, failure of a utility
provider to provide pole attachments on reasonable terms or conditions
therefor, or any cause beyond the control of said party. In such event, said
time period shall be extended for the amount of time said party is so delayed.
An act or omission shall not be deemed to be beyond a grantee's control if
committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business entity which
holds a controlling interest in the grantee, whether directly or indirectly.
Further, the failure of a grantee to obtain financing, or to pay any money due
from it to any person, including the county, for whatever reason, shall not be
an act or omission which is beyond the control of the grantee. (Ord. 08-252, 8-
12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-258: NO WAIVER OF RIGHTS BESTOWED BY VIRTUE OF LAW:
The county does not waive or release rights bestowed upon it by virtue of law
or statute. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
10.5-259: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances thereof in conflict herewith, are hereby
repealed to the extent of any such conflict. (Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-
2008)
10.5-260: GOVERNING LAW AND VENUE:
This chapter shall be governed in accordance insofar as applicable with the
laws of the state of Illinois. Where federal jurisdiction applies, this chapter
shall be governed by the applicable laws and agencies of the United States
government. Venue shall be in either the circuit court of Kane County, or the
United States district court, northern district of Illinois, eastern division.
(Ord. 08-252, 8-12-2008, eff. 9-1-2008)
CHAPTER 11
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I. SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
11-1: Scope
11-2: Enforcement
11-3: Garbage And Refuse
11-3-1: Deposit Of Trash, Garbage, Etc., On Highway Right Of Way Unlawful;
Penalty
11-3-2: Misuse Of Public Trash Receptacles
11-4: Vehicles
11-5: Inspection
11-5-1: Violation
11-5-2: Fines
11-6 - 11-20: Reserved
Division 2. Solid Waste Disposal Fee
11-21: Purposes
11-22: Solid Waste Disposal Fee
11-23: Exemptions From Fee
11-24: Solid Waste Disposal Report
11-25: Termination
11-26: Appeals
11-27: Effective Date
11-28 - 11-40: Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
11-1: SCOPE:
This article regulates the storage, transportation and disposal of solid waste
within the limits of Kane County, Illinois. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The county shall have jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcement of this
article as referenced in 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 905/20. (Ord. 08-168, 5-
13-2008)
11-3: GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
   A.   Generally: All disposal of garbage and refuse within the county shall
conform to the provisions of the "state of Illinois environmental protection
act, title V: land pollution and refuse disposal", copies of which shall be on
file in the environmental management office. Except in accordance with those
provisions, it shall be unlawful to dump or deposit or permit to remain upon
the ground within the limits of this county, any garbage, cans, rubbish,
refuse, or other substances which by reason of its quantity or decomposition
would become foul, odorous, subject to spontaneous combustion, or tend to breed
rodents, flies, mosquitoes, or harmful bacteria, and become detrimental to
public health or conducive to the spread of disease.
   B.   Placing Or Leaving, Burning: No person shall place, leave, dump or
accumulate any garbage, rubbish or other refuse in any building, or on any
premises, improved or vacant, or upon any open lot, alley or road in the
county. No person shall burn garbage out of doors in the county.
   C.   Accumulation And Storage: No person shall accumulate or store on any
premises, improved or vacant, or in any open lot or roadway in the county any
of the following materials:
      1.   Salvage Materials: Any refuse or waste, discharge or salvage
materials, including junk autos, except in a junkyard;
      2.   Unusual Materials: Any materials other than those ordinarily
associated with the use for which the premises are regularly intended. (Ord.
08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-3-1: DEPOSIT OF TRASH, GARBAGE, ETC., ON HIGHWAY RIGHT OF WAY UNLAWFUL;
PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any trash, garbage, or
other offensive material on the county highway rights of way.
   B.   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each location at
which a violation exists. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-3-2: MISUSE OF PUBLIC TRASH RECEPTACLES:
No person shall transport by any means garbage or refuse from any dwelling,
residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit such materials
in or around trash barrels or other receptacles placed along public roads or
rest areas. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-4: VEHICLES:
No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the purpose of carrying,
carting, hauling, or transporting garbage, ashes, refuse, or miscellaneous
waste shall cause or permit any vehicle to be so loaded, to be in such
defective condition, so out of repair, or of such faulty construction, or so
improperly driven or managed, that any garbage, ashes, refuse, or miscellaneous
waste with which such vehicle is loaded or is being loaded, shall drop or fall
in any public way or other place. Such vehicle shall be so constructed and
covered as to prevent any part of the contents thereof from falling, leaking,
or spilling therefrom. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-5: INSPECTION:
The county shall have the right to enter into or on any property to inspect any
facility or condition thereon for the purpose of determining whether these
regulations are being complied with. Refusal by said owner of right of entry
shall cause the county to seek the permission of the court for right of entry.
(Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-5-1: VIOLATION:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the
county, any authorized representative shall give written notice to the owner
and/or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the
person allowing, causing or maintaining the nuisance. The notice of violation
under the provisions of this section shall contain:
      1.   The location of the violation.
      2.   A description of what constitutes the violation.
      3.   A statement of acts necessary to abate or correct the violation.
      4.   A date by which the violation must be abated or corrected to avoid
further legal action.
   B.   Complaint: In the event the owner or occupant of the property upon
which such nuisance exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such
nuisance, then an authorized representative shall file a complaint pursuant to
the processes and methods prescribed by chapter 2, article IX, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code. Any authorized representative may issue a
complaint against the owners, lessees and/or occupants of said property or the
persons responsible for causing the nuisance charging a violation of any
section or subsection of this chapter. Such complaint may seek any and all
applicable relief available at law or in equity including, but not limited to,
abatement of the nuisance, fines or injunctive relief. Issuance of a notice of
violation shall not be a precondition to the filing of a complaint. (Ord. 08-
168, 5-13-2008)
11-5-2: FINES:
The fine for a violation of any subsection of this chapter shall not exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation exists constitutes a
separate offense. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-6 - 11-20: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FEE
11-21: PURPOSES:
   A.   It is the purpose of this division to provide a source of revenue to
implement the solid waste management fund for Kane County as authorized by
public act 85-14. The fund will be used for solid waste management purposes,
including long term monitoring and maintenance of landfills, planning,
inspection, enforcement and all other activities consistent with the solid
waste management act of Illinois and the authorized uses of the county landfill
enterprise fund.
   B.   It is the purpose of the county board in establishing the county solid
waste disposal fee to administer said fee equitably and in a manner that will
not create economic hardship. It is the county board's intention that the fee
established hereby, although imposed on the landfill owners or operators, shall
ultimately be borne by the generators of waste being disposed of within Kane
County. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-22: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FEE:
   A.   On or after August 1, 1988, the county shall assess and collect a fee
in the amount set forth herein from the owner or operator of each sanitary
landfill located within the county which is permitted or required to be
permitted by the Illinois EPA to dispose of solid waste, if the sanitary
landfill is located off the site where such waste was produced and if such
sanitary landfill is owned, controlled, and operated by a person other than the
generator of such waste.
   B.   The owner or operator of any sanitary landfill subject to this section
shall pay a fee of sixty cents ($0.60) per cubic yard of nonhazardous solid
waste received at a site, unless the owner or operator weighs the quantity of
the solid waste received with a device for which certification has been
obtained under the weights and measures act, in which case, the fee shall not
exceed one dollar twenty seven cents ($1.27) per ton of solid waste received.
   C.   The amount of said fee shall be determined by the quantities of solid
waste reported as received on the solid waste disposal report required by this
division.
   D.   Payment of the solid waste disposal fee shall be made on a quarterly
basis in conjunction with the solid waste disposal report required by this
division. Payment shall be in the form of a check payable to the treasurer of
Kane County, Illinois, and shall be deposited in the previously established
enterprise surcharge fund. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-23: EXEMPTIONS FROM FEE:
   A.   The county shall grant exemptions from the fee requirements of this
division for receipt or transport of solid waste meeting all of the following
criteria:
      1.   Receipt of solid waste is pursuant to a written contract between the
owner or operator of the sanitary landfill and some other person, or transport
of the solid waste is pursuant to a written contract between the transporter
and some other person; and
      2.   The contract for receipt or transport of solid waste was lawfully
executed on or before August 1, 1988, and has not been amended at any time
after that date, and by its express terms continues beyond August 2, 1988; and
      3.   The contract for receipt or transport of solid waste established a
fixed fee for compensation, and by its express terms or by implication does not
allow the operator or transporter to pass the fee through to another party, and
does not allow voluntary cancellation or renegotiation of the compensation or
fee during the terms of the contract.
   B.   Exemptions granted under this section shall cause the solid waste
received by an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill to be disregarded in
calculating the volume or weight of solid waste received during a calendar year
under this division.
   C.   Applications for exemptions under this section may be granted
retroactively. Applications for retroactive or prospective exemptions must be
submitted with proof of satisfaction of all criteria necessary to grant the
exemption, and must be received by the county before October 1, 1988.
   D.   It shall be the duty of an owner or operator of a sanitary landfill to
keep accurate records and to prove to the satisfaction of the county the volume
or weight of solid waste received under an exemption during the calendar year.
   E.   Exemptions under this section shall expire upon the expiration, renewal
or amendment of the exempted control, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 08-168, 5-
13-2008)
11-24: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL REPORT:
   A.   Every owner or operator of a sanitary landfill located within the
county which is permitted, or required to be permitted by the Illinois EPA,
shall file quarterly reports specifying the quantities of waste received and
the fee payment due to the county.
   B.   Said report shall be on the form provided by the county.
   C.   The quarterly solid waste disposal report shall be due on January 15,
April 15, July 15 and October 15 of each calendar year. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-
2008)
11-25: TERMINATION:
Any owner or operator of a sanitary landfill subject to the provisions of this
division intending to terminate the receipt of solid waste during the calendar
year shall notify the county of such intent. Unless termination of operation is
the result of an emergency order by a regulatory agency or a court of competent
jurisdiction, the owner or operator of a sanitary landfill must notify the
county ninety (90) days in advance of any termination of operation. Such notice
must include the estimated date upon which the landfill will no longer receive
solid waste for disposal. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-26: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person disputing the payment of the solid waste disposal fee
established by this division may file a protest along with his payment and
request a hearing.
   B.   A hearing shall, thereafter, be provided by the county within sixty
(60) days of said filing. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-27: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The solid waste disposal fee established by this division shall become
effective on August 1, 1988. The first quarterly solid waste disposal report
shall be due, together with a fee based on that report, on October 15, 1988.
(Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-28 - 11-40: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. LANDFILLS
SECTION:
11-41: Short Title; Applicability
11-42 - 11-55: Reserved
11-41: SHORT TITLE; APPLICABILITY:
This article shall be known as the SANITARY LANDFILL CONTROL ORDINANCE OF KANE
COUNTY, ILLINOIS.
Any sanitary landfill as defined under section 3.41, 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1 et seq., of the Illinois environmental protection act (the "act")
shall conform with the act, relevant regulations, and any future amendments to
the act. The act is enforced by the Illinois environmental protection agency,
the attorney general and the state's attorney. (Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008)
11-42 - 11-55: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR NEW POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITE
APPROVAL APPLICATION IN UNINCORPORATED AREAS OF KANE COUNTY
SECTION:
11-56: Applicability
11-57: Definitions
11-58: Petitions
11-59: Payment And Administration Of Costs
11-60: Request For Modification Of Specific Requirements
11-61: Participants
11-62: Public Hearing
11-63: Public Comment
11-64: Public Record
11-65: Decision By The County Board
11-66 - 11-107: Reserved
11-56: APPLICABILITY:
This article is applicable to a petition for site location approval of a new
pollution control facility. To the extent a facility, described in a petition,
proposes to manage material which is not a waste, or proposes to conduct an
activity which is excluded from the act's definition of a pollution control
facility, or proposes to conduct an activity which does not require a permit
from the Illinois environmental protection agency, this article does not govern
the petition, and authorization to locate such a facility shall be determined
by the county's other ordinances, including, but not limited to, those related
to zoning, special use, building or environmental requirements, as applicable.
(Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-57: DEFINITIONS:
All words used in this article shall have the same meanings and definitions as
set forth in the environmental protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1 et seq. (hereinafter the "act") unless otherwise set forth hereinbelow.
Defined terms in this article need not be capitalized to have the meanings
prescribed to them in this section or the act.
ACT:                                  The environmental protection act, 415
                                      Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
                                      Any person, group of persons,
                                      partnership, firm, association,
APPLICANT:                            corporation, company or organization of
                                      any kind that files an application for
                                      site approval pursuant to this article.
CLERK:                                The Kane County clerk.
COUNTY:                               Kane County, Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD:                         The Kane County board.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND WATER The Kane County department of
RESOURCES:                            environmental and water resources.
DIVISION OF TRANSPORTATION:           The Kane County division of
                                      transportation.
FACILITY:                             A new pollution control facility as
                                      defined in the act.
                                      A site where hazardous waste is received,
HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE:                 stored, treated, dumped or disposed.
                                      "Hazardous waste" is defined by the act.
                                      The attorney appointed by the chairman of
HEARING OFFICER:                      the county board and the state's attorney
                                      to conduct the public hearing(s)
                                      associated with a siting petition.
IEPA:                                 The Illinois environmental protection
                                      agency.
                                      The application filed by the applicant
PETITION:                             requesting site approval for a facility.
                                      (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-
                                      13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
 
11-58: PETITIONS:
   A.   Filing: The applicant shall file one original and ten (10) copies of
the petition with the Kane County clerk, including all site plans, exhibits,
and maps, in the form described in subsections C and D of this section.
However, only three (3) copies of large-scale engineering drawings are required
to be filed with each request, provided the applicant includes copies of the
engineering drawings reduced to eleven inche by seventeen inche (11" x 17")
paper in each submitted copy of the petition. Additional printed copies of the
application shall be provided by the applicant to the Kane County clerk upon
request for distribution to members of the county board, county staff, or
technical review staff retained by the county for review of the application.
The applicant shall also file thirty-two (32) electronic copies of the complete
petition in a text- recognized and searchable format. The applicant shall
include, with the filing of the petition, the application fee, as described in
section
11-59 of this chapter.
   B.   Procedure After Filing: The clerk, upon receiving said petition, shall
do the following:
      1.   Accept for filing and date stamp as filed any petition that is filed
with the correct number of copies as required by subsection A of this section,
in the form as required by subsection C of this section; with sections
identified as containing materials required by subsections D11.a and D11.b of
this section; and with the application fee as provided in section
11-59 of this chapter. The date on the stamp of the clerk shall be considered
the official filing date for all time limit purposes. Receipt and acceptance of
a petition by the clerk is pro forma, and does not constitute an acknowledgment
that the applicant has complied with the act or this article. Should the
petition be presented to the clerk without the correct number of copies, in the
incorrect form, or without the materials and fee described in this subsection,
the petition shall be rejected by the clerk.
      2.   Upon the filing of a petition, the clerk shall distribute the copies
of the petition to the following parties in the following numbers:
Recipient Printed Copies Electronic Copies
Recipient                      Printed Copies                 Electronic Copies
County board                   2                              25
Office of the state’s attorne1                              1
Director of the Kane County
department of environmental    1, plus 2 drawing sets         1
and water resources
Director of the Kane County    1                              1
division of transportation
Hearing officer (at time of
filing, or when retained by    1                              1
county)
Nearest public library to      2                              1
where the facility is proposed
Maintained by the clerk        1 original plus 2 copies, plus 2
                               1 drawing set
 
      3.   The clerk shall make available a copy of the petition and public
record concerning the petition for public inspection during the normal business
hours of the clerk's office. Additionally, the clerk shall provide to any
person so requesting, copies of the petition or the public record, upon such
person's payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   C.   Form Of Petitions:
      1.   All petitions shall be in writing on eight and one-half inch by
eleven inch (81/2" x 11"), eight and one-half inch by fourteen inch (81/2" x
14"), or eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") paper.
      2.   The pages of the application and all exhibits submitted to the
county shall be consecutively numbered.
   D.   Content Of Petitions: The determination of the quality and quantity of
information to be included in a petition is, ultimately, the applicant's to
make, as it is the applicant's burden to demonstrate that the siting criteria
set forth in section 39.2 of the act are met. However, for purposes of this
article, a petition shall contain, at a minimum, the following documents and
information. To the extent such documents and information are based on, in
whole or in part, other information or data, citations to the primary source
shall be provided, so to reasonably enable a member of the public to locate
such information. The content of petitions shall address the following minimum
elements to demonstrate compliance with each of the siting criteria. The
petition shall be organized according to the siting criteria and presented by
the applicant as outlined in this section
11-58 to facilitate review of the petition for compliance with the siting
criteria; any deviation from this organization must be clearly noted by the
applicant to identify the location of the required information within the
petition:
      1.   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area
it is intended to serve:
         a.   Identification of the area to be served by the proposed facility,
including a map showing the extent of the service area the facility is intended
to serve, and a statement of the need for the identified area for such a
facility. Where there is more than one waste proposed to be handled by the
facility, and the service areas are different, the service area for each waste
should be identified as set forth above.
         b.   A description of the type(s) of waste to be received.
         c.   A summary of the current and projected future demographics,
including population, of the service area.
         d.   A calculation of the capacity of the proposed facility, the
estimated daily volume of waste to be received, the sources of said waste, and
the estimated duration of operation at the proposed facility.
         e.   A calculation of the current amount of waste generated and
disposed within the service area and an estimate of the amount of waste to be
generated and disposed within the service area for the next twenty (20) years.
The impact of future recycling and waste reduction efforts on volumes disposed
should be addressed.
         f.   A calculation of the current amount of waste exported out of and
imported into the service area.
         g.   A calculation of the permitted disposal capacity available within
the service area.
         h.   A list and map showing all existing facilities and not existing,
but permitted for development, facilities which manage the same waste streams
as the proposed facility, located within or serving or capable of serving the
area proposed to be served (i.e., all facilities within or at the same distance
from the outer perimeter of the service area, as the proposed facility is from
the most distant point of its service area) and, with respect to each such
facility, the following information shall be provided on the list (not the
map): location, size, owner and operator, type of pollution control facility,
daily intake or throughput, as applicable, remaining capacity, probable life of
the facility, types of wastes received and authorized to be received, IEPA
facility number (where applicable), and sources for the information presented
concerning the facilities. The map should identify the facility by the same
name used on the list, such that the map can be cross referenced with the list.
         i.   A statement of the economic benefits of the proposed facility.
         j.   Documentation of all methods and data sources used in
calculations demonstrating need shall be presented.
      2.   The facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, and welfare will be protected:
         a.   Site general information and legal description.
            (1)   The identification as well as current address of the
applicant, all landowners and the operator for the proposed facility. If the
proposed site is owned by a land trust, each beneficiary of the land trust must
be identified and their name and address listed, and the extent of their
interest must be defined. Indicate whether or not the applicant, if not the
property owner, is to purchase or lease the site. If the site is to be leased,
state the term of years of any lease for the proposed site and attach the lease
and any amendments to said lease. Also indicate whether the applicant, the
landowner and the operator is a corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, individual or unit of government. In the case of a partnership,
submit the names of all partners. In the case of a corporation, submit the
names and addresses of all officers and directors, and the names and addresses
of all shareholders owning five percent (5%) or more of the capital stock of
the corporation. In the case of a corporation, attach articles of incorporation
and a certified copy from the secretary of state, of the entity's incorporation
in the state of Illinois or, if not incorporated in the state of Illinois, its
license to do business in the state of Illinois as exhibits. In the event that
forty percent (40%) or more shares of a corporation are owned by another
corporation ("owning corporation"), all of the above listed disclosures and
requirements regarding corporations shall be applicable to the owning
corporation.
            (2)   Property title search, and identification of any covenants
recorded with the property deed.
            (3)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street
address as well as other reasonable descriptions of where the proposed site is
located. A plat of survey of the proposed facility boundary must be attached to
the petition, and a map or description stating existing zoning of the property,
as well as adjacent property zoning.
            (4)   A brief description of the proposed facility, its operation,
the expected longevity thereof and copies of any proposed or actual agreements
for host fees or incentives offered or agreed to by the applicant with the
county or any other person or entity.
            (5)   A description of the general characteristics of the site
(open field, gravel pit, quarry, strip mine, swamp, floodplain, etc.) and the
historical uses of the property.
            (6)   A detailed topographic survey of the subject site and the
surrounding area, within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the
property lines of the proposed site, which indicates land use and, if
applicable, the boundary of the 100-year floodplain. Include also as an exhibit
a copy of the United States geological survey topographic quadrangle map of the
area which includes the proposed site, with an outline of the location
indicated therein.
         b.   Site plan(s) showing details of the proposed facility. Unless
stated otherwise below, the information is to be provided for the proposed site
of the facility (i.e., within the site property lines). Details to be shown
include, but are not limited to, the following information:
            (1)   The site plan shall be drawn on a topographic map to a scale
no smaller than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') with a two foot
(2') contour interval;
            (2)   Engineering cross sections;
            (3)   Fences, buildings and other structures;
            (4)   Roads, entrances and driveways;
            (5)   Existing and proposed underground or aboveground storage
tanks (identified as such), identifying, if applicable, which are known to be
out of operation or abandoned;
            (6)   Location of property lines of neighboring properties and
properties whose owners were provided notice pursuant to section 39.2(b) of the
act;
            (7)   Existing and proposed utility lines (identified as such and
identified as to type of utility), indicating which are above and which are
below the ground;
            (8)   Surface water drainageways, including, but not limited to,
drain tiles, creeks, etc.;
            (9)   Boundaries of prior waste disposal areas and any areas of
known soil, surface water or groundwater contamination;
            (10)   If the proposed facility is a landfill, soil boring
locations within the property lines of the proposed site, and within two
hundred feet (200') of the proposed site; and
            (11)   All known and proposed wells (identified as such), whether
potable, monitoring, or other, within the proposed site and, if the proposed
facility is a landfill, within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the
property line of the proposed site.
         c.   Information demonstrating compliance with applicable regulatory
location standards, including (as applicable):
            (1)   Setbacks from residential properties, property lines,
roadways, and other features;
            (2)   Proximity to airports;
            (3)   Endangered species and historic preservation reviews;
            (4)   Wetlands locations, including any mitigation to be completed
if wetlands are present on the site; and
            (5)   Map identifying, within one and one-half (1.5) miles of the
proposed facility, any surface or subsurface mining activities in the area,
residential (single-family or multiple-family) housing areas, schools,
hospitals, nursing or extended care facilities, daycare or other childcare
facilities, historic or architectural or archaeological resources identified by
the Illinois historic preservation agency, threatened or endangered species
habitats, parks, recreational areas, nature preserves, and airports.
            (6)   Any additional information to demonstrate that the proposed
facility is so located in such a manner that the public health, safety and
welfare will be protected, in addition to that which is required herein.
         d.   Site design information providing description of the design
criteria and design features of the facility, including (as applicable):
            (1)   Site roadway and vehicle maneuvering features including
entrance(s) and exit(s), access roads, interior traffic circulation areas,
parking, and vehicle stacking / queuing;
            (2)   Weigh station location and design;
            (3)   Proposed structure(s) and detailed floor plan(s);
            (4)   Office, maintenance, and other supporting structures;
            (5)   Security features and measures to be implemented;
            (6)   Utilities to be utilized for facility operations and whether
they are currently present onsite or proposed to be located onsite;
            (7)   Water supply and capacity requirements;
            (8)   Surface water control;
            (9)   Documentation detailing stormwater management measures,
including:
               (A)   Design based on requirements of the 100-year, 24-hour
storm;
               (B)   Basin design(s) and release rate(s);
               (C)   Sediment control measures, both during and after
construction;
               (D)   Erosion control measures, both during and after
construction;
               (E)   Drainage flow on-site and off-site; and
               (F)   Demonstration of compliance with the Kane County soil
erosion and sediment control ordinance, the Kane County stormwater ordinance
(ordinance 19-151, as amended), and the technical policy statements associated
therewith;
            (10)   Liner design, including proposed soil and/or geomembrane
specifications;
            (11)   Leachate collection system, including:
               (A)   Type, location and construction of the subsurface
collection system;
               (B)   Written narrative describing methods and processes of the
collection, management and treatment of the leachate;
               (C)   Program for monitoring effectiveness of the collection,
management and treatment of the leachate; and
               (D)   Discharge points of effluent;
            (12)   Final cover system, including proposed soil and/or
geomembrane specifications;
            (13)   All monitoring systems, which may include but not be limited
to, stormwater, security, vector control, noise, litter, odor, groundwater,
surface water, and air, including:
               (A)   Techniques, location and construction;
               (B)   Frequency of sampling and analysis; and
               (C)   Future corrective action program;
            (14)   Gas control system;
            (15)   Air emissions control;
            (16)   Facility construction quality assurance and quality control
program; and
            (17)   If the proposed facility is a landfill, a description of the
proposed site geology and hydrogeology, including:
               (A)   A detailed description of each geologic unit found within
the site including geologic, seismic, geotechnical, and hydrologic properties;
               (B)   A description of all water bearing strata within the site
including potentiometric maps, groundwater flow velocities, gradients and
directions;
               (C)   Geologic cross sections of the site illustrating all water
bearing strata, water elevations, confining units and all discernable geologic
units;
               (D)   Complete subsurface investigation results including
borings below the site and the following information as a result of these
borings:
                  i.   Types and thicknesses of soil units encountered and the
depth of and the type of bedrock encountered;
                  ii.   As to each boring sample taken, provide at a minimum
the following information:
                     (a)   Unified soil classification;
                     (b)   Index and engineering properties test results for
representative samples;
                     (c)   Standard Procter moisture-density tests for any soil
material proposed to be used for liner and cover construction;
                     (d)   Hydraulic conductivity based on field and/or
laboratory determinations, including a determination of the soil proposed for
liner and cover using the proposed soil liner and cover construction
specifications; and
                     (e)   Ion exchange capacity and ability to absorb and
"fix" heavy metal ions;
                  iii.   Geological and geotechnical engineering evaluation;
               (E)   Background analysis for groundwater, surface water and
air, or a statement as to why such analysis is not needed or appropriate for
the county's review of the proposed site. Where background analysis is
provided, identify the locations and dates of the background samples, the types
of media sampled (e.g., groundwater, surface water, soil, air), and the depth
at which the sample was taken; and
            (18)   Any additional information to demonstrate that the proposed
facility is so designed in such a manner that the public health, safety and
welfare will be protected, in addition to that which is required herein.
         e.   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed facility,
including (as applicable):
            (1)   Type of facility including method of landfilling,
incineration, resource recovery, recycling, transfer, or other proposed
storage, process, treatment or management, including identification of any
proposed process flows, storage, treatment, disposal, consolidation, or other
waste management activity.
            (2)   Hours of operation.
            (3)   A description of the types of wastes or other materials
proposed to be received or produced at the facility (including any the
applicant claims are not subject to the requirement for site location approval
under the act, and a notation next to any such wastes or materials identified
as such) and, if applicable, identification of the time frame when such waste
or materials are proposed to be received or produced.
            (4)   For each type of waste or material proposed to be received or
produced at the facility, provide:
               (A)   The maximum daily receipt and throughput;
               (B)   Process capacity, including a materials flow analysis and
capacity analysis to demonstrate the facility can safely and adequately manage
the maximum daily receipts and throughput (in weight/volume and vehicles); and
               (C)   Production.
            (5)   Proposed life of the facility.
            (6)   Traffic patterns and flows onsite.
            (7)   Description of any overnight storage of waste or materials
onsite.
            (8)   Identification of disposal or processing sites for any
materials not disposed or used onsite.
            (9)   Identification of proposed railroad activities.
            (10)   Waste screening procedures, including:
               (A)   Plans for identification and verification of waste
received;
               (B)   Plans for identification of unacceptable waste, soils or
other material and removal of same;
               (C)   Plans for chemical analysis of waste, if applicable; and
               (D)   Load checking program and procedures.
            (11)   Leachate collection, management and treatment system or
plan.
            (12)   Landfill gas collection, management, and treatment system or
plan.
            (13)   Personnel requirements, including number of full and part
time employees, which personnel positions and in what numbers are considered
minimally necessary for facility operation.
            (14)   Equipment requirements.
            (15)   Fueling procedures for all onsite equipment and vehicles.
            (16)   Facility cleaning and maintenance.
            (17)   Litter, vector, dust, odor and noise control procedures.
            (18)   Indoor and outdoor air quality procedures and air emission
monitoring system(s).
            (19)   Fire and emergency management control procedures.
            (20)   Corrective actions for spills and other operational
accidents.
            (21)   Lockout / tagout procedures.
            (22)   Wastewater generation and handling, including:
               (A)   Wastewater generation calculations;
               (B)   Wastewater storage procedures; and
               (C)   Wastewater disposal / treatment procedures.
            (23)   Operational contingency plans, including:
               (A)   Equipment failure;
               (B)   Interruption of utility service; and
               (C)   Inclement weather.
            (24)   Record-keeping procedures, including:
               (A)   Daily tonnage receipts by waste type;
               (B)   In-county daily tonnage receipts;
               (C)   All regulatory correspondence;
               (D)   All environmental and regulatory inspections;
               (E)   Wastewater generation and disposal records;
               (F)   Load inspection and load discrepancy records; and
               (G)   Accident records.
            (25)   The stages of development or use.
            (26)   A closure plan including:
               (A)   Equipment cleaning and removal procedures;
               (B)   Cost estimate for closure;
               (C)   Schedule for closure;
               (D)   Required post-closure care responsibilities and
procedures; and
               (E)   Demonstration of financial assurance measure(s) to be
utilized.
            (27)   An end use plan describing the future use(s) of the property
following closure and completion of any post-closure care obligations. The end
use plan should include:
               (A)   Identification of the planned or potential use of the
property;
               (B)   Additional activities that would be required to prepare
the property for the proposed use following completion of closure and post-
closure care as applicable; and
               (C)   Identification of the parties to be responsible for
coordination, approval, and development of the use (e.g., applicant, local
government(s) including the county and/or nearby municipalities, other private
entities, etc.).
            (28)   Any additional information to demonstrate that the proposed
facility is proposed to be operated in such a manner that the public health,
safety and welfare will be protected, in addition to that which is required
herein.
      3.   The facility is located so as to minimize the incompatibility with
the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value
of the surrounding property:
         a.   Adjacent and surrounding zoning and land uses within one and one-
half (1.5) miles of the property line of the site.
         b.   Appearance of proposed final development and/or final design
grades relative to surrounding properties.
         c.   Proposed use after operation (i.e., end use) including changes in
topography and all new surface features.
         d.   A description of how the applicant will minimize the effect of
traffic flow to and from the proposed facility on the character of the area
through which the traffic is proposed to pass and property values.
         e.   A description of the external materials to be used in
construction of the proposed facility.
         f.   A description of any proposed landscaping or facility screening.
         g.   Property values of surrounding property, and a property value
impact analysis conducted by a certified real estate appraiser demonstrating
the proposed facility will minimize the impact on the value of the surrounding
property.
      4.   The facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain or the site is flood-proofed:
         a.   Location of the 100-year floodplain;
         b.   A statement as to whether the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the site is floodproofed; and
         c.   Documentation supporting such statement.
      5.   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or other operational
accidents:
         a.   Provide documentation detailing, at a minimum:
            (1)   Accident prevention plan, including plans for spill control
and containment;
            (2)   Fire prevention plan;
            (3)   Proposed responses to spills and other operational accidents;
            (4)   An emergency response plan for the proposed site, including,
but not limited to, documentation detailing procedures to be used in case of a
release or spill, as to:
               (A)   Notification of appropriate agencies and personnel;
               (B)   Containment procedures; and
               (C)   Evacuation procedures for the facility and the surrounding
area.
      6.   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows:
         a.   Provide a traffic study regarding the proposed site including:
            (1)   Methodology used to identify the traffic characteristics of
the facility, perform traffic assignment and analysis, and evaluate roadway and
site access requirements;
            (2)   Evaluation of site accessibility, including site location,
area roadways, proposed roadway improvements, and existing traffic volumes;
            (3)   The anticipated number and type of vehicles, their size,
weight, and directional distribution indicating where vehicles are traveling
from and to as they enter and exit the facility;
            (4)   The number of each type of vehicle expected or intended to
enter or exit the facility, broken down by each hour of the day. If the number
of vehicles is expected or intended to be greater or less on particular days of
the week, identify those days, the numbers of vehicles, and where it includes
vehicles other than passenger automobiles, include the hourly analysis for each
day of the week;
            (5)   Proposed traffic route(s) or plan for vehicles entering and
exiting the facility, from the point where the vehicles enter or exit the
county to the point where the vehicles enter or exit the proposed facility,
including, but not limited to identification of all roadways within the county
which the vehicles will utilize for access to the site and the anticipated
primary routing to disposal facilities when exiting the site where applicable.
Where it is expected that passenger automobiles will be utilized only to bring
passengers to and from the site and the automobile traffic is not the majority
of traffic to or from the site, then such automobile traffic may be excluded
from the traffic routes described;
            (6)   Accident history of key intersections to and from the
facility; and
            (7)   Gap study for key intersections to and from the facility and
the facility entrance and exit.
      7.   If the facility will be treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment, and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release:
         a.   If the site is a proposed hazardous waste facility, provide a
copy of the resource conservation recovery act contingency plan. Hazardous
waste treatment and/or disposal facilities warrant an increased level of
scrutiny that will require documentation beyond the scope of this article.
      8.   If the facility is to be located in a county where the county board
has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning
requirements of the local solid waste disposal act or the solid waste planning
and recycling act, the facility is consistent with that plan:
         a.   A statement by the applicant demonstrating that the proposed
facility is consistent with the county's solid waste management plan, including
any updates of that plan (e.g., five (5) year update).
      9.   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area,
any applicable requirements specified by the Illinois pollution control board
for such areas have been met:
         a.   The applicant shall provide documentation detailing compliance
with any and all applicable requirements specified by the Illinois pollution
control board should the facility be located within a regulated recharge area.
      10.   Operator information and experience, including:
         a.   A statement describing the past operating experience of the
applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation), in the field of solid waste management and identify all
experience in the state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, a list of
all existing, planned or closed facilities which manage, treat, store,
consolidate or dispose of waste; the capacity of such facility established by
operational feasibility, permit and siting condition; the date and community
which granted site location approval; the street address of the facility; any
IEPA number assigned to identify the facility; and identification over the past
ten (10) years of any notices of violation of federal, state or local
government law, ordinance, rule, regulation, permit or permit condition, or
condition on site location approval received at the facility, a description of
such notices of violation (including citation), and a description of the
resolution, if any, of such alleged violations. List all litigation in which
the applicant has been involved in the connection with the foregoing. State
also if the applicant has ever voluntarily or involuntarily closed a pollution
control facility in Illinois, and if so, the name and location of said facility
and the dates upon which said closing was commenced and completed.
         b.   Furnish a statement citing the past record of convictions or
admissions of violations of the applicant over the past ten (10) years,
including, but not limited to, any of its current officers and directors, and
any of a subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation. Said statement shall include, but not be limited to, a citation of
the applicable statute or ordinance violated; a brief written summary of the
violation or conviction; and the penalty imposed. As to the past record of
convictions or admissions of violations of the applicant, its officers or
directors, or any subsidiary or parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation, provide documentation detailing:
            (1)   A description of each conviction or admission of violations,
either criminal or civil, of any foreign, federal, state or local law, statute,
regulation, or ordinance of: 1) the applicant, 2) any subsidiary corporation of
the applicant, 3) any parent corporation of the applicant, 4) any subsidiary of
the parent corporation, or 5) the current officers and directors of the
applicant, including, but not limited to, the identification of the law,
statute, regulation or ordinance violated and the penalty imposed.
            (2)   To the extent such conviction or admission of violation
involved or was related to operation of a pollution control facility or waste
management, provide a description of the type of facility, including, but not
limited to, identification of the location of the facility.
            (3)   A description of enforcement actions or lawsuits brought, if
any, by any government entity or any person.
            (4)   Remedial action taken, if any, as a result of, in conjunction
with, or as part of a settlement of any conviction or admission of violation.
         c.   In addition to the above, the petition shall be accompanied by
all documents, if any, submitted as of the date of filing to the IEPA in
connection with the application except trade secrets as determined under 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7.1.
      11.   Additional information to be submitted with the petition:
         a.   Proof of service evidencing that copies of said petition were
served upon each municipality whose official boundaries are within one and one-
half (1.5) miles of the property line of the proposed facility.
         b.   Proof of notice, pursuant to section 39.2(b) of the act.
         c.   Provide all physical evidence, including, but not limited to,
studies; maps, reports; permits or exhibits which the applicant desires the
county board to consider at the public hearing. It is intended that the
applicant provide a full and complete disclosure of his case to facilitate
early review and analysis by all participants.
         d.   The petition shall be signed by the applicant, landowners,
operator, engineer registered in the state of Illinois under the Illinois
professional engineering practice act, land surveyor and any other technical
consultant responsible for drafting all or portions of the petition. (Ord. 04-
393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-59: PAYMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS:
   A.   Initial Costs And Fees Deposit: At the time of filing a petition, the
applicant shall submit to the clerk a costs deposit in the form of a certified
or cashier's check made payable to "Kane County Treasurer", to defray the
reasonable and necessary fees and costs of the county in processing and
responding to the petition, and any appeal from the county's decision on the
petition, including, but not limited to, the fees and cost of: county employee
or staff review time, expert witnesses, scientific testing, records or other
investigations, data searches, notices, court reporters, transcription costs,
consultants and attorneys, the hearing officer, other expenses incurred by the
county or any county officer or official in conducting the review of the
petition, the public hearing, the county's site location decision, and any
appeal of the county's site location decision. The amount of the initial costs
and fees deposit depends on the type of facility which the applicant proposes:
 
Landfill, including expansion $250,000.00
Incinerator                   250,000.00
Transfer station              150,000.00
Storage facility              75,000.00
Other                         35,000.00
 
   B.   Additional Initial Costs And Fees Deposit For Hazardous Waste
Facilities: In addition to the initial costs and fees deposit stated in
subsection A of this section, a facility which proposes to manage hazardous
waste will be subject to an additional initial fee of one hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($150,000.00) above the amounts listed in subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Subsequent Costs And Fees Deposits: Should there be any additional
costs incurred by the county or any county officer over the amount paid by the
applicant in the initial costs and fees deposit (including, but not limited to,
fees and costs associated with any appeal of a county decision on the petition)
the applicant shall bear any and all additional costs. If at any time, the
balance of the initial costs and fees deposit is reduced to a figure less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) at any time prior to the conclusion of the
review, hearing, decision and appeal (if any) of the petition, the applicant,
upon notice from the county, shall contribute an additional twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00), unless a lesser sum is needed and the county's
notice to the applicant identifies the lesser sum. The applicant, within five
(5) business days of receiving such notice, shall pay the amount requested to
the county to supplement the initial costs and fees deposit.
   D.   Amendment Costs And Fees: In the event the applicant files an amendment
in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/39.2(e), an additional
initial costs and fees deposit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be
delivered to the clerk at the same time as the filing of the amendment, and
such deposit shall be in the same form as described in subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Fees And Expenses Incurred By County: All fees and expenses incurred by
the county as described in subsection A of this section, shall be paid from the
fees and costs deposits as provided herein:
      1.   Records of county incurred fees and costs, including, but not
limited to, relevant time records of county employees and staff and county
consultants, may be submitted by the persons creating such records to the
director of the county finance department on a no more frequent than monthly
basis.
      2.   The director of the county finance department or his/her designee,
shall organize the records and prepare and submit periodic reports to the
county board chairman, clerk and the applicant, of invoices to or expenditures
by the county. The actual invoices and bills submitted to the director of the
county finance department may be, but are not required to be, included in the
report submitted to the county board chairman, clerk and applicant only if all
privileged and confidential information has been redacted. Inadvertent
disclosure of confidential or privileged information by the director of the
county finance department is not a waiver of confidentiality or privilege.
      3.   Not earlier than ten (10) calendar days after the submittal of each
report, described in subsection E2 of this section, to the county board
chairman, clerk and applicant, and provided the county board has not instructed
the director of the county department of finance to do otherwise, the director
may draw upon the applicant's costs and fees deposits in the amount of the
reported incurred costs and fees.
      4.   In determining the fees to be paid to the county to reimburse the
county for its employees' or staff's time involved in matters concerning the
petition, hearings on the petition, or appeals (if any), the director of the
county department of finance shall determine a rate for each employee who
submits a record of his/her time to the director, including in such rate, all
costs of the county in compensating such employee or staff member, such as
salary or wage, benefits and retirement. The director shall include the rate it
calculates per employee in the report described in subsection E2 of this
section.
      5.   Any portion of the fees and costs deposits that remains unexpended
at the conclusion of the site location review process (including all appeals
and resolution of any applicant challenge to fees or costs), shall be returned
to the applicant.
      6.   An applicant may, within five (5) calendar days of its receipt of a
report under subsection E2 of this section, deliver to the director of the
county finance department a written challenge to the necessity or
reasonableness of a fee or cost set forth in the report. The challenge shall
specify all of its basis, reasons or objections, or such basis, reasons or
objections are waived. In addition, any challenge to fees or costs not timely
raised pursuant to this subsection are waived. Challenged fees or costs shall,
at the discretion of the director of the department of finance, be paid,
despite the challenge by the applicant, however, the director's utilization of
such discretion shall not be evidence of the reasonableness, unreasonableness,
necessity or nonnecessity of such fees or costs. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord.
08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-60: REQUEST FOR MODIFICATION OF SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Upon receipt of a written request from a potential applicant, specific
requirements within this article may be modified by the chair of the Kane
County board, with the advice and consent of the Kane County solid waste
committee, under the following conditions:
      1.   The proposed facility's primary purpose is to accept a waste
material of no more than one thousand (1,000) tons per day and through
composting, processing or other method(s) produces a marketable product for
resale.
The chair of the Kane County board will first determine whether the request for
an amendment is warranted. If the chairman decides a revision is warranted, the
request will be presented to the solid waste committee for advice and consent.
If the chairman of the Kane County board decides the request for an amendment
is or is not warranted, after consultation with the solid waste committee, the
matter will be referred to the county board for its decision by an affirmative
vote of a majority of the members of the county board whether to approve or
deny the request.
The decision of whether a proposed facility is warranted for consideration
under this provision by the Kane County board, and the decision to modify this
article under this provision by the county board is final and cannot be
appealed. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-
2021)
11-61: PARTICIPANTS:
   A.   Participant: The applicant is a participant.
   B.   Employees Participating In Public Hearings: The county, its employees
and staff, and any experts, consultants, investigators or attorneys hired by
the county to review, investigate, present at hearing, or otherwise work for
the county concerning the petition, are participants. To the extent the county
employees and staff wish to participate in the public hearings outside their
roles or employment with the county, they must submit a notice of
participation, as do other members of the public.
   C.   Notice Of Participation: Any person other than described in subsections
A and B of this section, must file a written notification of intent to
participate (notice of participation), on a form provided by the clerk, with
the clerk before the start of the first day of public hearing; or, to the
hearing officer, after the start and before the adjournment of the first day of
public hearing. Such notification shall state, at a minimum, the name, address,
daytime phone number and, if available, facsimile number and e-mail address of
the person filing the notice of participation, whether the person will be
participating on his/her own behalf or as a representative/spokesperson of
another person or entity (and if on behalf of another person or entity,
identify the name of that person or entity), whether the person (or the entity
or association he/she represents) will be represented by an attorney during the
public hearings, and whether the person intends on providing oral testimony or
comment during the public hearing.
   D.   Participant Rights: Participants have the right to present sworn
testimony and witnesses; provide unsworn, oral comment during the public
hearing (subject to the hearing officer's judgment and consistent with
fundamental fairness); if represented by an attorney, participants have the
right to have their attorney cross examine witnesses who provide sworn
testimony; if not represented by an attorney, participants have the right to
submit to the hearing officer written questions to the hearing officer to be
asked of the witnesses at the hearing officer's discretion as to whether and
how such questions are to be posed. An attorney representing a participant must
be licensed and in good standing to practice law in the state of Illinois, or
if licensed and in good standing to practice law in another state which is part
of the United States, shall be allowed to serve as an attorney for a
participant upon motion made to and acted upon by the hearing officer at the
hearing officer's discretion. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008;
Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-62: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   No sooner than ninety (90) days but no later than one hundred twenty
(120) days from the date the petition was filed with the clerk, a public
hearing shall be held by the county board. One member of the county board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of holding such a public hearing. They will
observe the proceedings.
   B.   The chairman of the county board shall determine the date, time and
location upon which such public hearing shall be held, but in any event the
initial public hearing must be scheduled no sooner than ninety (90) days but no
later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the petition was filed
with the clerk.
   C.   The chairman of the county board shall notify the clerk of the date
upon which such hearing shall be held and shall request the clerk to cause
notice of such hearing to be made as follows. Upon receipt of such request, the
clerk shall cause the publication of notice pursuant to the following
requirements:
      1.   By publication of two (2) legal notices in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the county. One such notice shall be published no
later than sixty (60) days from the date the petition was filed and one such
notice shall be published no later than seventy five (75) days from the date
the petition was filed.
      2.   Such notices shall consist of the following information which,
except for subsections C2h through C2j of this section, must be disclosed by
the applicant in the petition:
         a.   The name and address of the person, partnership or corporation
requesting site location approval;
         b.   The name and address of the owner of the site, and in case
ownership is in a land trust, the names of the beneficiaries of said trust;
         c.   The legal description of the site;
         d.   The street address of the property, and if there is no street
address applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership or occupancy or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
         e.   The nature and size of the proposed facility;
         f.   The nature of the activity proposed;
         g.   The probable life of the proposed activity and facility;
         h.   The time and date of the public hearing(s);
         i.   The location(s) of the public hearing(s);
         j.   A statement that all copies of evidence other than testimony to
be submitted at the public hearing(s) must be filed with the county clerk at
least seven (7) days before the date of the first public hearing.
      3.   A copy of the notice shall also be sent, by certified mail to:
         a.   All members of the general assembly from the district in which
the proposed facility is located;
         b.   The Illinois environmental protection agency;
         c.   All municipalities and townships within one and one-half (11/2)
miles of the property line of the proposed facility (such property line to be
determined from the petition).
      4.   AAdditional notice of the public hearing may be given by publishing
a notice in a newspaper of general circulation published as a display ad at
least once during the week preceding the public hearing. Such notice shall
consist of all items described in subsections C2a through C2j of this section
except for subsection C2c of this section.
   D.   Prior to the date of the first public hearing, the chairman of the
county board and the Kane County state's attorney shall, jointly, appoint the
hearing officer for the public hearing on the petition. The hearing officer
shall preside over the public hearing and shall make any decisions concerning
the admission of evidence and the manner in which the hearing is conducted
subject to this article. The hearing officer shall make all decisions and
rulings in accordance with the concept of fundamental fairness. The hearing
officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony. No
ruling of the hearing officer shall be appealable to the county board. All
testimony shall be in the presence of a certified court reporter who shall
report all proceedings regarding consideration of the petition. The hearing
officer shall have the following powers or duties:
      1.   Administer oaths and affirmations.
      2.   Conduct a public meeting, prior to the start of the public hearings,
to explain the public hearing and site location review process. If the hearing
officer decides to hold such a meeting, notice shall be given in a newspaper of
general circulation one week prior to the meeting and such notice shall
expressly state that it is an informational meeting concerning the procedure to
be used at the public hearing and the site location review process, and that it
is not a public hearing at which evidence will be taken for purposes of making
a determination in accordance with the act.
      3.   Arrange for the presence of a certified court reporter to attend and
transcribe the conduct of all public hearings for the public record.
      4.   Regulate the course of the hearing, including, but not limited to,
controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this article.
      5.   Require a witness to state his/her position either for, against, or
undecided as respects the proposed facility.
      6.   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify.
      7.   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of public hearing
consistent with the act and this article, including, but not limited to, the
reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, unsworn oral comment, direct and
cross examination of any witnesses, and the limitation of repetitive or
cumulative testimony and questioning.
      8.   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions, with the
understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental fairness,
but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois supreme court, Illinois
code of civil procedure, or any local rules of evidence governing a civil
judicial trial in the state of Illinois, county of Kane.
      9.   Allow the introduction of late filed evidence, be it written or
testimonial, on behalf of any participant, provided good cause is shown for the
late filing, the evidence is offered in and is relevant to the rebuttal portion
of the participant's case, and evidence was filed with the clerk at least one
day before the public hearing at which it is offered, and fundamental fairness
to all parties will be preserved.
      10.   No ruling of the hearing officer, made during the course of the
public hearing, shall be appealable to the county board.
      11.   The hearing officer may confer with the county board concerning the
petition, between the time of the filing of the petition and the county board's
decision on the petition. However, the hearing officer may not confer with the
participants (applicant and county included, but the county board members, the
director of the county department of environmental and water resources, and the
director of the county division of transportation are not included in this
restriction) concerning the petition, unless such conference takes place during
the public hearing. The only additional exception from this restriction is that
the hearing officer may confer with the clerk about the upkeep or status of the
public record, make a request to review or copy the public record, or confer
with the clerk regarding the scheduling of the hearings.
      12.   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after consideration of
all timely filed written comments, submit written findings (of law or fact) to
the county board and file a copy of such findings with the clerk. Such written
findings may be submitted to the county board jointly with the director of the
county department of environmental management and the director of the county
division of transportation.
      13.   The hearing officer does not have the right or the power to vote,
as a county board member votes, on the petition.
   E.   The chairman of the county board shall also appoint the director of the
county department of environmental and water resources and the director of the
county division of transportation, as well as any technical consultant retained
by the county to advise it with respect to review of the petition, as technical
representatives of the county board, for purposes of the public hearing. These
directors and technical consultant(s) have the following rights, obligations or
powers for purposes of the public hearing:
      1.   The directors shall attend each day of public hearing, unless
excused by the county board chairman.
      2.   The directors may ask a witness questions.
      3.   The directors and technical consultant(s) may, at the conclusion of
the public hearing and after consideration of all timely filed written
comments, submit written findings and recommendations to the county board. Such
written findings and recommendations may be submitted to the county board
jointly with the hearing officer.
      4.   The directors and technical consultant(s) do not have the right or
the power to vote, as a county board member votes, on the petition.
      5.   The directors and technical consultant(s) may not confer with the
participants (including applicant, county, county board members, and hearing
officer) concerning the petition, unless such conference takes place during the
public hearing. The only additional exception from this restriction is that the
directors may confer with the clerk about the status of the public record, the
hearing schedule, or make a request to the clerk to review or copy the public
record.
   F.   All reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence or copies thereof,
other than testimony, which any participant desires to submit for the record at
the public hearing must be filed with the clerk at least seven (7) calendar
days before the public hearing and shall be available for public inspection in
the office of the clerk. In the event that the seventh day prior to the date
set for public hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the next working
day shall be considered the day that reports, studies and exhibits must be
filed.
   G.   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
      1.   Call to order.
      2.   Introduction of the county board members who are present, the
hearing officer, the director of the county division of transportation, and the
director of the county department of environmental and water resources, and any
technical consultant(s) retained by the county, if present.
      3.   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the petition.
      4.   Recognition of fees, notices, and date of filing of the petition.
      5.   Recognition of the county.
      6.   Recognition of all other participants who have filed the notice of
participation, pursuant to subsection
11-61C of this chapter.
      7.   Recognition of all reports, exhibits, maps or documents of record as
filed pursuant to subsection F of this section.
      8.   The applicant, the county and participants may make an opening
statement.
      9.   The county board shall then hear testimony from the applicant and/or
any witnesses the applicant may wish to call. Upon the close of the applicant's
testimony, participants, other than the applicant or the county, may present
sworn testimony, including any witnesses and evidence they wish to present.
      10.   After the close of the applicant's and participants' cases as
described in subsection G9 of this section, the county may present any
witnesses and evidence it wishes to present.
      11.   Rebuttal testimony and evidence will be allowed at the discretion
of the hearing officer, but if it is allowed, it will be presented in the same
order as described in subsections G9 and G10 of this section.
      12.   Following rebuttal testimony, if any, any participant who wishes to
present unsworn oral comment may then present such comment to the county board.
      13.   Closing statements, if any, by participants, including the
applicant and county, who presented evidence or testimony at or questioned
witnesses during the public hearing.
      14.   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject to
limitations as imposed by the hearing officer.
      15.   Hearing closed.
   H.   All witnesses who testify under oath, shall be subject to reasonable
questioning as follows: direct, cross examination, redirect, recross, etc.
   I.   At any time during the public hearings, any county board member, the
hearing officer, the director of the division of transportation, or the
director of the county department of environmental and water resources may
question participants or cross examine witnesses.
   J.   Should any issues, facts, data or other evidence arise during the
course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably foreseeable
by a party from the petition as filed with the clerk, such situation may
constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for a period not to
exceed five (5) working days. Any decision in this regard shall be made by the
hearing officer. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183,
4-13-2021)
11-63: PUBLIC COMMENT:
   A.   Any person has the right to file written comment concerning the
appropriateness of the proposed facility, or its compliance with the
requirements of section 39.2 of the act, with the clerk, at any time after the
filing of a petition and within the time limitation provided in subsection D of
this section.
   B.   The clerk, on behalf of the county board, shall receive written comment
from any person concerning the appropriateness of the proposed site. Upon
receipt of any such written comment the clerk shall date stamp same and shall
file written comment and the postmarked envelope in which comment is received.
   C.   Copies of such written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the offices of the clerk, and members of the public shall be
allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment of actual cost of
reproduction.
   D.   Any written comment received by the clerk or postmarked not later than
thirty (30) days after the date of the last public hearing shall be made part
of the record at the public hearing as hereinafter described and the county
board shall consider any such timely written comments in making its final
determination concerning said petition. In the event that the thirtieth day
falls on a Sunday or a federal holiday, the next day on which mail is delivered
shall be considered the thirtieth day for purposes of this subsection. (Ord.
04-393, 10-12-2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-64: PUBLIC RECORD:
   A.   The clerk or his/her designee shall prepare and maintain the public
record concerning the petition with a full and complete copy maintained at the
county board office, such record shall include the following documents:
      1.   The original petition and any amendments filed with the clerk.
      2.   All written comment filed with the clerk within the time frame
specified by subsections
11-63A and D of this chapter.
      3.   Notices of participation filed with the clerk, pursuant to
subsection
11-61C of this chapter.
      4.   All exhibits entered into evidence at the time of the public
hearings.
      5.   All transcripts of testimony during the public hearing.
      6.   Any motions filed during the course of the public hearing.
      7.   Any evidence filed pursuant to subsection
11-62F of this chapter.
      8.   Copies of all published or displayed notices of the public hearings
which were prepared by the county or prepared by others and filed with the
clerk.
      9.   All reports submitted to the clerk by the director of the county's
department of finance pursuant to subsection
11-59E2 of this chapter, redacted as necessary to prevent disclosure of
confidential or privileged information.
      10.   All transcripts, when available, of meetings, other than the public
hearings held pursuant to this article, at which a county board member was in
attendance. Although county board members are not encouraged to attend meetings
at which the member knows the petition may be discussed, due to the member's
continuing, regular legislative duties during the course of the county board's
consideration of a petition, attendance at such meetings is sometimes
unavoidable (e.g., attendance at a municipality's council meeting, attendance
at a local chamber of commerce meeting). As such, the member is required to
obtain and file a transcript of any meeting, where such meeting has been
transcribed or recorded, or otherwise disclose such meeting in the public
records (such as disclosing it on the record during the transcribed public
hearings or during the written comment period provided for in this article).
      11.   The hearing officer's, the director of the county division of
transportation's, and director of the county department of environmental and
water resources’ written findings and recommendations to the county board.
      12.   The resolution containing the final decision of the county board on
the petition.
   B.   The clerk or his/her designee shall, during the regular business hours
of the clerk's office, make the public record available to any person
requesting to review it.
   C.   The clerk or his/her designee shall, during the regular business hours
of the clerk's office, accept requests from persons for copies of the public
record, in whole or in part, and arrange for copying so requested upon the
requesting person's payment of the actual cost of copying. The clerk shall
respond to copying requests within a reasonable time.
   D.   The clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of the public
record.
   E.   Although late filed public comments are not part of the public record
pursuant to this article, they shall be retained by the clerk with any evidence
of date of filing, such as the clerk's date stamp copy of the written comment
or the postmark, if the written comment was mailed. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-2004;
Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-65: DECISION BY THE COUNTY BOARD:
   A.   On or before the one hundred eightieth day following the date the
petition was filed, or on or before the two hundred seventieth day following
the date the petition was filed if the applicant filed an amendment to the
petition in compliance with the timing requirements of the act, the county
board shall, by written resolution, upon the vote of a majority of its members,
decide whether to:
      1.   Grant the petition, without any conditions; or
      2.   Grant the petition, but with conditions on such approval, provided
such conditions are reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of
section 39.2 of the act and are not inconsistent with the regulations
promulgated by the Illinois pollution control board; or
      3.   Deny the petition.
   B.   The county board shall state in its decision its findings as to whether
the applicant has established, and whether the public record supports the
establishment of each of the following criteria:
      1.   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area
it is intended to serve;
      2.   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      3.   The facility is located so as to minimize the incompatibility with
the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value
of the surrounding property;
      4.   For a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal
site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain
or the site is floodproofed; and for a facility that is a sanitary landfill or
waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-
year floodplain, or if the facility is a facility described in subsection (b)
(3) of section 22.19a of the act, the site is floodproofed;
      5.   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other operational
accidents;
      6.   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      7.   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release;
      8.   If the facility is to be located in a county where the county board
has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning
requirements of the local solid waste disposal act or the solid waste planning
and recycling act, the facility is consistent with that plan; for purposes of
this criterion (8), the “solid waste management plan” means the plan that is in
effect as of the date the application for siting approval is filed; and
      9.   If the facility is located in a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Illinois pollution control board for
such areas have been met.
   C.   The county board shall consider as evidence the previous operating
experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the
applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation) in the field of solid waste management when considering the second
and fifth criterion of the act, and subsections B2 and B5 of this section.
   D.   In making its decision, the county board shall consider the public
record of the hearing proceedings, as defined in section
11-64 of this chapter, except that the county board shall not consider as
evidence those portions of the public record identified in subsections
11-64A3 and
11-64A8 through A10 of this chapter. The county board shall give greater
evidentiary weight to sworn testimony and evidence presented during the public
hearings than to unsworn oral or written comment.
   E.   No determination by the county board of a petition may be reconsidered,
except to the extent it is reversed and remanded on appeal and the county board
is directed by the Illinois pollution control board or Illinois appellate court
to conduct all or part of the review process again.
   F.   Any county board member may be excused from participation in the
hearing and decision upon demonstration of any disqualifying direct and
personal interest in the property or the affairs of the applicants.
Additionally, any county board member may abstain from voting on the decision,
except to the extent there are insufficient number of board members to pass a
resolution consistent with subsection A of this section. (Ord. 04-393, 10-12-
2004; Ord. 08-168, 5-13-2008; Ord. 21-183, 4-13-2021)
11-66 - 11-107: RESERVED:
ARTICLE IV. RECYCLING AND HAULER LICENSING
SECTION:
11-108: Definitions
11-109: Applicability
11-110: Enforcement And Right Of Inspection
11-111: Separation And Collection Of Recyclable Materials From Residential
Dwelling Units
11-112: Separation And Collection Of Recyclable Materials From Commercial
Establishments
11-113: Licenses
11-114: Violations And Penalties
11-115: Administrative Procedures
11-116: Hearings
11-117: Severability
11-118: Provisions Cumulative
11-119 - 11-130: Reserved
11-108: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT: Any building or any part of a building wherein
commerce or business is conducted, both profit and not for profit, including,
but not limited to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, shopping centers,
theaters, schools, churches, government offices, and manufacturing facilities.
COMPOST: A nutrient-rich soil amendment composed of organic material that has
been processed through decomposition at a permitted facility.
COUNTY: Kane County government and any duly authorized representatives or
divisions, including the Kane County Department of Environmental Management.
DWELLING UNIT OR RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: A residential accommodation
including complete kitchen facilities permanently installed which are arranged,
designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one
family.
FOOD SCRAP: Organic material that is capable of being decomposed into compost
by composting and that may be separated from municipal waste for the purpose of
composting, including, but not limited to, vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, sale, or consumption of food.
GARBAGE: Any refuse products or materials discarded as no longer usable.
HAULER: Any person who engages in the business of collecting or hauling
garbage, municipal waste, recyclables or other refuse on a continuous and
regular basis, and makes multiple scheduled collections per month within the
County.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Materials that are separated from municipal waste for the
purpose of composting, including, but not limited to, all accumulations of
grass, shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs, and other materials accumulated
as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, and trees.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A property with manufactured single-family housing units
thereon.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units
used for residential occupancy, including apartment houses, nontransient
apartment hotels, rooming houses, boarding houses, fraternities, sororities,
dormitories and similar housing types but not including hotels, motels,
hospitals, foster family homes, long term care facilities or semi-independent
group residents.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Garbage, refuse, general household, institutional and
commercial waste, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and construction and
demolition debris.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that are separated from municipal waste for the
purpose of recycling, including, but not limited to, aluminum and tin cans,
newspapers, corrugated cardboard, mixed office paper, high-grade printing and
writing papers, magazines, plastic containers (bottles, tubs, jugs, and jars)
and glass containers (bottles and jars).
RECYCLING: A method, technique, or process by which materials that would
otherwise be disposed of or discarded are collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products, but does not include the combustion of waste for energy recovery or
volume reduction.
REFUSE: Garbage or municipal waste. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-109: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all premises located within the borders of the
County; provided, however, that certain municipalities, townships and township
solid waste management districts may sever themselves from County jurisdiction
relative to this article pursuant to the provisions of section
11-117 of this article. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-110: ENFORCEMENT AND RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
   A.   The provisions of this article are to be managed, administered and
enforced by the Kane County Division of Environmental and Water Resources or
its duly authorized representative.
   B.   The Director and the Recycling Coordinator of the Kane County Division
of Environmental and Water Resources and their duly authorized representatives,
after notification and identification and subject to constitutional
limitations, may enter at reasonable times upon the private or public property,
both indoors and outdoors, and including any motor vehicle used to haul refuse
or recyclables, of any commercial establishment or similar entity, or of the
common areas of any multi-family dwelling unit for the purposes of
investigating conditions relating to the administration and enforcement of this
article or to determine whether a violation of this article exists.
The owner, owner's authorized representative or occupant of a commercial
establishment or of a multi-family dwelling unit shall give the Director and
Recycling Coordinator, and their authorized representatives, free access to
said premises at all reasonable times relating to the administration and
enforcement of this article; provided, however, that an owner of a multi-family
dwelling unit, or the owner's authorized representative, shall not give the
inspector access to the interior of a privately occupied residential dwelling
unit. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-111: SEPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FROM RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Separation Required: It shall be the duty of every occupant of a
single-family, two-family, or multi-family dwelling unit to separate recyclable
materials from all other municipal waste, and store these recyclables
separately in containers designed for recycling.
   B.   Collection Of Recyclables:
      1.   Collection of recyclable materials, as defined above, from all
dwelling units shall be by a hauler duly licensed by the County under this
article selected by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by a manager of
such premises, or by an association governing such premises, or by franchise
awarded by a municipality or township. It shall be the duty of every owner of a
two-family or a multi-family dwelling unit or owner of a mobile home park an
association governing such properties to arrange for the collection of
recyclables from such premises by duly licensed haulers.
      2.   As a guideline to owners of two-family or multi-family dwelling
units or mobile home parks, it is recommended that each refuse corral on the
premises include at a minimum, one (1) 96-gallon wheeled cart for collection of
recyclable materials, co-located with each trash dumpster. Over time, as
participation increases, the recommended standard is to scale service so as to
have a recycling dumpster of a capacity equal to forty percent (40%) the
capacity of the trash dumpster.
      3.   Recyclable materials to be separated for collection shall include
all acceptable items listed in the definition above.
      4.   Recyclable materials collected by a hauler within the County shall
not be deposited into a landfill or incinerator unless all reasonable efforts
have been made by the hauler to sell those recyclable materials to a processor
or end user.
   C.   Ownership Of Refuse And Recyclables:
      1.   Ownership of refuse and recyclable material set out for collection
shall remain with the occupant who set out the material until removal by a
licensed hauler. Until the refuse and/or recyclable materials are removed by
the licensed hauler, the occupant who set out the material is totally
responsible for their proper preparation, handling, and storage. Ownership and
responsibility for the proper handling of the refuse and recyclable materials
shall vest in the licensed hauler upon removal thereon by the hauler.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person who is not licensed by the County to
take or collect or scavenge any refuse or recyclable materials set out for
licensed collection programs within the County. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-112: SEPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FROM COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Separation Required: As of January 1, 1997, all commercial
establishments, having recyclable materials which accumulate on the premises,
shall separate from all other municipal waste all recyclable materials as
defined above for said commercial establishment. It shall also be the duty of
every owner, tenant, or occupant of a commercial establishment to store these
recyclables separately in designated containers.
   B.   Collection Of Recyclables:
      1.   Collection of recyclables from the commercial establishment shall be
by a hauler selected by the owner or manager of such premises or by an
association governing such premises, or by franchise awarded by a municipality,
village or township, but which hauler is duly licensed by the County under
section
11-113 of this article.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any hauler to knowingly collect municipal
waste from any commercial establishment that is not separating its recyclable
materials for collection and recycling.
      3.   Each hauler shall offer, either as part of basic service, or
alternatively as an additional service, the collection of recyclable materials
and food scrap from any commercial business, commercial property, or
institutional facility within the County. Haulers shall provide information on
the requirements of this article and on how and what materials to recycle and
compost at least once every other year to customers with recycling service.
Haulers shall provide information on this article, along with a written offer
to provide recycling services to commercial businesses, owners or operators of
commercial property, and institutional facilities that are not recycling. Those
offers shall be made at least once during the term of the contract or at least
once every two (2) years, whichever is shorter. The hauler's written offer
shall include a request that the commercial business, owner or operator of the
commercial business, or institutional facility respond to the hauler's request
to provide recycling services in writing.
      4.   Recyclable materials collected by a hauler within the County shall
not be deposited into a landfill or incinerator unless all reasonable efforts
have been made by the hauler to sell those recyclable materials to a processor
or end user.
   C.   Ownership Of Refuse And Recyclables:
      1.   Ownership of refuse and recyclable material set out for collection
shall remain with the occupant who set out the material until removal by a
licensed hauler. Until the refuse and/or recyclable materials are removed by
the licensed hauler, the occupant who set out the material is totally
responsible for their proper preparation, handling, and storage. Ownership and
responsibility for the proper handling of the refuse and recyclable materials
shall vest in the licensed hauler upon removal thereon by the hauler.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person who is not licensed by the County to
take or collect or scavenge any refuse or recyclable materials set out for
licensed collection programs within the County.
   D.   Request For Waiver:
      1.   If any commercial establishment believes that it has no recyclable
materials or only one recyclable material pursuant to this article, it may
request authorization from the County for a waiver to separate only one
recyclable material; such request shall be submitted in writing to the Kane
County Department of Environmental Management and shall be supported by the
results of a waste audit or other relevant information, which shall be
submitted with the request.
      2.   The County shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
request to approve or deny authorization for waiver. The decision shall be in
writing and shall be served personally to the person requesting authorization
or by certified mail to the address provided in the written request for waiver.
A decision of denial of a waiver to separate only one recyclable material shall
include a written notice stating the basis for the denial and shall provide
notice to the applicant that a hearing may be requested in writing pursuant to
section
11-116 of this article and that such request must be received by the County
within fifteen (15) calendar days following service of the decision of denial
on the applicant.
      3.   A request for hearing on a denial of a waiver shall be made by the
applicant in writing to the Kane County Department of Environmental Management,
and must be received by said department within fifteen (15) calendar days
following the service of the decision of denial on the applicant. Upon receipt
of a request for hearing, the County shall set a time and place for the
hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures of section
11-116 of this article. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-113: LICENSES:
   A.   Licenses Required: No person or company with two (2) or more trucks
shall engage in the business of collecting or hauling garbage, municipal waste,
recyclables, or other refuse from sites within the County without first
procuring a license to do so from the County. Such license shall be valid for
one calendar year, beginning on January 1.
   B.   Application: Kane County shall prepare and make available to all
haulers an application form for vehicle licenses. The application may include
the following information:
      1.   Name of business operating vehicles.
      2.   Name of manager of business.
      3.   Street address, email address and telephone number of business.
      4.   Year, make, and model of each vehicle.
      5.   Type of each vehicle (e.g., dump truck, packer, pickup, etc.).
      6.   Vehicle identification number, license plate number, and fleet
number for each vehicle.
      7.   Weight of each vehicle.
      8.   Capacity of each vehicle in cubic yards and tons.
      9.   Such other information as the County shall deem appropriate or
necessary.
The licensee shall notify the County in writing within thirty (30) days
following a change in any information contained in the license application.
   C.   License Renewal: The County shall provide license renewal forms to each
hauler within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the contractor's
current license. License renewal forms shall be completed and received by the
County thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the contractor's current
license.
   D.   Conditional License: The County may grant a conditional license where
an application is incomplete. The conditional license shall specify the
conditions upon which a permanent license will be granted and the time
requirement within which the conditions must be met. Failure to comply with the
conditions specified shall result in a revocation of the conditional license
and denial of the permanent license.
   E.   Issuance Or Denial:
      1.   The County shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
license or renewal application to issue or deny the license, license renewal,
or conditional license. The County will issue a temporary license valid for
thirty (30) days upon its failure to act upon the application within thirty
(30) days.
      2.   The past history of the applicant, in terms of compliance with this
article, will be considered for purposes of issuance or denial of the license.
The County shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision.
      3.   A license denial shall provide written notice stating the basis for
the denial and shall provide notice to the applicant that if an appeal is
desired, a written request for a hearing must be received by the County within
fifteen (15) calendar days following service. Upon receipt of a request for
hearing, the County shall set a time and place for the hearing. The hearing
shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures in section
11-116 of this article.
   F.   License And Vehicle Registration Fee:
      1.   Schedule Of Fees: The following fees shall be required:
         a.   For each license: Five hundred dollar ($500.00) base fee.
         b.   For each vehicle used in collecting or hauling garbage, municipal
waste, recyclables, or other refuse: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle.
      Payment of all fees must accompany the license application/renewal.
      2.   Vehicle Registration: The County reserves the right to issue to each
licensee a vehicle registration decal to be placed conspicuously on the outside
of each vehicle so utilized by the contractor operating in Kane County. Such
decals may be issued annually. The number of said vehicles utilized by the
licensee shall be reported in the application.
   G.   Reporting: On or before January 31 of each year, each licensee shall
submit a completed tonnage report form, provided by the County, based on its
recycling service operations during the previous calendar year. Failure to
submit such a report shall constitute a violation of this article and will
result in suspension or revocation of the license. This report shall contain:
      1.   The total tonnage of municipal waste collected in the County.
      2.   The total tonnage of recyclable material collected in the County in
each sector (i.e., municipal residential, unincorporated residential, multi-
family residential, and commercial).
      3.   The total tonnage of landscape waste and food scrap collected for
land application and/or composting.
      4.   The number of accounts held in each sector (i.e. households, multi-
family dwellings, commercial establishments). (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018; Res. 19-
346, 10-8-2019)
11-114: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Civil Penalties:
      1.   Any licensed hauler who violates any provision of this article shall
be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation; and two hundred dollars
($200.00) for a third violation. In the case of a fourth violation, a fourteen
(14) day suspension of a license to collect or haul garbage, municipal waste,
recyclable materials, or other refuse within the County shall be imposed. A
fifth violation may result in two (2) months' suspension of license. For
further subsequent violation(s), the license may be revoked for the remainder
of the license term plus an additional year. For purposes of enforcement, the
time period in which these violations accumulate shall be the period of the
license. Notwithstanding these provisions, any flagrant violation of this
article may result in suspension or revocation proceedings pursuant to
subsection
11-115A of this article.
      2.   Any commercial establishment who violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day in violation. Each
day the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
      3.   Any owner of a two-family, multi-family dwelling unit or mobile home
park who fails to arrange for the collection of separated recyclables from such
unit or units on the property in question or who otherwise violates any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day in
violation. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
      4.   Any person who scavenges municipal waste and recyclable materials
that have been set out by residents, or businesses, or the County specifically
for an authorized collection under this article shall be subject to a fine of
up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Warnings: The County or any of its duly authorized representatives will
issue a warning notice to any occupant of a dwelling unit, owner of a two-
family, multi-family dwelling unit or mobile home park, hauler or establishment
observed not in compliance with any provision of this article.
   C.   Injunctive Relief: The County may institute appropriate actions or
proceedings, including application for injunctive relief, action to compel
performance, or other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or
abate any violation or threatened violation of this article. (Ord. 18-224, 7-
10-2018)
11-115: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Suspension Or Revocation Of License:
      1.   Any license required under this article may be suspended or revoked
for violation of any provisions of this article.
      2.   Written notice of a suspension or revocation shall be served via
email upon the licensee at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
effective date of the suspension or revocation. The written notice shall
contain the effective date of the suspension or revocation; the facts which
support the conclusion that a violation or violations have occurred; a
statement that if the licensee desires to appeal, a written request for a
hearing must be received by the County within fifteen (15) calendar days
following service of the notice, exclusive of the day of service; and that the
request for hearing must state the grounds for appeal. If a hearing is
requested, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending outcome of the
hearing.
      3.   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the County shall set a date,
time, and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures in section
11-116 of this article.
   B.   Summary Suspension Of License:
      1.   If the County finds that the public health, safety, or welfare
requires immediate action, summary suspension of a license may be ordered.
      2.   Written notice of a summary suspension shall be delivered via email.
The County shall also take reasonable steps to notify the licensee by telephone
prior to the summary suspension.
      3.   The written notice shall state the effective date of the summary
suspension; the violation requiring emergency action, the facts which support
the conclusion that a violation has occurred; a statement that if the licensee
desires to appeal, a written request for hearing must be received by the County
within ten (10) calendar days following service of the notice, and that the
request must state the grounds for appeal.
      4.   Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the County shall set a date,
time, and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the
procedures in section
11-116 of this article.
      5.   The summary suspension shall not be stayed pending an appeal. (Ord.
18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-116: HEARINGS:
   A.   Hearings conducted pursuant to this article shall be conducted as
follows:
      1.   Hearing Commission: The hearing shall be before a Hearing Commission
consisting of the three (3) members of the Energy and Environmental Committee
of the Kane County Board.
      2.   Prehearing And Hearing Notice: The County shall schedule and provide
notice of the date, time, and place of the prehearing conference and hearing.
The prehearing conference shall be held at least three (3) weeks prior to the
hearing. The hearing shall be held no later than forty five (45) calendar days
after receipt of the request for hearing or by mutual agreement of the parties.
      3.   Procedures: The prehearing conference and hearing shall be conducted
in the following manner:
         a.   The prehearing conference shall define the issues, schedule the
exchange of witness lists and documentary evidence, seek agreement on the
authenticity of documents and relevant testimonial evidence, determine whether
intended evidence is cumulative and repetitive, and consider all other matters
that will assist in a fair and expeditious hearing.
         b.   Each party shall exchange all relevant information and
documentary evidence at least one week prior to the hearing date. Such
information shall include all evidence intended for introduction at the hearing
and includes, but is not limited to, the following: exhibits; statements;
reports; witness lists including a description of the facts and opinions to
which each is expected to testify; photographs, slides, demonstrative evidence.
Evidence not exchanged in accordance with this provision will not be considered
in the hearing unless good cause is shown to the Hearing Officer.
         c.   The hearing shall be public and shall be recorded by a certified
court reporter.
         d.   All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
         e.   The hearing is subject to the general rules of evidence with
latitude necessary to gain facts or information. Irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
         f.   The County shall have the burden of proof through preponderance
of evidence.
         g.   The County, licensee or applicant, and additional parties as
determined by the Hearing Officer, shall present evidence in that order. Each
party shall have the opportunity to cross examine the witnesses of the other
party. The Hearing Commission may examine witnesses.
         h.   The Hearing Commission shall make a written finding of fact and
conclusions based upon the evidence provided at the hearing.
         i.   The cost of preparing and certifying a record of proceedings
shall be borne by the applicant or licensee.
         j.   Appeal of a decision by the Hearing Commission shall be made to
the Circuit Court within thirty (30) calendar days following the Hearing
Commission decision. (Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-117: SEVERABILITY:
   A.   Provisions: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof.
   B.   Townships: If a township or township solid waste disposal district
within the County has a recycling ordinance in place on the effective date of
this article which substantially conforms with or exceeds the requirements of
this article including, but not limited to, the required separation and
collection of recyclable material, submission of a material separation plan and
reporting requirements, the township may continue to enforce its ordinance and
such enforcement shall constitute within that township implementation of this
article. A township or township solid waste disposal district may at any time
adopt and enforce a recycling ordinance that is more stringent than that
required by this article.
   C.   Municipalities: A municipality which is located in two (2) or more
counties, one of which is a home rule county, may, by ordinance, sever itself
from county jurisdiction relative to this article if the municipality is a
member of a municipal joint action agency formed prior to June 15, 1988,
pursuant to section 3.2 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. (Ord. 18-224,
7-10-2018)
11-118: PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE:
The provisions in this article are cumulative and are additional limitations
upon all other laws and ordinances covering any subject matter in this article.
(Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
11-119 - 11-130: RESERVED:
(Ord. 18-224, 7-10-2018)
ARTICLE V. AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION EASEMENT AND FARMLAND PROTECTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
11-131: Adoption
11-132: Definitions
11-133: Land Trust Commission
11-134: Agricultural Conservation Easement And Farmland Protection Program
Expenditures
11-135: Procedure For Acquisition Of Conservation Interests
11-136: Alienation Of Acquired Interests
11-137: Conflict Of Interest
11-138 - 11-145: Reserved
11-131: ADOPTION:
An article to create the Kane County Agricultural Conservation Easement and
Farmland Protection Program and to establish the Kane County Conservation
Easement and Farmland Protection Program pursuant to the Illinois Property
Conservation Rights Act, 765 ILCS 120/0.01 et seq., to read as follows. (Ord.
01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-132: DEFINITIONS:
In this article:
BOARD: The Kane County Board.
COMMISSION: The Kane County Agricultural Conservation Easement and Farmland
Protection Commission.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: A holder's non-possessory interest in real property
within Kane County imposing any limitation or affirmative obligation the
purpose of which includes protecting viable farm operations and farmland to
maintain the rural character of Kane County, permanently preserving scenic
vistas and environmentally significant areas, including wetlands, lakes,
streams and wood lots, creating and preserving "buffer zones" around
significant environmental areas and agricultural areas, protecting Kane County
from encroachment of neighboring cities and villages, restricting land
divisions, retaining or protecting natural, scenic or open space values of real
property, assuring the availability of real property for agricultural, forest,
recreational or open space use, protecting natural resources, maintaining or
enhancing air or water quality, preserving the historical, architectural,
archaeological or cultural aspects of real property.
CONSERVATION INTEREST: A holder's interest in a conservation easement, a third-
party right of enforcement in a conservation easement or fee title interest in
real property.
HERITAGE FARM: A farm operation including its accompanying agricultural land
that is culturally or historically unique based on features that significantly
contribute to the character of Kane County and make it especially worthy of
protection as agricultural land. A heritage farm located within a Kane County
municipality may be considered through an intergovernmental agreement.
NONPROFIT CONSERVATION ORGANIZATION: A nonprofit corporation, a charitable
trust or other nonprofit association whose purposes include the acquisition of
property for conservation purposes and that is described in Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code and is exempt from federal income tax under
Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001; amd. Ord.
02-206, 7-9-2002)
11-133: LAND TRUST COMMISSION:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created the Kane County Agricultural
Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection Commission (hereinafter the
"Commission").
   B.   Duties: The Commission shall be responsible for general supervision of
the Agricultural Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection Program as set
forth in this article, including the following:
      1.   The Commission shall maintain contact with public and private
agencies to maximize the resources and coordinate efforts to preserve the rural
character of the County.
      2.   The Commission shall determine the interest of owners of land within
the County at least annually, to donate or sell interests in real property for
the purpose of the Agricultural Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection
Program.
      3.   The Commission may recommend selection criteria and may recommend
the acquisition of interests in specific parcels of real property to be
acquired by the County for agricultural protection purposes.
      4.   The Commission may recommend changes to the Kane County Agricultural
Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection Program and suggestions as to how
the Kane County Agricultural Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection Fund
acquisition program may be integrated with the Kane County 2020 Land Resource
Management Plan, the Kane County Historic Preservation Ordinance, the Kane
County 2020 Transportation Plan, and the Kane County Stormwater Management
Ordinance and other local and regional land use plans.
      5.   The Commission may conduct public meetings or public hearings as it
determines necessary or convenient to its work.
      6.   The Commission may prepare any application forms necessary for the
Agricultural Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection Program and prepare,
review and recommend any grant applications for State and Federal grants.
   C.   Membership: The Commission shall consist of nine (9) voting members
consisting of:
      1.   The Chairman of the Kane County Board.
      2.   The Chairman of the Kane County Development Committee.
      3.   A representative of the Kane County Farm Bureau.
      4.   Six (6) members appointed by the County Board Chairman with the
advice and consent of the Board, appointed for terms expiring on June 1
following the third anniversary of their appointment. All members shall be
electors of the County and, to the extent practicable, include persons with
backgrounds and experience in agriculture, finance, conservation or planning.
      5.   The Chairman of the Kane County Regional Planning Commission and the
Chairman of the Kane County Historic Preservation Commission shall be ex-
officio members but shall have no right to vote and shall not be included in
determining a quorum.
   D.   Officers: The Commission shall have the following officers:
      1.   The Commission Chair shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Kane
County Board and shall preside at all meetings of the Commission.
      2.   A Vice Chair shall be elected by a majority vote of the Commission
at the first meeting of the Commission to serve for a term of three (3) years.
   E.   Rules Of Procedure: The Commission may adopt rules of procedure
governing its deliberations. In the absence of any other such rules, the
Commission shall conduct its proceedings in accordance with Robert's Rules of
Order, latest revised edition. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-134: AGRICULTURAL CONSERVATION EASEMENT AND FARMLAND PROTECTION PROGRAM
EXPENDITURES:
The Board is authorized to acquire conservation interests in real property or
to make payments to nonprofit conservation organizations for the purpose of
rural and farmland preservation as provided herein.
   A.   Conservation Easement Purchases: The Board may, subject to subsection
D, expend funds for costs associated with the purchase or acceptance of donated
holders' interests or third party rights of enforcement in conservation
easements as defined, respectively, in the Illinois Property Conservation
Rights Act.
   B.   Land Purchases: The Board may, subject to subsection D, expend funds
for the purchase of land for the purpose of farmland protection.
   C.   Payments To Nonprofit Organizations: The Board may, subject to
subsection D, appropriate money for payment to a nonprofit conservation
organization for the conservation of farmland and natural resources within the
County or beneficial to the County through the acquisition of conservation
interests, provided that the recipient organization submits and the Board
approves a detailed plan for the work to be done. The Board may attach such
conditions and restrictions on the appropriation as the Board considers
necessary and appropriate to protect the County's interests in farmland
protection.
   D.   Voluntary Conveyances: The Board may acquire conservation interests
only from willing owners and may not exercise its power of eminent domain to
acquire such interests.
   E.      Indirect Costs: In addition to the purchase price therefor, the
Board may expend funds for the payment of indirect costs associated with the
conduct of the program, including costs of administration and acquisition of
conservation interests, including but not limited to survey costs, title
evidence, attorneys' fees, appraisers' fees, environmental assessments,
transfer taxes and recording fees. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-135: PROCEDURE FOR ACQUISITION OF CONSERVATION INTERESTS:
   A.   The Board may conduct public meetings or public hearings as it
determines necessary or convenient for consideration of Agricultural
Conservation Easement and Farmland Protection expenditures.
   B.   Prior to purchasing any conservation interest, the Board may cause an
appraisal to be prepared by a qualified appraiser setting forth the fair market
value of the interest proposed to be purchased. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-136: ALIENATION OF ACQUIRED INTERESTS:
Except where the intention to reconvey a conservation interest is expressly
provided for in the Board's authorization to acquire such interest, no
conservation interest acquired by the County under the provisions of this
article shall thereafter be alienated, unless all of the following conditions
have been met:
   A.   The Board or the Commission has conducted a public hearing for the
purpose of considering the proposed alienation;
   B.   The County Board has referred to the Commission, for its consideration
and recommendation before final action is taken by the Board, the proposed
alienation. Unless such recommendation is made within thirty (30) days, or such
longer period as may be stipulated by the Board, the Board may take final
action without it;
   C.   A resolution in support of the proposed alienation is adopted by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board; and
   D.   A resolution in support of the proposed alienation is adopted by a
majority of the members of the governing body of any public agency or nonprofit
conservation organization which jointly undertook the acquisition of the
conservation interest proposed to be alienated. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-137: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No person may participate in any deliberation of the Commission or of the Board
in the consideration or determination of any expenditure under this section in
which the person, a member of the person’s family, or an organization with whom
the person is affiliated has a financial interest. (Ord. 01-67, 4-10-2001)
11-138 - 11-145: RESERVED:
CHAPTER 11.5
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
11.5-1: Definitions
11.5-2: Right Of Inspection
11.5-3: Issuance Of Notice
11.5-4: Hearings And Conferences
11.5-4-1: Enforcement
11.5-5: Penalty
11.5-6: Reserved
11.5-7: Cleanup
11.5-8: Intergovernmental Agreements
11.5-9: Jurisdiction
11.5-10: Relief From Personal Responsibility
11.5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated in
this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
ADULTERATED: Shall have the same definition as defined in the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act, section 402.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: A designated employee of the Kane County Health
Department.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five (5) guestrooms
for rent, in operation for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses or food
establishments.
BUILDING: Any structure which is designed, used or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or other property and
which is permanently affixed to the land.
CERTIFIED FOOD SERVICE MANAGER OR SUPERVISOR: A person certified in compliance
with section 750.540 of the Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code.
CHARITABLE NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization exempt from taxation
pursuant to 26 USC 501(c)(3), and any other organizations whose purpose is not
for profit including, but not limited to, organizations operated exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or
educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports
competition, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals.
COMMISSARY: A catering establishment, food establishment, or any other place in
which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or
stored. This establishment is permitted by the Kane County Health Department or
if outside of Kane County, the local Health Department permitting authority.
COUNTY: The County of Kane, State of Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD: The County Board of Kane County, Illinois.
EMBARGO: To detain the sales or place a hold on the service of any food.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PRACTITIONER: An employee of the Kane County Health
Department credentialed as a licensed environmental health practitioner or
licensed environmental health practitioner in training engaged in the carrying
out of any activity pursuant to this chapter including, but not limited to,
inspections and investigations.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, trapping or by
any other recognized and legal method of pest elimination approved by the
Health Officer or authorized representative.
FOOD EMPLOYEE OR FOOD WORKER: An individual working with unpackaged food, food
equipment or utensils, or food-contact surfaces. "Food employee" or "food
handler" does not include unpaid volunteers in a food establishment, whether
permanent or temporary.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends
food directly to the consumer, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption, such as a restaurant, satellite or catered feeding location,
catering operation if the operation provides food directly to a consumer or to
a conveyance used to transport people, market, vending location, institution or
food pantry; and relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
indirectly, through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders
or restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common
carriers.
Food establishment includes:
   An element of the operation, such as a transportation vehicle or a central
preparation facility, that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding
location, unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the regulatory
authority; and
   An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary or
permanent facility or location. This inclusion applies regardless of whether
consumption is on or off the premises and whether there is a charge for the
food.
Food establishment does not include:
   An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time/
temperature controlled for safety;
   A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables;
   A food processing plant, including those that are located on the premises of
a food establishment;
   A kitchen in a private home, such as a small family daycare provider or a
bed and breakfast operation as defined in the Bed and Breakfast Act that
prepares and offers food to guests;
   A private home that receives catered or home delivered food; a closed family
function where food is prepared or served for individual family consumption; or
   A cottage food operation.
FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION: Any organization established, maintained, or conducted
for the purpose of making a profit.
FUNDRAISING EVENT: An event or campaign whose primary purpose is to raise money
for a cause, charity, or nonprofit organization.
GARBAGE: Organic waste resulting from the preparation, processing, handling and
storage of food, and all decayed or spoiled food from any source whatsoever.
HEALTH COMMITTEE: The Public Health Committee of the Kane County Board.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Kane County Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Executive Director of the Kane County Health Department or
their authorized representative.
HEARING COMMITTEE: Four (4) members of the Kane County Public Health Committee
appointed by the Public Health Committee Chairman to conduct hearings relative
to this chapter or, in the event that any such members are not available, up to
three (3) other members of the Kane County Board appointed by the Public Health
Committee Chairman.
HIGHLY SUSCEPTIBLE POPULATION: Persons who are more likely than other people in
the general population to experience foodborne disease because they are:
   A.   Immunocompromised; preschool age children, or older adults; and
   B.   Obtaining food at a facility that provides services such as custodial
care, health care, or assisted living, such as a child or adult day care
center, kidney dialysis center, hospital or nursing home, or nutritional or
socialization services such as a senior center.
MISBRANDED: The presence of any written, printed or graphic matter upon or
accompanying food or containers of food which is false or misleading.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: A vehicle mounted mobile food establishment designed and
operated as readily movable, e.g., mobile truck moving from location to
location continuously. The unit shall return daily to a commissary for
supplies, cleaning, and for all servicing operations. The unit shall not have
permanent potable water, wastewater, or electric connections.
NONMOBILE FOOD UNIT: A vehicle mounted mobile food establishment designed to be
stationary in a fixed location throughout the day (e.g., trailer). The unit
shall be removed from the fixed location daily to a commissary for supplies,
cleaning, and for all servicing operations. The unit shall be provided with
permanent potable water, wastewater, and electric connections at the fixed
location to ensure no interruption in operation, e.g., potable water tank
empty, wastewater tank full, generator malfunction.
OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of space within a building.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
State, County or Municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERMIT: A written authorization issued by the Kane County Health Department or
its authorized representative.
PERSON: Shall mean, but not be limited to, any individual, partnership,
copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust estate, or municipality, or his or its legal representative or agent.
PERSON IN CHARGE: The individual present at a food establishment who is
responsible for the operation at the time of inspection.
PREHEARING CONFERENCE: An informal conference between the authorized
representative of the Kane County Health Department and the party affected by a
notice pursuant to this chapter, conducted by the Health Officer or authorized
representative.
PREPACKAGED: Bottled, canned, cartoned, or securely wrapped. The term
"prepackaged" does not include a wrapper, carryout box, or other nondurable
container used to containerize food for the purpose of facilitating food
protection during service and receipt of the food by the consumer.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person in whose name legal title to the real estate is
recorded including beneficiaries and/or trustees of a land trust.
PUSHCART: A cart that is limited to precooked hot dogs, unshucked cooked corn,
whole fresh fruit, canned beverages, condiments, and prepackaged non-time/
temperature control for safety food. The unit shall return daily to a
commissary for supplies, cleaning and for all servicing operations. The unit
shall not have permanent potable water, wastewater, or electric connections.
READY TO EAT FOOD: Shall have the same definition as defined in the United
States Public Health Service 2013 Food and Drug Administration Food Code.
REVOCATION: To permanently remove a permit to operate a food establishment or
temporary food establishment.
RODENTS: An animal of the order Rodentia, including, but not limited to, mice,
rats, squirrels, chipmunks, gophers, porcupines, beavers, prairie dogs and
groundhogs.
SEASONAL TEMPORARY FOOD EVENTS: Seasonal temporary events will include multiple
temporary events within Kane County.
SHARED KITCHEN: Any food establishment that has more than one vendor preparing
food in that establishment.
SHARED KITCHEN VENDOR: Any individual operator or entity, who is not the owner
of the kitchen preparing foods in a shared kitchen. This does not include the
individual using the food establishment as a commissary.
SUSPENSION: To temporarily remove a permit to operate a food establishment or
temporary food establishment.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: A food establishment that operates at a fixed
location for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days in
conjunction with a single event or celebration.
TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal
owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TIME/TEMPERATURE CONTROL FOR SAFETY FOOD (Formerly "Potentially Hazardous Food
(PHF)"): Shall have the same definition as defined in the United States Public
Health Service 2013 Food and Drug Administration Food Code, and any further
amendments to.
VENDING LOCATION: Means the room, enclosure, space, or area where one or more
vending machines are installed and operated and includes the storage areas and
areas on the premises that are used to service and maintain the vending
machines.
VERMIN: Roaches, bedbugs, fleas, lice, termites, or similar pest-like insects.
Other definitions as stated in rules and regulations that are referenced in
this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-2: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
The Health Officer or authorized representative, after identification and
subject to constitutional limitations, may enter at reasonable times upon
private or public property, both indoors and outdoors, for the purposes of
investigating conditions relating to the administration and enforcement of this
chapter or to determine if a violation of this chapter exists. The owner,
occupant, tenant or agent of said premises or the person in charge thereof
shall give the Health Officer or authorized representative free access to all
parts of said premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of investigating
conditions relating to the administration and enforcement of this chapter. If
entry is refused or not obtained, the Health Officer or authorized
representative is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law including,
but not limited to, the obtaining of a warrant for inspection at a prescribed
time. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-3: ISSUANCE OF NOTICE:
Whenever the Kane County Health Department determines that a violation of any
provision of this chapter has occurred, the Kane County Health Department shall
give written notice to the owner, occupant, tenant or agent of the property
upon which the violation exists; the notice shall contain:
   A.   The location of the violation;
   B.   A description of what constitutes the violation;
   C.   A statement of acts necessary to abate the violation;
   D.   A date by which the violation must be abated to avoid further legal
action. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-4: HEARINGS AND CONFERENCES:
   A.   Prehearing Conferences Before The Health Officer: Any person affected
by any order or notice issued by the Kane County Health Department in
connection with the enforcement of any section of this chapter, may file in the
Office of the Kane County Health Department a written request for a prehearing
conference before the Health Officer or authorized representative. Unless
stated elsewhere in this chapter, the Health Officer or authorized
representative shall hold a prehearing conference at a time and place
designated by him as soon as possible but no later than five (5) business days
from the date of which the written request was filed. The petitioner for the
prehearing conference shall be notified of the time and place of the prehearing
conference not less than five (5) business days prior to the date on which the
prehearing conference is to be held. The prehearing conference shall be an
informal proceeding and there shall be no testimony by witnesses. If, as a
result of the prehearing conference, the Health Officer or authorized
representative finds that strict compliance with the order or notice would
cause undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would be
adequately protected and substantial justice done by varying or withdrawing the
order or notice, the Health Officer or authorized representative may modify or
withdraw the order or notice and as a condition for such action may, where he
deems it necessary, make requirements which are additional to those prescribed
in this chapter for the purpose of properly protecting the public health. The
Health Officer or authorized representative shall render a decision within ten
(10) business days after the date of the prehearing conference which shall be
reduced to writing and placed on file in the Office of the Kane County Health
Department as a matter of public record. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Health Officer or authorized representative may seek relief therefrom
through a hearing before the Hearing Committee.
   B.   Hearings Before Hearing Committee: Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Health Officer or authorized representative rendered as the result of a
prehearing conference held in accordance with this section, may file in the
Office of the Kane County Health Department a written request for a hearing at
a time and place designated by the Secretary of the Hearing Committee as soon
as possible but no later than five (5) business days of the date on which the
written request was filed. The petitioner for the hearing shall be notified of
the time and place of the hearing not less than five (5) business days prior to
the date on which the hearing is held. If as a result of facts elicited as a
result of the hearing, the Hearing Committee finds that strict compliance with
the decision of the Health Officer or authorized representative would cause
undue hardship on the petitioner, and that the public health would be
adequately protected and substantial justice done by granting a variance from
the decision of the Health Officer or authorized representative, the Hearing
Committee may grant a variance and as a condition for such variance, may, where
it deems necessary, make requirements which are additional to those prescribed
by this chapter. The Hearing Committee shall render a decision within five (5)
business days after the date of the hearing which shall be reduced to writing
and placed on file in the Office of the Health Officer or authorized
representative and a copy thereof shall be served on the petitioner personally
or by delivery to the petitioner by certified mail, return receipt requested. A
certified transcript of the record shall be provided at the expense of the
person requesting the hearing. All witnesses called shall be required to
testify under sworn oath. An appeal from a decision of the Hearing Committee
may be made to the Circuit Court of Kane County, pursuant to the provisions of
the "Administrative Review Law" in force and effect at that time in the State.
(Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-4-1: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Health Officer or authorized representative may issue a complaint
against the owners and occupant of said property or the person responsible for
causing the violation charging a violation of any section or subsection of this
chapter.
   B.   The Health Officer or authorized representative upon observing any
violation of this chapter may issue a notice of violation directed to the
Recorder of Deeds of the County, or to the occupant of said property, or both,
which said notice shall describe the violation and shall establish a reasonable
time limit for the abatement thereof by such owner or occupant, which time
shall not be less than ten (10) business days after service of such notice. An
authorized representative shall serve the notice herein provided for upon the
owner, occupant, tenant or agent of the property where such violation exists,
or upon both of them, and shall make upon his or her return a copy of such
notice, showing the time of service to the person upon whom it was served, or
the manner in which it was served.
      1.   Upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice for the
abatement of such violation, a Health Officer or authorized representative
shall investigate to determine whether or not such violation has been abated.
      2.   In the event the owner or occupant of the property upon which such
violation exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such violation,
then the Health Officer or authorized representative shall file a complaint
pursuant to the processes and methods prescribed by chapter 2, article IX,
"Administrative Adjudication", of this Code. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day's failure
to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Revocation of a permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so
as to bar any other penalty being enforced. The levy and/or payment of any
penalty or fine provided in this article shall not be deemed a waiver of the
authority of the Health Officer or authorized representative to suspend, revoke
or refuse to renew any license or permit for cause. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-7: CLEANUP:
   A.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot neglects
or fails to abate a declared violation after due notice and time specified by
the Health Officer or authorized representative, the Health Officer or
authorized representative may request a private hauler to remove such materials
and the expense incurred shall be billed to the owner, agent, occupant or
tenant.
   B.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot neglects
or fails to exterminate any infestations of vermin or rodents after due notice
and time, as specified by the Health Officer or authorized representative, the
Health Officer or authorized representative may cause such vermin or rodents to
be exterminated and the expense incurred shall be billed to the owner, agent,
occupant, or tenant.
   C.   If the charge for cleanup or extermination remains unpaid, it shall be
included in the food establishment permit renewal fee.
If such charges remain unpaid it shall be made a special lien against the
property at the next tax roll. Such lien shall be such notice to all persons
from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate
thereafter until satisfied. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-8: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
The County of Kane may enter into intergovernmental agreements with
municipalities for the provision of services under this chapter. All rights and
obligations shall be detailed in a written agreement which shall be passed and
signed by the governing boards of each political body. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-
2017)
11.5-9: JURISDICTION:
The Kane County Health Department shall have jurisdiction for the purpose of
enforcement of this chapter as referenced in 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-
25008. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-10: RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The Health Officer or authorized representative charged with the
enforcement of this chapter while acting for Kane County and in good faith and
without malice shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his official duties.
   B.   Any suit instituted against the Health Officer or authorized
representative because of an act performed by him in the lawful discharge of
duties and under provisions of this chapter, shall be defended by the legal
representative of Kane County until the final termination of the proceedings.
   C.   In no case shall the Health Officer or authorized representative be
liable for cost in any action, suit, or proceedings that may be instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The Health Officer or authorized representative, acting in good faith
and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any
provisions of this chapter or by reason of any act or omission in the
performance of his official duties in connection thereto.
   E.   It is the intent of this chapter that the County, Health Officer, and
all authorized representatives shall be extended the full amount of any
immunities authorized by the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort
Immunity Act 1  or at common law. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 745 ILCS 10.
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
11.5-11: Establishment; Powers; Term
11.5-12: Board Of Health Advisory Committee
11.5-13: Appointments; Initial Meetings
11.5-14: Officers; Proceedings
11.5-15: Abolishment Of Tuberculosis Sanatorium And Board; Tax
11.5-16: Authorized Personal Health Fees
11.5-17: Authorized Environmental Health Fees
11.5-18 - 11.5-25: Reserved
11.5-11: ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS; TERM:
   A.   The Kane County Board of Health ("Board of Health") shall be
established consisting of all of the members of the Kane County Board,
including the Chairman thereof.
   B.   The powers of the Board of Health shall be those authorized by statute.
   C.   The Board of Health shall continue in effect until: 1) the effective
date of an ordinance of the County Board abolishing the Board of Health, or 2)
the effective date of any amendment to Illinois Compiled Statutes, or valid
State rules or regulations that attempt to reconstitute the Board of Health in
any manner other than consisting of all of the members of the Kane County
Board. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-12: BOARD OF HEALTH ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
The Board of Health shall be advised by a Board of Health Advisory Committee
which shall consist of at least five (5) members appointed by the Chairman of
the County Board with the approval of the County Board for terms of three (3)
years; except that of the first appointees, at least two (2) shall serve for
three (3) years, at least two (2) shall serve for two (2) years, and at least
one shall serve for one year. At least one member of the Advisory Committee
shall be a physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine in all its
branches, at least one shall be a dentist licensed in Illinois, and one shall
be a nurse licensed in Illinois. All members shall be chosen for their special
fitness for membership on the Board of Health Advisory Committee. (Ord. 17-299,
10-10-2017)
11.5-13: APPOINTMENTS; INITIAL MEETINGS:
The Chairman of the County Board shall:
   A.   Appoint the members of the Board of Health Advisory Committee in accord
with this article.
   B.   Call to order at the earliest convenient opportunity, the first meeting
of the Board of Health for the purpose of organization.
   C.   Schedule and call to order the first meeting of the Board of Health
Advisory Committee for organization purposes. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-14: OFFICERS; PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   The officers of the County Board, including Chairman and Vice Chairman,
shall also serve as the officers of the Board of Health.
   B.   The Health Officer and the other appointed officials and employees
shall report to the Public Health Committee of the Kane County Board.
   C.   All of the Board of Health activities, including meetings, shall be
conducted as part of the regular County Board procedures, activities, meetings
and rules.
   D.   Every activity authorized under Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended,
for county boards of health, shall be deemed an action of a Board of Health, if
done by the County Board, even though the words "Board of Health" or terms
related thereto are not contained in said action, rules or correspondence.
(Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-15: ABOLISHMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS SANATORIUM AND BOARD; TAX:
In accordance with section 1a of "An Act Relating to the Care and Treatment by
Counties of Persons Afflicted with Tuberculosis and Providing the Means
Therefore", approved June 28, 1915, as amended:
   A.   The tuberculosis sanatorium and board are abolished and the employees,
assets and liabilities of the sanatorium and board transferred to and assumed
by the Board of Health; and
   B.   A tax be imposed by the Kane County Health Department up to the maximum
rate of 0.05, which shall not be increased at any time. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-
2017)
11.5-16: AUTHORIZED PERSONAL HEALTH FEES:
   A.   Fees:
      1.   Assessment Of Fees: Administration fees may be assessed upon each
individual receiving personal health services and collected by the Kane County
Health Department. However, no eligible individual may be denied services
because of inability to pay.
      2.   Schedule Of Fees: The fee schedule for this section is on file in
the Office of the Kane County Clerk.
   B.   Credit Of Fees: Fees collected shall be credited to fund 042 (Health
Fund), line item 16-99 (fees). (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-17: AUTHORIZED ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH FEES:
   A.   Fees:
      1.   Assessment Of Fees: Administration fees may be assessed upon each
individual receiving environmental health services and collected by the Kane
County Health Department.
      2.   Schedule Of Fees: The fee schedule for this section is on file in
the Office of the Kane County Clerk. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-18 - 11.5-25:   RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. FOOD SANITATION
SECTION:
11.5-26: Scope
11.5-27: Adoption By Reference
11.5-28: Permits; Fees
11.5-29: Variances
11.5-30: Inspections
11.5-31: Compliance With Applicable Codes
11.5-32: Correction Of Violations
11.5-33: Examination And Condemnation
11.5-34: Outside Jurisdiction
11.5-35: Plan Review; Fees
11.5-36: Exemptions
11.5-37: Adulterated Food
11.5-38: Notices
11.5-39: Bed And Breakfast Guidelines
11.5-40: Sec. 44-400 Home Kitchens
11.5-26: SCOPE:
This article regulates food establishments, temporary food establishments, the
operation of such establishments and equipment, and requires permitting of food
establishments and temporary food establishments within the limits of Kane
County. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-27: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
In addition to those provisions set forth herein, this article hereby adopts
and specifically incorporates by reference the provisions set forth in the
State of Illinois:
   The Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code
750, et seq., effective July 29, 2016, and subsequent editions,
   2014 Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890, et seq.,
effective April 24, 2014 and subsequent editions, and
   2014 Illinois Department of Children and Family Services licensing standards
for daycare centers, 89 Illinois Administrative Code 407, et seq., effective
August 1, 2014 and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, three (3)
copies of which shall be on file in the Office of the Kane County Clerk. (Ord.
17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-28: PERMITS; FEES:
   A.   Permits: Beginning January 1, 1987, and every year thereafter, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment or temporary food
establishment within Kane County who does not possess a valid permit issued to
him by the Health Officer or authorized representative. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and
retain such a permit.
Permits shall not be transferable from one person to another person nor shall
said permit be applicable to any locations, buildings, or places other than
that for which it is issued. Each facility shall have a valid permit. A valid
permit shall be posted in every food establishment so as to be clearly visible
to all customers. A valid permit is one that is not suspended, revoked or
expired.
   B.   Term: A permit for a food establishment shall expire December 31 of
each year unless sooner suspended or revoked. A permit for a temporary food
establishment shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
   C.   Fees:
      1.   Schedule Of Fees: The fee schedule for this section is on file in
the Office of the Kane County Clerk.
      2.   Waiver: Any fee in this article may be waived or reduced by the
Health Officer based on hardship, for public health reasons, or to commemorate
public health awareness events/celebrations.
      3.   Definition Of Categories:
         CATEGORY I-1 FACILITY: A food establishment that presents a high
relative risk of causing foodborne illness based on the large number of food
handling operations typically implicated in foodborne outbreaks and/or the type
of population served by the facility. Category I-1 facilities include those
where the following operations occur:
            Potentially hazardous foods are cooled, as part of the food
handling operation at the facility;
            Potentially hazardous foods are prepared hot or cold and held hot
or cold for more than twelve (12) hours before serving;
            Potentially hazardous cooked and cooled foods must be reheated;
            Potentially hazardous foods are prepared for off premises serving
for which time-temperature requirements during transportation, holding and
service are relevant;
            Complex preparation of foods or extensive handling of raw
ingredients with hand contact for ready to eat foods occurs as part of the food
handling operations at the facility;
            Vacuum packaging and/or other forms of reduced oxygen packaging are
performed at the retail level; or
            Immunocompromised individuals such as the elderly, young children
under age four (4) and pregnant women are served, where these individuals
compose the majority of the consuming population.
            Examples of category I-1 facilities would include, but are not
limited to, large (greater than 15,000 square feet) multidepartment retail
grocery stores which may include delicatessen, bakery, meat/seafood, produce
and food service.
         CATEGORY I-2 FACILITY: A food establishment that presents a high
relative risk of causing foodborne illness based on the large number of food
handling operations typically implicated in foodborne outbreaks and/or the type
of population served by the facility. Category I-2 facilities include those
where the following operations occur:
            Potentially hazardous foods are cooled, as part of the food
handling operation at the facility;
            Potentially hazardous foods are prepared hot or cold and held hot
or cold for more than twelve (12) hours before serving;
            Potentially hazardous cooked and cooled foods must be reheated;
            Potentially hazardous foods are prepared for off premises serving
for which time-temperature requirements during transportation, holding and
service are relevant;
            Complex preparation of foods or extensive handling of raw
ingredients with hand contact for ready to eat foods occurs as part of the food
handling operations at the facility;
            Vacuum packaging and/or other forms of reduced oxygen packaging are
performed at the retail level; or
            Immunocompromised individuals such as the elderly, young children
under age four (4) and pregnant women are served, where these individuals
compose the majority of the consuming population.
            Examples of category I-2 facilities would include, but are not
limited to, full menu restaurants, caterers, hospitals, small (less than 15,000
square feet) grocery stores, daycares/preschools providing a full service meal.
         CATEGORY II FACILITY: A food establishment that presents a medium
relative risk of causing foodborne illness based upon few food handling
operations typically implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks. Category II
facilities include those where the following operations occur:
            Hot or cold foods are held at required temperatures for no more
than twelve (12) hours and are restricted to same day services;
            Foods are prepared from raw ingredients using only minimal
assembly; and
            Foods that require complex preparation (whether canned, frozen or
fresh prepared) are obtained from approved food processing plants, high risk
food establishments or retail food stores.
            Examples of category II facilities would include, but are not
limited to, fast food restaurants and daycares/preschools that provide
potentially hazardous prepackaged or catered food that must be kept hot or
cold.
         CATEGORY III FACILITY: A food establishment that presents a low
relative risk of causing foodborne illness based upon few or no food handling
operations typically implicated in foodborne illness outbreaks. Category III
facilities include those where the following operations occur:
            Only prepackaged foods are available or served in the facility, and
any potentially hazardous foods available are commercially prepackaged in an
approved processing plant;
            Only limited preparation of non-time/temperature control for safety
foods and beverages, such as snack foods and carbonated beverages, occurs at
the facility; or
            Only nonbottled beverages (alcoholic and nonalcoholic) are served
at the facility.
            Examples of category III facilities would include, but are not
limited to, retail outlets selling only prepackaged foods, movie theaters with
popcorn and soda, bars that do not prepare time/temperature control for safety
food and daycares/preschools that serve limited potentially hazardous foods
such as milk or non- time/temperature control for safety food snacks.
         MOBILE FOOD UNITS, NONMOBILE FOOD UNITS AND PUSHCARTS: Mobile food
units, nonmobile food units, and pushcarts within Kane County shall be charged
a fee according to the current environmental health fee schedule. Permits
expire on December 31 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked.
         TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS: The fee established in the
environmental health fee section for a food establishment that operates at a
fixed location for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive
days per single event or celebration. There will be a late fee according to the
current environmental health fee schedule for any application received within
seven (7) days of event or celebration.
         a.   Seasonal Temporary Food Events: Seasonal temporary food events
will include multiple temporary events within Kane County. Permits expire on
December 31 of each year unless sooner suspended or revoked.
      4.   Proration Of Fees: Permit fees will be nonrefundable and prorated on
a semiannual basis for newly opened establishments and/or establishments with a
change of ownership. To obtain a valid permit, the new owner must reapply and
complete the permit application process. Establishments opening or changing
ownership prior to July 1 will pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
appropriate annual fee. Establishments opening or changing ownership July 1 or
after will pay fifty percent (50%) of the annual fee for the remainder of the
calendar year. Establishments opening or changing ownership October 1 or after
will pay twenty five percent (25%) of the annual fee for the remainder of the
calendar year.
      5.   Late Payment Penalty: All permit fees for the annual renewal of
permits are due by December 31 of the previous year. The permitted year is the
calendar year, January 1 through December 31. Failure to submit the total fee
required by December 31 will result in expiration of the permit and cessation
of food establishment operations due to lack of a valid permit. Food
establishments failing to submit the required fee by December 31 shall be
assessed a late payment penalty fee of twenty five percent (25%) of the
required fee in addition to the appropriate permit fee. Food establishments
failing to submit the required fee by January 31 shall be assessed a late
payment penalty fee of fifty percent (50%) of the required fee in addition to
the appropriate permit fee.
   D.   Issuance: Any person desiring to operate a food establishment or
temporary food establishment, or person desiring to renew an expired permit
shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the Health
Officer or authorized representative. Food establishments shall provide a
dedicated fax number/machine that is available twenty four (24) hours per day,
and/or an e-mail account to receive emergent food safety information related
to, but not inclusive of, food recalls. This shall take effect beginning on
January 1, 2011. Food establishments failing to provide the fax number/machine
and/or e-mail account shall have the food establishment license suspended,
until compliance is verified. Such application shall include: the applicant's
full name, post office address, and whether such applicant is an individual,
firm, corporation or partnership; the names and type of proposed food
establishment; and the signature of the applicant or applicants. The
information provided on the application shall be kept current at all times. If
the application is for a temporary food establishment, it shall also include
the inclusive dates of the proposed operation. Upon receipt of such an
application for a new establishment, the Health Officer or authorized
representative shall make an inspection of the food establishment to determine
compliance with the provisions of this article. When inspection reveals that
the applicable requirements of this article have been met, a permit shall be
issued to the applicant by the Health Officer or authorized representative.
   E.   Renewal: Upon receipt of an application to renew an annual permit, the
Health Officer or authorized representative shall review the food establishment
record to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Whenever
the review process for renewal of permit reveals serious repeat violations of
this article the permit will not be issued and the Health Officer or authorized
representative shall notify the applicant immediately thereof. Such notice
shall state the reasons for not renewing the permit. Such notice shall also
state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for the applicant, if
requested, at a time and place designated by the Health Officer or authorized
representative. Such hearing shall be scheduled as soon as possible, but no
later than five (5) business days from the date of notice. The notice referred
to in this subsection shall be delivered to the applicant in person by the
Health Officer or authorized representative or may be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested. A permit which has expired shall be removed from the
food establishment by the Health Officer or authorized representative.
   F.   Suspension: Permits may be suspended by the Health Officer or
authorized representative for failure of the permit holder to comply with the
requirements of this article. Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed
to comply with any notice issued under the provisions of section
11.5-38 of this chapter, the permit holder or operator shall be notified, in
writing, that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended
and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for
a hearing is filed with the Health Officer or authorized representative by the
permit holder within five (5) business days from receipt of the notice. Upon
suspension of the permit, the permit shall be removed from the food
establishment by the Health Officer or authorized representative.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the Health
Officer or authorized representative finds unsanitary or other conditions in
the operation of a food establishment which in his judgment constitute a
substantial hazard to the public health, he may without warning, notice or
hearing, issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator, citing such
conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken and specifying the
time period within which such action shall be taken; and if deemed necessary,
such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended, and all
operations as a food establishment are to be immediately discontinued. Any
person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith, but
upon written petition to the Health Officer or authorized representative, shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible but no later than five (5) business
days of written request.
   G.   Cessation Of Operations: Permits for all food establishments shall be
automatically suspended should the holder or operator cease operation of the
food establishment for thirty (30) consecutive days or longer, irrespective of
whether such cessation of operations shall be due to the seasonal nature of
such food establishments, or any other reason. Said permit shall be reinstated
upon application to the Health Officer or authorized representative for
reinspection of the food establishment if the establishment is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of this article.
   H.   Reinstatement: Any person whose permit has been suspended may at any
time make application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of
the permit. As soon as possible, but no later than five (5) business days
following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the permit
have been corrected, the Health Officer or authorized representative shall make
a reinspection. If the applicant is compliant with the requirements of this
article, the permit shall be reinstated.
   I.   Revocation:
      1.   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of
this article, or for interference with the Health Officer or authorized
representative in the performance of his duties, a permit may be revoked after
an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Health Officer or
authorized representative. Prior to such action, the Health Officer or
authorized representative shall notify a permit holder, in writing, stating the
reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation, and advising that the
permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five (5) business days
following service of such notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with
the Health Officer or authorized representative by the permit holder within
such five (5) business day period. A permit may be suspended for cause pending
its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
      2.   Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of
the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit in accordance
with this section.
   J.   Hearing Conference: The hearing conferences provided for in this
article shall be conducted by the Health Officer or authorized representative
at a time and place designated by the Health Officer or authorized
representative. The Kane County Health Department and the permit holder shall
be entitled to call witnesses, be represented by legal counsel, and a record
shall be made of the proceedings. The Health Officer or authorized
representative shall make a final finding based upon the complete information
presented and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered
at the hearing conference. A written decision shall be furnished to the holder
of the permit by the Health Officer or authorized representative and said
decision shall be final, but may be appealed to the Hearing Committee upon
written request. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-29: VARIANCES:
   A.   Whenever approval as required by this chapter is denied by the Health
Officer or authorized representative, or where compliance with the requirements
of this chapter is impossible or impractical, an applicant may request a
variance as follows:
      1.   Variance:
         a.   Written Requests: Variance requests shall be in writing and shall
detail those conditions where compliance is impossible or impractical due to
cost, physical environment, or other factors.
         b.   Supporting Data: Variance requests shall include all pertinent
data and information, as stipulated in applicable code(s), to support the
requested waiver of the requirements of this chapter as being consistent with
the responsibility of the Health Officer or authorized representative to
protect and provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the people
of the County and of other affected communities.
         c.   Review Process: The Health Officer or authorized representative
shall review variance requests and shall approve or deny the request within
fifteen (15) business days of receipt of variance request provided all
conditions of this chapter are met including payment of fee and submission of
supporting data.
         d.   Notification: The Health Officer or authorized representative
shall send notification in writing to the person requesting a variance of the
approval or denial of the request and shall state the reasons for that decision
within fifteen (15) business days.
         e.   Separate Request: Each non-food item submitted for a variance
shall be considered a separate variance request and a separate fee shall apply.
         f.   Fees: Fees for variance requests shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified and shall be paid
at the time of submission.
      2.   Variances To The Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code Regarding
Special Processes:
         a.   Written Requests: Variance requests shall be in writing and shall
detail those conditions where compliance is impossible or impractical.
         b.   Supporting Data: Variance requests shall include pertinent data,
as stipulated in applicable code(s), to support the requested waiver of the
requirements of this chapter as being consistent with the responsibility of the
Health Officer or authorized representative to protect and provide for the
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of Kane County and of other
affected communities.
         c.   Review Process: The Health Officer or authorized representative
shall review variance requests and shall approve or deny the request within
twenty (20) business days of receipt of variance request provided all
conditions of this chapter are met including payment of fee and submission of
supporting data.
         d.   Notification: The Health Officer or authorized representative
shall notify in writing the person requesting a variance of the approval or
denial of the request and shall state the reasons for that decision.
         e.   Separate Request: Each food item submitted for a variance shall
be considered a separate variance request and a separate fee shall apply.
         f.   Fees: Fees for variance requests shall be in accordance with the
current fee schedule adopted by the County Board as codified and shall be paid
at the time of submission. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-30: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Frequency: The Health Officer or authorized representative shall
inspect each food establishment within Kane County as follows:
 
Category I-1 and I-2 2 - 3 times annually
Category II          1 - 2 times annually
Category III         1 time annually
 
The following activities may be used in place of one annual inspection of a
category I facility:
      1.   An Illinois Food Service Sanitation Manager is present at the
facility at all times food is being handled;
      2.   A hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) inspection/menu
review;
      3.   Facility employees attend an in-service training or educational
conference on food sanitation.
The Health Officer or authorized representative shall make as many additional
inspections and reinspections as are necessary for the enforcement of this
article.
   B.   Right Of Entry: The Health Officer or authorized representative, after
proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food establishment or
temporary food establishment in Kane County for the purpose of making
inspections, and to determine compliance with this article. The Health Officer
or authorized representative shall be permitted to examine the records of the
food establishment or temporary food establishment to obtain pertinent
information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used, and
persons employed. Failure to permit access after proper identification shall be
grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit. After such
suspension or revocation, the permit holder may submit, in writing, a request
for reinstatement of the permit.
   C.   Consent To Inspection: The receipt of any permit or license issued by
the Kane County Health Department pursuant to this chapter to any person, firm,
or corporation shall constitute the agreement of such person, firm, or
corporation to such investigations or inspections.
   D.   Reports: Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or temporary
food establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection
report. One copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person
in charge of the food establishment or temporary food establishment. (Ord. 17-
299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-31: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES:
Food establishments shall be in compliance with all applicable State and local
codes to remain in operation. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-32: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found. The correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified in accordance with
the "Kane County Health Department Food Sanitation Enforcement Procedure". The
inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for
corrections may result in immediate suspension of all food service operations.
An opportunity for a prehearing conference on the inspection findings or the
time limitation or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the
Health Officer or authorized representative within five (5) business days
following suspension of operations. If a request for a prehearing conference is
received, the prehearing conference shall be held within thirty (30) calendar
days of receipt of the request.
   B.   When more than one follow up inspection of a food establishment is
necessary to ensure compliance with a previous inspection, a fee as per the
current environmental health fee schedule shall apply.
   C.   Whenever a food establishment or temporary food establishment is
required under provisions of subsection A of this section to cease operations,
it shall not resume operations until it is shown on re-inspection that
conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist.
Opportunity for re- inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time
period. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-33: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION:
   A.   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Officer or authorized
representative as may be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or
misbranding. The Health Officer or authorized representative may, upon written
notice to the owner or person in charge, embargo any food which he determines
or has probable cause to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or
misbranded. Under an embargo, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It
shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter an embargo notice or tag
placed on food by the Health Officer or authorized representative. Neither such
food nor the containers therefor shall be relabeled, repackaged or reprocessed,
altered, disposed of or destroyed without permission of the Health Officer or
authorized representative, except on an order by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   After the owner or person in charge has had a prehearing conference as
provided in section
11.5-4 of this chapter, and on the basis of evidence produced at such
prehearing conference, or on the basis of an examination in the event a written
request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) business days, the Health
Officer or authorized representative may vacate the embargo or may, by written
order direct the owner or person in charge of food which was placed under the
embargo, to denature or destroy such food or bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this article. Such orders shall be stayed if the order is
appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three (3) business days.
   C.   Where equipment used in the preparation of food products is found to be
in a state of disrepair, unsafe, unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, such
equipment shall be taken out of use and an embargo placed on said items by the
Health Officer or authorized representative. Such equipment may not be put back
into service until written permission is obtained from the Health Officer or
authorized representative. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter
an embargo, notice or tag placed on equipment by the Health Officer or
authorized representative. Such equipment will not be altered, disposed of or
destroyed without permission of the Health Officer or authorized representative
except on an order by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   After the owner or person in charge has had a prehearing conference as
provided in section
11.5-4 of this chapter, and on the basis of the evidence produced at such
prehearing conference, or on the basis of an examination in the event a written
request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) business days, the Health
Officer or authorized representative may vacate the embargo or may by written
notice direct the owner or person in charge of the equipment to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this article. Such orders shall be stayed if
the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three (3)
business days. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-34: OUTSIDE JURISDICTION:
Food from establishments outside the jurisdiction of the County may be sold in
the County if such food establishments conform to the provisions of this
article or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the Health Officer or authorized
representative may accept reports from responsible authorities and other
jurisdictions where such food establishments are located. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-
2017)
11.5-35: PLAN REVIEW; FEES:
   A.   Fee Schedule: See reference environmental health fee schedule on file
in the Office of the Kane County Recorder.
   B.   General: Whenever a food establishment is hereafter constructed or
remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, an application for permit is required including properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or
conversion which shall be submitted to the Health Officer or authorized
representative for review and approval before construction, remodeling or
conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed
layout, arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas;
and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Health
Officer or authorized representative shall approve the plans and specifications
if they meet the requirements of this article. No food establishment shall be
constructed, remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and
specifications approved by the Health Officer or authorized representative.
Construction, remodeling and/or conversion activities shall not begin until the
plans and specifications have been approved by the Health Officer or authorized
representative.
Plan review fees will be doubled if work is commenced without an approved plan
review.
   C.   Preopening Inspections: Whenever plans and specifications are required
by subsection B of this section to be submitted to the Health Officer or
authorized representative, the Health Officer or authorized representative
shall inspect the food establishment prior to the beginning or resumption of
operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications
and with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-36: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Persons operating establishments which have only prepackaged,
nonperishable and/or non-time/temperature control for safety food and whose
principal order of business is not to sell food for human consumption shall be
exempt from the permitting requirements of this article.
   B.   Roadside stands operated for the sale of unprocessed agricultural
products produced and offered for sale shall be exempt from the permitting
requirements of this article.
   C.   Temporary food establishments selling prepackaged nonperishable and/or
non-time/temperature control for safety food shall be exempt from the
permitting requirements of this article.
   D.   Establishments which have only nonperishable, non- time/temperature
control for safety food dispensed by vending machines shall be exempt from the
permitting requirements of this article. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-37: ADULTERATED FOOD:
No food establishment shall offer for sale or keep for the purpose of selling
or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human consumption which
is adulterated for any reason, or violate any rule or regulation as provided
herein. (Ord. 17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-38: NOTICES:
   A.   Issuance: Whenever a Health Officer or authorized representative makes
an inspection and discovers that any of the requirements of this article have
been violated, he may notify the permit holder or operator of such violations
by means of an inspection report form or other written notice. In such written
notice, the Health Officer or authorized representative shall:
      1.   Set forth the specific violations found;
      2.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violations found in accordance with the enforcement
procedure;
      3.   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this article may result in immediate suspension of the
permit, and/or the possibility of further legal action;
      4.   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a prehearing conference is
filed with the Health Officer or authorized representative within the period of
time established in the notice of correction.
   B.   Service: Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed
properly served when a copy of the inspection report form or other notice has
been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge, or such
notice has been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the permit holder. Copy of such notice shall be filed with the
records of the Health Officer or authorized representative. (Ord. 17-299, 10-
10-2017)
11.5-39: BED AND BREAKFAST GUIDELINES:
Bed and breakfast establishments shall be subject to the bed and breakfast
requirements as approved by the Kane County Board, Public Health Committee, and
incorporated in this chapter. The Public Health Committee may from time to time
amend such guidelines at any public meeting after required public notice. (Ord.
17-299, 10-10-2017)
11.5-40: SEC. 44-400 HOME KITCHENS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this article, the definitions found in
the Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act at 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 625 et seq., are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
   B.   Home Kitchens:
      1.   The direct sale of baked goods as described in the Illinois Food
Handling Regulation Enforcement Act is hereby authorized.
      2.   Subject to all applicable ordinances, including, without limitation,
land use and zoning regulations and privilege taxes, the statutory provisions
contained within the Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act
regarding home kitchen operations, as now or hereafter amended 1  are hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
      3.   In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article,
other applicable County ordinances and the statutory provisions in the Illinois
Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, any and all applicable Kane County
ordinances shall control.
      4.   The home kitchen operation must register with the Kane County Health
Department and agree in writing at the time of registration to grant access to
the Kane County Health Department to conduct an inspection of the home kitchen
operation in the event of a complaint or foodborne illness outbreak. (Ord. 17-
299, 10-10-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 625 et seq.
CHAPTER 12
LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
12-1 - 12-15: Reserved
12-1 - 12-15: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
12-16: Inmate Medical Services Reimbursement
12-17 - 12-30: Reserved
Division 2. Merit Commission
12-31: Establishment Of Commission
12-32: Tenure And Eligibility
12-33: Authority And Responsibility
12-34: Exemption Of Certain Positions
12-35 - 12-45: Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
12-16: INMATE MEDICAL SERVICES REIMBURSEMENT:
Pursuant to 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 125/17, reimbursement by the county
of Kane for the cost of all medical services provided to inmates in the custody
of the Kane County sheriff shall be at the Illinois department of public aid's
rates for medical assistance. (Ord. 00-119, 5-9-2000; amd. Ord. 23-69, 2-14-
2023)
12-17 - 12-30: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. MERIT COMMISSION 1
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/3-8001 et seq.
12-31: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
The Kane County sheriff's office merit commission is hereby created in the
county of Kane, Illinois, to be known as the Kane County sheriff's office merit
commission. (Ord. 66-23, § I, 2-8-1966; Ord. 06-324, § 2, 8-8-2006)
12-32: TENURE AND ELIGIBILITY 1 :
   A.   The commission shall consist of three (3) members appointed for terms
of six (6) years each, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   No member shall hold any office whatsoever in any political party, nor
shall any commissioner during the term of his office hold any other political
or governmental post or position, whether appointed or elected and whether
compensated or uncompensated.
   C.   Of the initial appointments, one shall be for a term of two (2) years,
one for a term of four (4) years, and one for a term of six (6) years.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of six (6) years. (Ord. 66-23,
§ II, 2-8-1966; Ord. 06-324, § 2, 8-8-2006)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection 2-74C of this code.
12-33: AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY:
The Kane County sheriff's office merit commission shall have the authority and
responsibility to promulgate rules, regulations, and procedures for the
operation of the merit system and is hereby authorized to provide in said
rules, regulations, and procedures for: a) the orderly appointment, promotion,
discharge, and disciplining of jail officers, known as deputy sheriff
corrections officers and deputy sheriffs, known as deputy sheriff peace
officers in the office of the sheriff, and b) the orderly disciplining,
including discharge, of court security officers employed by the Kane County
sheriff. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be in conformance with
the sheriff's merit system law, the counties code, section 3-6012.1, and any
applicable collective bargaining agreement provision which has been entered
into as provided in section 3-8014 of the sheriff's merit system law. (Ord. 66-
23, § III, 2-8-1966; Ord. 06-324, § 2, 8-8-2006; Ord. 09-376, 10-13-2009)
12-34: EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN POSITIONS:
   A.   Personal assistants of the sheriff are hereby exempted from coverage by
the sheriff's merit system law, 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-8001 et seq.
("sheriff's merit system law"), and the jurisdiction of the Kane County
sheriff's office merit commission ("merit commission"), and shall be vested by
the sheriff, in his or her discretion, with all authorities granted to deputy
sheriffs pursuant to 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-6015. "Personal
assistants of the sheriff" shall be defined as "chief deputy", "chief
deputies", "undersheriff", "administrative assistants", "superintendent of the
jail", and any and all other equivalent positions consistent with the intent of
the sheriff's merit system law, regardless of the title which is assigned by
the sheriff, and shall include, without limitation, the following titles:
"corrections commander", "administration commander" and "operations commander".
   B.   While "personal assistants of the sheriff", as defined in subsection A
of this section, shall be at will employees of the sheriff, any employee who is
under the jurisdiction of the merit commission at the time of his or her
appointment as a personal assistant of the sheriff shall be granted a leave of
absence from his or her merited position until such time as his or her
appointment as a personal assistant is terminated by the sheriff in his or her
discretion. Upon termination of such an employee's appointment as a personal
assistant of the sheriff, the employee shall be returned to the last highest
merited rank achieved by the employee immediately prior to accepting the
appointment as a personal assistant, at which time the employee shall be
subject to the sheriff's merit system law and the jurisdiction of the merit
commission. Any employee who has been granted a leave of absence from his or
her merited position to accept an appointment pursuant to this section shall be
entitled to return to his or her merited position before the sheriff may
either: 1) suspend the employee for more than thirty (30) days, 2) demote the
employee to a rank below the last highest merited rank achieved by the employee
prior to his or her appointment, or 3) terminate the employee's employment with
the sheriff's department. In the case where the employee returns to his or her
merited position prior to being disciplined or discharged, the employee shall
be disciplined or discharged in accordance with the sheriff's merit system law
and the rules of the merit commission.
   C.   The granting of a leave of absence pursuant to subsection B of this
section shall not constitute a break in service for purposes of pension
calculations; any employee who is employed as a deputy sheriff and participates
in the Illinois municipal retirement fund's sheriff's law enforcement personnel
plan ("SLEP retirement plan") at the time of his or her appointment as a
personal assistant of the sheriff pursuant to this section, and is vested with
deputy authority by the sheriff, shall remain a deputy sheriff for purposes of
the SLEP retirement plan and shall be eligible to participate in such plan.
(Ord. 07-86, 3-13-2007)
12-35 - 12-45: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. LOITERING
SECTION:
12-46: Definitions
12-47: Prohibition Upon Loitering
12-48: Severability
12-49: Penalty
12-46: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
COMMIT PROSTITUTION: To engage in sexual conduct for money or other
consideration.
LOITER: To delay or linger without a lawful purpose for being on the property
and for the purpose of committing a crime as opportunity may be discovered.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area open to the public or exposed to public view and includes
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the general public,
including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the
doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing
them. (Ord. 99-328, 11-9-1999)
12-47: PROHIBITION UPON LOITERING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place in a manner
and under circumstances manifesting the purpose and with the intent to engage
in drug related activity. Among circumstances that may be considered in
determining whether a person has the requisite intent to engage in drug related
activity are that the person:
      1.   Acts as a "lookout".
      2.   Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive
fashion.
      3.   Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object that reasonably
could be involved in an unlawful drug related activity.
      4.   Uses signals or language indicative of summoning purchasers of
illegal drugs.
      5.   Repeatedly beckons to, stops, attempts to stop, or engages in
conversations with passersby, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, indicative
of summoning purchasers of illegal drugs.
      6.   Repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether on foot or
in a motor vehicle, money or small objects.
      7.   Is under the influence of a controlled substance or possesses
narcotic or drug paraphernalia. For the purposes of this subsection, "narcotic
or drug paraphernalia" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in
the Illinois criminal code.
      8.   Has been convicted in any court within this state, within one year
prior to the charge under this article, of any violation involving the use,
possession, or sale of any controlled substance as defined by the Illinois
criminal code or has been convicted of any violation of those provisions or
substantially similar laws or ordinances of any political subdivision of this
state or of any other state.
      9.   Is currently subject to any order prohibiting his or her presence in
any high drug activity geographic area.
      10.   Has engaged, within six (6) months prior to the date of the charge
under this article, in any behavior described in this section, with the
exception of subsection A8 of this section, or in any other behavior indicative
of illegal drug related activity.
   B.   The list of circumstances set forth in subsection A of this section is
not exclusive. The circumstances set forth in subsection A of this section
should be considered particularly salient if they occur in an area that is
known for unlawful drug use and trafficking, or if they occur on or in premises
that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful
drug activity. Any other relevant circumstances may be considered in
determining whether a person has the requisite intent. Moreover, no one
circumstance or combination of circumstances is in itself determinative of
intent. Intent must be determined based on an evaluation of the particular
circumstances of each case.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place with the
intent to commit prostitution. This intent is evidenced by acting in a manner
and under circumstances which openly demonstrate the purpose of inducing,
enticing, or soliciting prostitution, or procuring another to commit
prostitution. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining
whether a person loiters with the intent to commit prostitution are that the
person:
      1.   Repeatedly beckons to, stops, engages in conversations with, or
attempts to stop or engage in conversations with passersby, indicative of
soliciting for prostitution.
      2.   Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles by hailing the
drivers, waving arms, or making any other bodily gestures, or engages or
attempts to engage the drivers or passengers of the motor vehicles in
conversation, indicative of soliciting for prostitution.
      3.   Has been convicted of violating this section or any other offense
relating to or involving prostitution, within one year of the charge under this
section.
      4.   Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to,
contacts, or attempts to contact or stop pedestrians or other motorists,
indicative of soliciting for prostitution.
      5.   Has engaged, within six (6) months prior to the charge under this
article, in any behavior described in this subsection, with the exception of
subsection C3 of this section, or in any other behavior indicative of
prostitution activity.
   D.   The list of circumstances set forth in subsection C of this section, is
not exclusive. The circumstances set forth in subsection C of this section
should be considered particularly salient if they occur in an area that is
known for prostitution activity. Any other relevant circumstances may be
considered in determining whether a person has the requisite intent. Moreover,
no one circumstance or combination of circumstances is in itself determinative
of intent. Intent must be determined based on an evaluation of the particular
circumstances of each case. (Ord. 99-328, 11-9-1999)
12-48: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, that portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and that holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this article. (Ord. 99-328, 11-9-1999)
12-49: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this article is punishable by a fine of up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 99-328, 11-9-1999)
CHAPTER 13
LAW LIBRARY
SECTION:
13-1: Established
13-2: Surcharge On Court Cases
13-1: ESTABLISHED 1 :
There is hereby established a county law library. (Res., 12-12-1961)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-39001.
13-2: SURCHARGE ON COURT CASES 1 :
The clerks of all trial courts located in the county seat of government shall
charge and collect a county law library fee of twenty one dollars ($21.00) in
all civil cases, such fee to be paid for and at the time of filing the first
pleading paper or other appearance filed in such cases. Such clerks shall
monthly remit to the county treasurer all such library fees collected by him,
and the county treasurer is hereby directed to deposit such fees in a fund to
be designated as the county law library fund. The fee change will be effective
April 11, 2016. (Ord. 16-71, 3-8-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. 55 ILCS 5/5-39001.
CHAPTER 14
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES
SECTION:
14-1: Reserved
14-2: Licenses For Raffles And Poker Runs
14-3: Permits For Special Events
14-3-1: Definitions
14-3-2: Special Event Permits
14-3-3: Regulations For Special Events
14-3-4: Form Of Application
14-3-5: Granting Of Permits
14-3-6: Penalties
14-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 89-62, 4-11-1989)
14-2: LICENSES FOR RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS:
   A.   Governing Law: Whenever reference is made in this section to "state
law" it shall mean and refer to any act of the General Assembly regulating
certain games of chance, including but not limited to the Raffles and Poker
Runs Act, all as amended from time to time. Raffles and poker runs are licensed
by the governing body with jurisdiction over the Key Location. A license shall
authorize the holder of such license to sell raffle chances throughout the
State, including beyond the borders of Kane County.
   B.   Licensing Agent. As used in this section the terms RAFFLE LICENSING
AGENT, POKER RUN LICENSING AGENT or LICENSING AGENT, means the Kane County
Clerk. Unless the context otherwise requires, all words and phrases used herein
shall have the same meaning as the same or similar words or phrases defined and
used in state law. The licensing agent shall act on a license application
within 30 days from the date of application.
   C.   Definitions.
                        A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
BUSINESS:               businesses who have joined together to advance the
                        commercial, financial, industrial, and civic interests
                        of a community.
                        An organization or institution organized and operated
CHARITABLE:             to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The
                        service rendered to those eligible for benefits must
                        also confer some benefit on the public.
                        An organization or institution organized and operated
                        to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of
EDUCATIONAL :           learning by methods common to schools and institutions
                        of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
                        intensity with the course of study presented in tax
                        supported schools.
                        An agency of this State or a unit of local government
FIRE PROTECTION AGENCY: in this State that is vested by law or ordinance with
                        the duty to protect life and property from fire and
                        explosion.
                        An organization of persons having a common interest,
                        the primary interest of which is to both promote the
FRATERNAL:              welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the
                        general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens
                        of government by caring for those that otherwise would
                        be cared for by the government.
                        The location where the winning chances in the raffle
KEY LOCATION:           are determined or where a poker run concludes and the
                        prizes are awarded.
                        An organization composed of workers organized with the
LABOR:                  objective of betterment of the conditions of those
                        engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher
                        degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
                        An agency of this State or a unit of local government
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: in this State that is vested by law or ordinance with
                        the duty to maintain public order and to enforce
                        criminal laws or ordinances.
                        The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
NET PROCEEDS:           reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license
                        fees, and other operating expenses incurred as a result
                        of operating a raffle
                        An organization or institution organized and conducted
NONPROFIT:              on a not for profit basis with no personal profit
                        inuring to anyone as a result of the operation.
                        A prize-awarding event organized by an organization
                        licensed under this section in which participants
                        travel to multiple predetermined locations, including a
POKER RUN:              Key Location, to play a randomized game based on an
                        element of chance. "Poker run" includes dice runs,
                        marble runs, or other events where the objective is to
                        build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an
                        item or playing a randomized game at each location.
 
           A form of lottery, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 28-2 of
           the Criminal Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed
           under Illinois law in which the player pays or agrees to pay
           something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a
           number or by way of a combination of numbers or by some other
RAFFLE:    medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
           chance and the winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
           or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or
           set of acts on the part of the persons conducting or connected with
           the lottery except the winning chance shall not be determined by the
           outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the
           purpose of religious worship.
           An organization or association composed of members of which
           substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses,
VETERANS:  widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to
           promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the
           general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.
 
   D.   Permissible Applicants: Raffle and poker run licenses shall be issued
only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational, veterans and other bona fide not-for-profit organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making
application for a license and which have had during that entire five (5) year
period been engaged in carrying out their objectives or to a non-profit
fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized
for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified
individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the
result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. Law enforcement
agencies and statewide associations that represent law enforcement officials
are also permissible applicants. Fire protection agencies and associations that
represent fire protection officials are also permissible applicants.
   E.   Application Requirements. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct
raffles or poker runs without having first obtained a license as herein
specified. The license and application for a license must specify the
following:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant and the type of organization
of the applicant.
      2.   The Key Location(s), as defined in Section C5 above, for the raffle
or poker run.
      3.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
The time period during which a poker run will be conducted and the name and
address of each poker run’s predetermined locations.
      4.   The place and date of chartering or incorporation of the applicant,
if applicable
      5.   The time or times of determination of winning chances.
      6.   A list of prizes and the retail value of each prize to be awarded in
a single raffle.
      7.   The price to be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold.
      8.   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
   F.   Ineligible Applicants. The following are ineligible for any license
under this section:
      1.   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person’s ability
to engage in the license position;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any organization in which a person defined in Section F.1., F.2., or
F.3., above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
person is active or employed.
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in Section F.1., F.2., or
F.3., above is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
and
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in Section F.1., F.2., or
F.3., above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle or
poker run as defined in this section.
      7.   If the Licensing Agent refuses to issue a license to the applicant,
the applicant will be notified of the denial in writing. The notice will
include the following: (a) a statement about the decision to refuse to issue a
license; (b) a list of the convictions of the licensing authority will impair
the applicant’s ability to engage in the position for which a license is
sought; (c) a list of convictions forming the sole or partial basis for the
refusal to issue a license; (d) and a summary of the appeal process or the
earliest the applicant might reapply for a license, whichever is applicable.
Review of any such denial will consider the factors enumerated in 230 ILCS 5/
3.1(b).
   G.   Conduct of Raffles and Poker Runs.
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member
of the sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management or
operation of the raffle or poker run. No person may receive any remuneration or
profit for managing or participating in the management or operation of the
raffle or poker run. However, sponsoring organizations may contract with third
parties who, acting at the direction of and under the supervision of the
sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the sponsoring
organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the following:
(a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b) legal, (c) procurement of goods,
prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the raffle, (d)
rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented, (e)
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting (g) mailing and
delivery, (h) banking and payment processing, and (i) other services relating
to the operation of the raffle.
      3.   A licensee may rent the premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined by a
percentage of the receipts or profits from the raffle.
      4.   Raffle chances may be sold throughout the state, including beyond
the borders of Kane County but winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license for a raffle.
      5.   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances or poker runs only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances at a raffle or winning hands or scores in a poker run are being
determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
   H.   Raffle Manager; Bond. All management, operation, and conduct of raffle
shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the
organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount in an amount
equal to the sum of the aggregate retail value of the prices as set out in the
application in favor of the organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in
the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that
notice shall be given in writing to the Licensing Agent not less than 30 days
prior to its cancellation. If the retail value of the prizes exceeds fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00), such bond shall be a corporate surety. The Kane
County Board may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision
provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only
by the affirmative vote of the requisite number of members of the licensed
organization or if the licensed organization does not have members, of members
of the governing board of the organization, to constitute an affirmative action
of the licensed organization. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply
to poker runs.
   I.   Records.
      1.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances or poker
run events shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances in a raffle or
winning hands or scores in a poker run are determined. All deductions from
gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of any purchased
items or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to the payee, purpose,
amount, and date of payment.
      2.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles or poker runs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to a license therefore issued by the Illinois Department of Revenue,
and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records
of its raffles and poker runs. The personal accounts for gross receipts,
expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles and poker runs shall
not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
      3.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles or poker runs shall
report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle or poker run to its
membership or, if the organization does not have members, to its governing
board. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles or poker runs shall report
promptly to Licensing Agent its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from
the raffle or poker run, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required herein.
      4.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years. An organization shall make available the records relating to the
operation of raffles or poker runs for public inspection at reasonable times
and places.
   J.   Raffle and Poker Run License Fees. Aggregate prize value less than
$500.00, no fee and considered automatically licensed without the necessity of
an application; aggregate prize value $500.00 to $5,000.00, fee of $14.00;
aggregate prize value $5,001.00 to $500,000.00 or more, fee of $25.00.
   K.   Violations; Penalties: Violation of this section or any section or
subsection hereof shall be chargeable as an ordinance violation with a fine not
to exceed $1,000.00 per violation of each section or subsection or in such
amount as prescribed in 55 ILCS 5/5-1113, as from time to time amended. (Ord.
19-445, 12-10-2019; amd. Ord. 24-257, 6-11-2024)
14-3: PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
14-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT RIDES AND ATTRACTIONS: Any building, structure, or mechanized device
(s), through which people walk or which carries passengers to provide
entertainment.
ATTENDANCE: Total attendance during the entire event unless otherwise
specified.
CARNIVAL: An enterprise which offers amusement, games or entertainment to the
public by means of one or more amusement rides and/or attractions.
FAIR: An enterprise principally devoted to the exhibition of products or
agriculture or industry where amusement rides, concerts, or other entertainment
or attractions may also be operated or offered.
RODEOS-CHARREADAS: Public competitions and/or exhibitions in which ranching
skills are demonstrated such as bronco riding and calf roping, test of the
horse, bull riding and skirmish.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any activity on public or private property that brings together
a total of one hundred (100) or more people.
SPORTING EVENT: An event generally organized for the purpose of competition to
include participants and/or the entertainment of spectators which are usually
governed by rules or customs.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES: Anything temporarily erected, the use of which requires a
location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a location on or
in the ground, including signs and billboards, and supports and frames thereof.
(Ord. 09-410, 11-10-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
14-3-2: SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
   A.   A special event permit shall be required for all special events as
follows:
      1.   Special Event Private Group Permit: Special outdoor events that are
not advertised to the public to include weddings, block parties, and other
private activities for one hundred (100) but not more than two hundred fifty
(250) persons and does not include sporting events. Amplified music and
temporary structures shall be permitted and must meet the requirements noted in
this section
14-3. All rules pertaining to the service and sale of alcohol under this code
shall be applicable. A nonrefundable fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall accompany
each application and is not a guarantee that said application will be approved
and a permit issued.
      2.   Special Event Sports Permit: Sporting events that may or may not be
advertised to the public and involve spectators and/or participants. Such
events shall include, but are not limited to, marathons, tournaments, games,
races, rodeos-charreadas, or sports rallies for two hundred fifty (250) or more
persons. Amplified music and temporary structures shall be permitted and must
meet the requirements noted in this section
14-3. Alcohol will not be permitted unless the property owner where the event
is being held holds either an annual or temporary Kane County liquor license.
Free dispensing of alcohol is not permitted. A nonrefundable fee based on
attendance shall accompany each application and is not a guarantee that said
application will be approved and a permit issued as follows:
 
100 - 250 people                       $ 100.00
251 - 1,000 people                     250.00
1,001 - 5,000 people                   1,000.00
Over 5,000 people                      2,000.00
Charitable not for profit organization 100.00
 
      3.   Special Event Entertainment Permit: Special entertainment events
that may or may not be advertised and open to the public and include, but are
not limited to, fairs, festivals, celebrations, circuses, carnivals, concerts,
shows, markets or private group events for two hundred fifty (250) or more
persons that do not include sporting events. Amplified music and temporary
structures shall be permitted and must meet the requirements noted in this
section
14-3. All rules pertaining to the service and sale of alcohol under this code
shall be applicable. A nonrefundable fee based on attendance shall accompany
each application and is not a guarantee that said application will be approved
and a permit issued as follows:
 
250 - 1,000 people   $ 250.00
1,001 - 5,000 people 1,000.00
Over 5,000 people    2,000.00
 
      4.   Special Event Not For Profit Organization Permit: Special events
that are or are not advertised to the public for charitable or fundraising
purposes for not for profit organizations for festivals or celebrations for two
hundred fifty (250) or more persons that do not include sporting events.
Amplified music and temporary structures shall be permitted and must meet the
requirements noted in this section
14-3. All rules pertaining to the service and sale of alcohol under this code
shall be applicable. A nonrefundable fee based on attendance shall accompany
each application and is not a guarantee that said application will be approved
and a permit issued as follows:
 
250 - 1,000 people   $100.00
1,001 - 5,000 people 250.00
Over 5,000 people    500.00
 
      5.   Special Event Gathering Permit: Special events for all other types
of gatherings for one hundred (100) or more persons to include, but not be
limited to, demonstrations, marches, rallies, and/or parades. Amplified music
and temporary structures shall be permitted and must meet the requirements
noted in this section 14-3. All rules pertaining to the service and sale of
alcohol under this code shall be applicable. A nonrefundable fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) shall accompany each application and is not a guarantee that
said application will be approved and a permit issued.
      6.   Pre-Event Plan: Events for one thousand (1,000) or more persons
require a pre-event plan which must be provided to the county no later than
three (3) months prior to the event and which plan shall be approved prior to
the issuance of a permit under this section. Pre-event planning shall require
meetings with county staff, fire, police and emergency management agencies
prior to the event.
   B.   The following events will not require a special event permit:
      1.   Lawful events held on forest preserve land, park district land, or
on any other land or area that is owned and controlled by any local
governmental unit. Any property owned or leased by the county, however, shall
require an event permit from the office of environmental management.
      2.   Lawful events held on properties that have been zoned for the
holding of public or private assemblies or special events unless the event is
not for the purpose for which the zoning or special use was obtained or if such
event is being sponsored by an individual, business, or group that is other
than the property owner.
      3.   Lawful events held within the walls of a residence or business
establishment by the owner of the residence or business establishment or by
someone authorized by the owner. (Ord. 09-410, 11-10-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
14-3-3: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
Permits shall be granted on the condition that the applicant can prove with
reasonable certainty that necessary measures have been taken to ensure the
public health, safety, and welfare as follows:
   A.   Attendance And Occupancy: The maximum number of people that will be in
attendance at or participating in a special event must be provided, and in no
event shall the maximum number of people in attendance exceed the number stated
on the application. At no time may the maximum occupancy of any permanent or
temporary structure be exceeded. A sign indicating the maximum occupancy of any
permanent or temporary structure must be posted in plain sight at all times
during a special event.
   B.   Site Plans Required: Site plans containing the following information
must be submitted with the application as follows:
      1.   Traffic: A traffic plan drawn to scale showing the areas of ingress
and egress, entrances and exits to any roads or highways, traffic flow pattern,
and parking areas. Motorized and nonmotorized rallies or events that involve
the use of public roadways must submit a route map and shall include a plan
designating the starting point and destination point.
      2.   Structures: A structural plan showing the location of temporary and
existing permanent structures (including, but not limited to, buildings, barns,
garages, tents, bleachers, booths, risers, inflatables, and stages), sanitation
facilities, dumpsters and refuse containers, fences and barricades, food
service locations, and any other activities. Said plan shall also include the
location of any grills, outdoor fireplaces, or any other device for cooking or
heating that contains fire, electricity, or the use of combustible materials. A
building permit and payment of applicable building permit fees is required for
temporary structures used for public assembly, public shelter, public restrooms
contained in a mobile trailer, spectator seating and/or elevated pedestrian
walkways more than thirty six inches (36") above grade. A final inspection
prior to the event is required for all structures requiring a permit.
      3.   Security And First Aid: A security and first aid plan must be
included that provides the number of security personnel that will be present
during the special event with their duties and responsibilities specified.
Firms providing security or performing other public safety functions at special
events must provide their regulatory number and certificates at the time of
application. The first aid plan must indicate the location of first aid
stations, the number and qualifications of emergency medical personnel, and the
location of any emergency vehicles that will be on site. The security and first
aid plan must also address the following issues:
         a.   How risks associated with the event will be addressed;
         b.   How emergency weather watches and warnings will be handled;
         c.   Procedures for contacting appropriate public safety agencies in
the event assistance is needed.
   C.   Approvals And Other Permits: Approval of all site plans by the Kane
County building, health, zoning, emergency management departments as well as
any local police, fire or other agency having jurisdiction of the event
location shall be required. Only sheriff's personnel or other personnel
approved by the county shall be permitted to regulate traffic on public
roadways. All other local, county, state, or federal licenses and permits
needed for the special event shall be provided to the county including, but not
limited to, food permits, liquor licenses, building permits, animal permits,
amusement ride or device permits, fireworks permits, and federal, state or
other local agency permits including fire departments/districts.
   D.   Animals: For events that involve domestic, farm, exotic or wild
animals, the number and type of animal must be submitted. Local, county, state,
and/or federal licenses and permits for animals that will be part of any
special event must be supplied to the county before any special event permit is
issued. The county may, at its discretion, require that a licensed veterinarian
be present during any special event where animals are present. The names and
dates of birth of all employees or volunteers who will be handling animals or
working or volunteering at an event where animals are present must be submitted
with the application. The sheriff at his discretion shall run warrants or
background checks on any employees or volunteers. In addition, the applicant
must certify that no convicted sex offenders, Illinois fugitives or fugitives
from any other state's law enforcement agency, or individuals for which there
are any outstanding warrants shall be employed or volunteer at the special
event.
   E.   Amusement Rides And Devices: If amusement rides will be on site during
any special event, a copy of the state of Illinois inspection report for each
amusement ride and a copy of the amusement ride permit issued by the Illinois
department of labor for carnival operators who will be on site must be provided
to the county. The names and dates of birth of all employees working or
volunteering at an event where amusement rides and devices are present must be
submitted with the application. The sheriff at his discretion shall run
warrants or background checks on any employees or volunteers. In addition, the
applicant must certify that no convicted sex offenders, Illinois fugitives or
fugitives from any other state's law enforcement agency, or individuals for
which there are any outstanding warrants shall be employed or volunteer at the
special event.
   F.   Insurance: Proof of insurance shall be provided for all special event
permits, with the exception of a special event private group permit, showing
evidence of a general liability policy naming the county as a primary,
noncontributory coinsured with a limit of no less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury, property damage and general liability naming the property
owner as an additional insured if the applicant is other than the property
owner submitted on a standard ACORD form stating the dates of coverage and
stating any limitations and exclusions.
   G.   Amplified Music: The use of amplified music is prohibited before nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on residentially zoned
or used parcels or on parcels that are adjacent to residentially zoned or used
parcels unless said parcel has been previously zoned for outside use of
amplified music. The use of amplified music is prohibited before nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and
before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on
Friday, Saturday, or on days preceding a holiday on all parcels zoned to allow
the use of outdoor amplified music and for all other parcels. The development
committee, or a subcommittee designated by it for such purpose, may, upon
written application, grant a variance for not to exceed two (2) additional
hours on parcels zoned to allow outdoor amplified music based upon evidence
that the nature of the amplification, location of the property or location of
the music venue on the property, or other safeguards are adequate to prevent
the amplified music from causing a nuisance to adjoining or nearby residential
property owners. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any
property under the jurisdiction of the forest preserve district of Kane County
that shall be subject to a special use permit governing its use by any third
party lessee or licensee.
   H.   Rodeos: For special events that are characterized as rodeos and/or
charreadas, horse poling or tripping is prohibited, and all rodeos and
charreadas must comply with the laws of the state of Illinois.
   I.   Sanitation: The site shall be cleared of all debris within twenty four
(24) hours of the close of the event, and temporary structures and/or
sanitation facilities must be removed from the site within seventy two (72)
hours of the close of the event. Any extension of time for said clearance and/
or removal must be submitted with the permit application.
   J.   Inspection: Receipt of an application hereunder shall allow Kane County
and any fire department/district personnel or representatives free and open
access to all areas of the special event for reasons of inspection from the
date of application until all conditions are satisfied as shall be determined
by the county and which shall include postevent cleanup.
   K.   Receipt Of Recommendations: Upon receipt of an application and
supporting documentation, the county shall receive recommendations from any
county department or office, local public safety agency, and any other local,
county, state, and/or federal agency as may be required. (Ord. 09-410, 11-10-
2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
14-3-4: FORM OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Application for permits shall be made in writing to the chairman of the
county board at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the special
event and any application received within thirty (30) days of a special event
may be denied unless otherwise provided in this section
14-3.
   B.   Applications shall provide all information requested on forms specified
by the county and shall be accompanied by all required supporting documentation
including, but not limited to, a site plan. The county may, at its discretion,
request further documentation from any applicant. No application shall receive
final approval until all supporting documentation has been received.
   C.   The event applicant, sponsor, property owner, and contact name of the
person overseeing the special event who will be on site during said special
event must be included in the application along with addresses and phone
numbers where said person may be reached during an emergency during the event.
   D.   The written consent of the owner of record of the subject property
shall be required on all applications. If the land is held in trust, the
signatures of all of the beneficiaries of the trust shall be required.
   E.   Applicant must indicate if alcohol will be served, sold, or distributed
at a special event. (Ord. 09-410, 11-10-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
14-3-5: GRANTING OF PERMITS:
   A.   The use of any land for a special event will not constitute a violation
of any zoning ordinance provided that a permit has been obtained to hold such
special event under the rules and regulations set forth in this section 14-3.
If more than one application is received for the same property within one year
for a similar event, the Kane County zoning department may ascertain that said
special event constitutes a change of use under the provisions of the Kane
County zoning ordinance.
   B.   The county may:
      1.   Grant the permit subject to the representations in the application
with or without additional conditions.
      2.   Deny the permit if the county determines that the information
supplied on the application indicates that the measures taken by the applicant
to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare are inadequate.
      3.   Deny the permit if the agent discovers any false or misleading
information has been submitted with the application.
      4.   Grant, amend, or deny the permit based upon the recommendation of
any Kane County department or office, any police or fire department or district
having jurisdiction of an event location, or any other state or local agency if
there are any outstanding violations of any kind or a failure to meet all
applicable codes and standards as adopted by said agency.
      5.   The county may restrict or deny any permit if the county determines
that the proposed attendance exceeds the capacity of the proposed site and/or
facility.
   C.   The granting of a permit under the regulations set forth hereunder in
no way waives or bars any future nuisance claims made against the applicant by
a private individual or public entity.
   D.   Permits hereunder shall be issued by and bear the signature of the
chairman of the county board or a designee.
   E.   Permits issued hereunder are not transferable and are only valid for
the single date or dates for which the permit shall be issued.
   F.   Permits shall be conspicuously displayed upon the premises on the date
(s) of the special event.
   G.   A special event may be suspended by the sheriff or other local public
safety agency, at their discretion, in the event of severe weather, public
emergency, or if there is a reasonable determination that the special event
poses a serious threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public.
   H.   All special events involving the use of public highways including
motorized or nonmotorized road rallies must comply with all traffic laws unless
specified by the Kane County sheriff. (Ord. 09-410, 11-10-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
14-3-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   The county board chairman may impose a fine, after notice and hearing,
of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) upon the applicant, sponsor, and/or
property owner who violates any of the provisions of this section 14-3. Each
day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense, and said fine
shall be in addition to any other fines or violations of law of any other Kane
County ordinances.
   B.   The county shall have the authority at any time upon issuance of a
permit to revoke said permit and suspend a special event if at any time the
county determines that the information submitted with the application is false
or misleading or the application is in violation of the terms of the permit.
   C.   The county board chairman may impose a fine, after notice and hearing,
of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) upon any property owner that is found
to be sponsoring or allowing a "special event", as previously defined, to be
held on their property without the proper permit. Each day a violation occurs
shall be considered a separate offense, and said fine shall be in addition to
any other fines or violations of law of any other Kane County ordinances.
   D.   Upon request of the chairman of the county board or the Kane County
sheriff, the Kane County state's attorney is hereby authorized to enjoin and/or
prosecute any violation(s) of this section
14-3. (Ord. 09-410, 11-10-2009, eff. 1-1-2010)
CHAPTER 14.5
PUBLIC NUDITY
SECTION:
14.5-1: Title
14.5-2: Intent
14.5-3: Definitions
14.5-4: Legislative Findings
14.5-5: Nudity Prohibited In Public Places
14.5-6: Exemptions
14.5-7: Enforcement And Penalties
14.5-8: Territory Embraced
14.5-9: Severability
14.5-10: Breast Feeding Permissible
14.5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the KANE COUNTY PUBLIC NUDITY ORDINANCE. (Ord.
96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-2: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve the health, safety,
welfare, and morals of the citizens of Kane County by prohibiting a person from
intentionally or recklessly appearing or being nude, or causing another person
to appear to be nude, in a public place and in other places which may
reasonably be expected to be observed by the public within the unincorporated
areas of Kane County except:
   A.   When such person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for
nudity provided: 1) such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the
legal function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within such
place provided or set apart for nudity, and 2) such person is not nude for the
purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for
another person or entity; or
   B.   When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this
chapter: 1) because it constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication,
demonstration or performance by such person wherein such nudity is expressive
conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a
genuine message or public expression and is not a guise or pretense utilized to
exploit nudity for profit or commercial gain and as such is protected by the
United States or Illinois constitution, or 2) because it is otherwise protected
by the United States or Illinois constitution. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
BREAST: A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred to as
the female breast) including the nipple and areola (the darker colored area of
the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of such gland wherein
such outside area is: a) reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola and b)
contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth (1/4) of the outside
surface area of such gland.
BUTTOCKS: (For a short general description see the last sentence of this
definition.) The area at the rear of the human body (sometimes referred to as
the gluteus maximus) which lies between two (2) imaginary straight lines
running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first or top such
line being one- half inch (1/2") below the top of the vertical cleavage of the
nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the
hip to the back of the leg) and the second or bottom such line being one-half
inch (1/2") above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshly protuberance
(sometimes referred to as the gluteal fold), and between two (2) imaginary
straight lines, one on each side of the body (the "outside lines"), which
outside lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above and which perpendicular outside lines pass through the
outermost point(s) at which each nate meets the outer side of each leg.
Notwithstanding the above, buttocks shall not include the leg, the hamstring
muscle below the gluteal fold, the tensor fasciae latae muscle or any of the
above described portion of the human body that is between either: a) the left
inside perpendicular line and the left outside perpendicular line or b) the
right inside perpendicular line and the right outside perpendicular line. For
the purpose of the previous sentence the left inside perpendicular line shall
be an imaginary straight line on the left side of the anus: a) that is
perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above and b)
that is one-third (1/3) of the distance from the anus to the right outside
line. (The above description can generally be described as covering 1/3 of the
buttocks centered over the cleavage for the length of the cleavage.)
ENTITY: Any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business
trust, joint venture, joint stock company or other for profit and/or not for
profit organization.
NUDE: Any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the
following body parts are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering:
   A.   The male or female genitals, or
   B.   The male or female pubic area, or
   C.   The female breast (see the last sentence of the definition for "places"
provided or set apart for nudity in this section), or
   D.   The buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this
requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, dental floss
and thongs.Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried,
and similar substances shall not be considered opaque covering. Each female
person may determine which one-fourth (1/4) of her breast surface area (see
definition of "breast") contiguous to and containing the nipple and the areola
is to be covered.
PERSON: Any live human being aged ten (10) years of age or older.
PLACES PROVIDED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY: Enclosed single sex public restrooms,
enclosed single sex functional shower, locker, and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping
accommodations, doctors' offices, portions of hospitals, and similar places in
which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the
home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. This term
shall not be deemed to include places where a person's conduct of being nude is
used for the promotion of business or is otherwise commercially exploited.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership
requirement), bottle clubs, hotels; motels; restaurants; nightclubs, country
clubs; cabarets; meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social,
fraternal or similar organization. Premises, or portions thereof such as hotel
rooms, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary in
nature shall not be deemed to be a public place. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-4: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
In addition and supplemental to the findings and determinations contained in
the "whereas" provisions of ordinance 96-313 which are incorporated by
reference into this section, it is hereby found by the board, acting in its
legislative capacity for the purpose of regulating the conduct of appearing
nude in public places that, considering what has happened in other communities,
the acts prohibited in section
14.5-5 of this chapter, encourage or create the potential for criminal
activity, that actual and simulated nudity and sexual conduct, begets and has
the potential for begetting undesirable and unlawful behavior; that sexual,
lewd, lascivious, and salacious conduct among patrons and employees within
establishments results in violation of law and creates dangers to the health,
safety, welfare and morals of the public and those who engage in such conduct.
(Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-5: NUDITY PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly
appear, or cause another person to appear, nude in a public place or in any
other place which is readily visible to the public, except as provided in
section
14.5-6 of this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity
maintaining, owning, or operating any public place establishment to encourage,
suffer or allow any person to appear nude in such public place, except as
provided in section
14.5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The prohibitions of section
14.5-5 of this chapter shall not apply:
   A.   When a person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity
provided: 1) such person is nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal
function(s) that is customarily intended to be performed within such place
provided or set apart for nudity, and 2) such person is not nude for the
purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain for such person or for
another person or entity; or
   B.   When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this
chapter: 1) because it constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication,
demonstration or performance by a person wherein such nudity is expressive
conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a
genuine message or public expression and is not a mere guise or pretense
utilized to exploit the conduct of being nude for profit or commercial gain and
as such is protected by the United States or Illinois constitution; or 2)
because it is otherwise protected by the United States or Illinois
constitution. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-7: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Any person or entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
prosecuted in the same manner as other ordinance violations are prosecuted.
Each incident or separate occurrence of an act that violates this chapter shall
be deemed a separate offense. Continual or repeated violations of this chapter
shall constitute a public nuisance and the Kane County state's attorney may
initiate proceedings to abate any such nuisance. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-8: TERRITORY EMBRACED:
All territory within the legal boundaries of unincorporated Kane County shall
be embraced by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or provision of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, whether for substantive, procedural, or any other
reason, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
14.5-10: BREAST FEEDING PERMISSIBLE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a mother may breast feed
her baby in any location, public or private, where the mother is otherwise
authorized to be, irrespective of whether the nipple of the mother's breast is
uncovered during or incidental to the breast feeding. (Ord. 96-313, 11-12-1996)
CHAPTER 15
NUISANCES AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
15-1: Definitions
15-2: Property Maintenance Procedures And Nuisances Declared
15-3: Exemptions
15-4: Right Of Entry
15-5: Enforcement
15-6: Fines
15-7: Cleanup
15-8: Relief From Personal Responsibility
15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated in
this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: The growing, developing, processing, conditioning, or
selling of farm crops and farm seeds, truck garden crops, animal and poultry
husbandry, apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, floriculture, horticulture,
nurseries, tree farms, sod farms, pasturage, viticulture, and wholesale
greenhouses when such agricultural purposes constitute the principal activity
on the land.
APIARY: The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: Any duly sworn deputy of the Kane County Sheriff's
Office, Environmental Management Officer, Zoning Officer, Building Officer, or
Health Officer.
BEE: Any life stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis Mellifera Species.
BEEKEEPER: The person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees.
BRUSH: Dry tree trunks, limbs, branches, and twigs.
BUILDING: Any rigid structure which is designed, used or intended for the
support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or other
property and which is permanently affixed to the land.
CEREMONIAL FIRE: An outdoor fire larger than three feet by three feet by three
feet (3' x 3' x 3') which is used for entertainment purposes as part of a
specifically scheduled public or private event and excludes leaves, grass or
shrubbery clippings or cuttings.
COLONY: An aggregate of bees consisting of workers, and at times a queen,
drones, brood, combs and honey.
COMPOST: A humuslike product derived from the process of composting.
COMPOSTING: An aboveground microbial process that converts organic waste to
soil or mulch by decomposition of material through an aerobic process that
requires adequate oxygen and moisture.
COUNTY: The County of Kane, State of Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD: The County Board of Kane County, Illinois.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
multiple-family dwellings and apartment hotels, but not including hotels,
motels, trailer coaches or mobile homes.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities that are used, or intended to be used,
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, trapping, or by
any other recognized and legal method of pest elimination approved by the
Health Officer.
FOWL: Birds belonging to one of two (2) biological orders, namely the gamefowl
or landfowl (Galliformes) and the waterfowl (Anseriformes).
GARBAGE: Organic waste resulting from the preparation, processing, handling and
storage of food and all decayed or spoiled food from any source whatsoever.
GRASS: All vegetative ground cover located within a yard excluding noxious
weeds.
GUINEA FOWL (AGELASTES, NUMIDA, GUTTERA, ACRYLLIUM): An African bird related to
pheasants and marked by a bare neck and head and slaty plumage speckled with
white.
HIVE: The man-made receptacle inhabited by a colony of bees.
HIVE, PERMANENT: The man-made receptacle inhabited by a colony of bees
permitted on a parcel year-round.
HIVE, TEMPORARY: The man-made receptacle for swarm control permitted on a
parcel for no more than one sixty (60) day period per year.
HOBBY ANIMALS: Any animal used for hobby, racing, show or recreational
purposes.
HUMAN WASTES: Food and byproducts of metabolism which are passed out of the
human body.
INFESTATION: The presence within a building of any insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAILER: Any motor vehicle, tractor, all-terrain
vehicle (ATV), boat, camping trailer, motor home, snowmobile, motorcycle,
minibike, from which, for more than fourteen (14) days, the engine, wheels or
other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts
have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven or operated under its own motor power. For the
purpose of this chapter, the term "inoperable motor vehicle or trailer"
includes any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer which is not
currently registered, if the Illinois Vehicle Code would prohibit operation of
the vehicle or trailer upon a highway without registration.
JUNK: Defined as, but not limited to, car parts, scrap metal, furniture,
appliances, equipment, glass, paper irrespective of whether these materials may
be reused.
JUNK VEHICLE: Any stripped, junked and/or wrecked motor vehicle not in good and
safe operating condition.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
flowers, and weeds.
MANURE: Stable bedding and excrement of all domestic animals and fowl.
NOXIOUS: Detrimental to one's health or property.
NOXIOUS WEED: An annual, biennial, or perennial plant propagated by seed or
vegetative parts, as listed in the Illinois Noxious Weed Rule, which is
injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land, or other property. Noxious
weeds as identified by the Illinois Noxious Weed Rule shall include the
following:
   A.   Marihuana (Cannabis sativa L.);
   B.   Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense);
   C.   Perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis);
   D.   Musk thistle (Carduus nutans);
   E.   Perennial members of the sorghum genus, including johnsongrass (Sorghum
halepense), sorghum almum, and other johnsongrass X sorghum crosses with
rhizomes; and
   F.   Kudzu (Pueraria labata).
NUISANCE: Any condition considered harmful to person(s) or property, or which
may be hazardous to the public health. A condition that has the ability to
affect the health, safety, or welfare of the public in general.
OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of space within a building.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
State, County or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PEA-FOWL (PAVO CRISTATUS, PAVO MUTICUS, AFROPAVO CONGENSIS): The peacock or pea
hen, large terrestrial pheasants.
POULTRY: Domesticated birds or rabbits, or both, dead or alive, capable of
being used for human food.
PRAIRIE PLANTS: Any one of eight hundred fifty one (851) species of plants
defined as a prairie plant by the Illinois plant information network maintained
by the Illinois Natural History Survey. This list may be found at http://
www.inhs.illinois.edu/~kenr/prairieplants.html.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire for warmth, cooking for human consumption or
temporary nonceremonial purposes where the fire is not larger than three feet
by three feet by three feet (3' x 3' x 3') and excludes leaves, grass or
shrubbery clippings or cuttings.
REFUSE: Ashes, sweepings, manure, dead animals, privy or cesspool contents or
litter.
RODENTS: An animal of the order Rodentia, including, but not limited to, mice,
rats, squirrels, chipmunks, gophers, porcupines, beavers, prairie dogs and
groundhogs.
ROOSTER: A male chicken.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust
from similar materials.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires a location on or in the
ground, or attached to something having a location on or in the ground.
TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal
owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
VACANT DWELLING: A dwelling which is lacking habitual presence of human beings
who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially all
lawful business operations or residential occupancy has ceased, or which is
substantially devoid of content. In determining whether a dwelling is vacant,
it is relevant to consider, among other factors, the percentage of the overall
square footage of the dwelling and the presence of rental or for sale signs on
the property; provided that a residential property shall not be deemed vacant
if it has been used as a residence by a person entitled to possession for a
period of at least three (3) months within the previous nine (9) months and a
person entitled to possession intends to resume residing at the property.
VERMIN: Roaches, bedbugs, fleas, lice, termites, mosquitoes, flies or similar
pestlike insects.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure.
YARD WASTE: Any waste generated as the result of tree trimming, lawn mowing,
gardening, leaf raking, and other yard activities and consisting of branches,
brush, grass clippings, leaves, sod, hedge trimmings and other plant waste from
yard and garden sources.
Other definitions as stated in rules and regulations that are referenced in
this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 12-83, 4-
10-2012, eff. 6-15-2012; Ord. 17-190, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017; Ord. 22-70, 3-
8-2022)
15-2: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES AND NUISANCES DECLARED:
It is hereby declared that any of the following activities and/or conditions
are nuisances, when not conducted in accordance with this chapter and are
unlawful when conducted or allowed to exist on property located within the
County, but outside the corporate limits of any city or village therein;
whether conducted, allowed, suffered or permitted by the owner, tenant, and/or
other occupant thereof (it being the intent of this chapter to make all such
persons jointly and severally liable for compliance herewith):
   A.   Exterior Property Areas:
      1.   Noxious Weeds: To keep, maintain or grow noxious weeds or other
vegetation which creates a health or safety hazard to the public. Excluded from
the provisions of this subsection are prairie plants, lands or portions of any
lands located in a public nature area, and any property owned or leased by a
unit of government. All noxious weeds are to be removed from property.
      2.   Overgrown Residential Yard: To allow vegetation defined as grass to
exceed twelve inches (12") in height on a residential use parcel located within
the county. Excluded from the provisions of this subsection are prairie plants.
      3.   Depositing Of Junk, Trash Or Refuse: To deposit or allow to be
deposited offal, fecal matter, night soil, garbage, junk, trash, refuse or
other offensive substances upon public or private property, or to permit such
objects to remain upon such property.
      4.   Storage Of Junk, Trash Or Refuse: To keep or store junk, trash and
refuse on property. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, "junk,
trash and refuse" is defined herein to include any and all waste matter,
whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood, and is specifically intended to include, but not
to be limited to, trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, any parts thereof,
iceboxes, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, metal drums or other containers,
paper, construction debris and raw garbage irrespective of whether or not such
objects are located on the property of the owner or bailee of such objects.
This subsection shall not apply to refuse disposal facilities regulated by the
state, the county, or any municipality of the state.
      5.   Throwing Or Depositing Offal: To throw or deposit any offal or other
offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead animal, in any watercourse, lake,
pond, spring, well, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, easement, street or public
highway.
      6.   Household Garbage: To place household garbage in any outside
container so that the household garbage is accessible to animals. Further, it
shall be a nuisance and unlawful to place garbage or trash out for collection
more than twenty four (24) hours before the scheduled pick up time.
      7.   Manure And Garbage: To accumulate manure, rubbish, garbage, refuse,
junk vehicles, human and industrial, noxious or offensive waste, except the
normal storage on a farm of manure for agricultural purposes. Normal storage
for agricultural purpose is considered to be two hundred sixteen (216) cubic
feet per acre (for example, a 6 x 6 x 6 accumulation).
      8.   Offensive Garbage Containers: To allow privies, vaults or garbage
cans which are offensive and which are not flytight, vermin and rodent proof,
or do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
      9.   Accumulations Of Yard Waste: To allow yard waste to remain upon
property for more than seven (7) days after generation.
      10.   Mosquito Breeding Site: To permit conditions upon property that
allow for the potential breeding of disease causing organisms, such as the
Culex species mosquito responsible for West Nile virus. Excluded from the
provisions of this subsection are lands or portions of any lands located in a
public nature area, or any property owned or leased by a unit of government.
      11.   Composting:
         a.   A compost pile may be no larger than one hundred twenty five
(125) cubic feet (for example, 5 x 5 x 5).
         b.   Compost may consist of yard waste, straw, fruit and vegetable
scraps, coffee grounds, or eggshells generated from the site on which the
compost is located. Commercially available ingredients specifically designed to
speed or enhance decomposition are allowed.
         c.   Composting of woody yard waste, meat, bones, fat, oil, whole
eggs, dairy products, unshredded branches or logs, weeds heavily laden with
seeds, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or pet wastes, diseased plants, or any
other garbage or refuse is not allowed.
         d.   Materials must be contained in a bin that may be constructed of
wood, wire mesh, or a combination of wood and wire, or in commercially
fabricated compost bins. Only one structure is allowed per lot. Structure must
not exceed one hundred twenty five (125) cubic feet (for example, 5' x 5' x 5')
in volume. Maximum height is five feet (5').
         e.   Compost structures must be placed at least five feet (5') from
property line (35 feet if property line is also a street line) and no closer
than forty feet (40') to any habitable building other than the resident's home.
         f.   Residents are required to use standard compost practices, which
include providing adequate air circulation to prevent combustion. Composting
that includes prohibited material is considered a public health nuisance.
         g.   Equine waste may, however, be composted in accordance with all
Illinois department of agriculture regulations. Such composting of equine waste
is only allowed in areas where the Kane County zoning ordinance permits keeping
of horses. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit farmers or
gardeners from incorporating bovine or equine waste into the soil for
fertilizer.
      12.   Dumping:
         a.   To dump, deposit, throw, discard, leave or cause or permit the
dumping, or depositing or discarding or leaving of litter upon any public or
private property in this county, or upon any river, lake, pond, stream or any
body of water.
         b.   There shall be no dumping as described in subsection A12a of this
section unless:
            (1)   The property has been designated by a local unit of
government as a proper litter disposal site, and the litter is disposed of on
that property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
state pollution control board.
            (2)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or
tenant and does not create a public health, safety, nuisance or fire hazard and
the litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by the owner
or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of litter.
            (3)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public
officials during special cleanup days.
            (4)   The person is lawfully acting to or reacting to an emergency
situation where health or safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of such litter when the emergency situation no longer exists.
         c.   To dump, deposit, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter
from any motor vehicle upon any public road, upon any public or private
property or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of water in this county.
      13.   Burning Of Garbage: To burn garbage, refuse or rubbish outdoors
with the exception of landscape waste and brush as permitted.
      14.   Construction Materials: Outdoor storage of lumber or other building
materials, construction vehicles, or construction equipment, not in connection
with a permitted building project in progress on the immediate premises is
prohibited. Outdoor storage of lumber or other building materials, construction
vehicles, or construction equipment in connection with a permitted building
project in progress on the immediate premises is prohibited after twelve (12)
months from the commencement of construction.
      15.   Parking: To park any vehicle, tractor, all-terrain vehicle (ATV),
boat, camping trailer, motor home, snowmobile, motorcycle, minibike, trailer
used for hauling in the front yard, back yard, corner yard, side yard or any
additional area of a lot or parcel of land situated between the public right of
way and any residence or accessory building or structure located therein,
except that parking is permitted in an area duly improved (meaning a gravel,
asphalt or concrete area) for parking purposes and the parking of noncommercial
vehicles is permitted in a driveway. Duly improved surfaces must be contiguous
to the main driveway accessed from the street.
      16.   Inoperable Motor Vehicles Or Trailers: To park any inoperable motor
vehicle or trailer, tractor, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), boat, camping trailer,
motor home, snowmobile, motorcycle, or minibike on public or private property,
unless on the premises of a duly licensed business engaged in the wrecking or
junking of motor vehicles.
         a.   Any motor vehicle, which is not currently registered when state
statute requires registration for driving on public roads.
         b.   This chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty
five (25) years of age kept within a building when not in use, or to a motor
vehicle on the premises of a place of a duly licensed business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
      17.   Uncompleted Yard: To allow the exterior yard areas to be in an
uncompleted condition, except that the exterior yard areas may be in an
uncompleted condition for no more than twelve (12) months after the
commencement of construction of a permitted building or site development
project, or a landscaping project not requiring a permit. Areas seeded with
grass and/or showing signs of nonweed growth shall be considered completed.
   B.   Open Burning:
      1.   To cause or allow any open, unattended or uncontrolled burning of
any materials, other than landscape waste or brush, in violation of the
following regulations and restrictions.
      2.   To cause or allow any open or uncontrolled burning of landscape
waste or brush in violation of the following regulations and restrictions. Any
and all burning in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be in
accordance with the restrictions enumerated below:
         a.   The open burning of landscape waste shall only occur on the
property upon which the landscape waste or brush was generated. The burning of
any materials other than landscape waste and brush is prohibited.
         b.   The following restrictions upon the open burning of landscape
waste or brush on the property upon which it was generated shall prevail:
            (1)   Burning is permitted only on sunny days between ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
            (2)   Burning is not permitted when the wind is in excess of ten
(10) miles per hour.
            (3)   Burning is not permitted within twenty feet (20') of any
building, structure or property line.
            (4)   Burning is not permitted when it is determined and announced
by the Kane County health department that inversion conditions or an ozone
alert exist.
            (5)   Burning is not permitted of any material other than dry
landscape waste or brush.
            (6)   Burning is not permitted on public or private roads, alleys,
sidewalks or easements.
            (7)   All open burning must be supervised until the fire is
extinguished.
            (8)   A fire extinguisher or garden hose or water source shall be
available at the burning site.
            (9)   A burn pile may not exceed two hundred sixteen (216) cubic
feet (for example, a 6 x 6 x 6 accumulation).
            (10)   It is the responsibility of the individual conducting the
burning and the owner of the property to satisfactorily determine that all
conditions upon burning as noted above are complied with during any burning.
         c.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
burning of landscape waste for purposes of habitat reclamation or firefighter
training.
            (1)   Property owner and/or the person conducting a prairie burn
must:
               (A)   Notify the Kane County health department when the prairie
burn will take place and when the burn has concluded. The Kane County health
department may be contacted at 630-444-3040.
               (B)   Notify the appropriate fire protection district or fire
department when the prairie burn will take place and when the burn has
concluded.
               (C)   Follow all standard restrictions.
            (2)   Prairie burns permitted by the Illinois environmental
protection agency are exempted from this provision.
         d.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
burning of brush for purposes of domestic fireplaces or cooking or external
fireplaces, or to self-contained outdoor wood burning devices or fireplaces.
         e.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
open burning of brush for purposes of recreational fires.
         f.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
open burning of brush for purposes of ceremonial fires provided that notice of
any ceremonial fire has been given to the fire protection district or fire
department serving the area where the fire is to take place and a permit has
been obtained from the Kane County health department. Failure to obtain a
permit from the Kane County health department prior to conducting a ceremonial
fire utilizing brush shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Failure to
notify the applicable fire protection district or fire department and obtain
permission prior to conducting a ceremonial fire utilizing brush shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
         g.   Effective January 1, 2003, the open burning of landscape waste
and/or other materials, with the exception of brush, is prohibited in the
unincorporated areas of Kane County. The aforesaid date limitations and the
aforesaid prohibition shall not apply to residential property currently located
within the geographical areas currently defined by any of the following ZIP
code areas, as established by the U.S. postal service on the effective date
hereof: 60109, 60119, 60140, 60142, 60144, 60147, 60151, 60178, 60182, 60511,
and 60554, unless or until such time as the state of Illinois expands its
vehicle emission testing program to include any of the aforesaid ZIP code
areas. Upon the state of Illinois expanding its vehicle emission testing
program to include any such ZIP code area, this prohibition shall automatically
apply to the area included in the vehicle emission testing program. Any and all
open burning within the aforementioned ZIP code areas shall comply with the
restrictions enumerated in subsections B2a and B2b of this section.
   C.   Noise:
      1.   Construction Noise: To perform or allow to be performed
construction, repair or remodeling work where the noise from such can be heard
from a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of the noise
between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Monday through
Friday and on Saturdays and Sundays and legal holidays between nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      2.   Vehicular Noise: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code,
to operate or permit operation of any sound amplification system in a vehicle
or on property, or to operate off road vehicles, including, but not limited to,
off highway motorcycles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), snowmobiles or
other like or similar vehicles, on private property where the noise from such
vehicle or activity is such as to unreasonably disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity; and when after written or verbal warning from law enforcement
personnel the owner or operator fails to cease and desist from such operation
or activity between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. The terms "motorcycles", "off road motorcycles", and "all-terrain
vehicles" shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois motor vehicle code.
"Snowmobile" shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois snowmobile
registration and safety act.
      3.   Lawn Equipment And Tools: To perform lawn mowing or utilize power or
nonpower tools between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M.
      4.   Raucous Noise: To make, continue, create or cause to be made or
continued any loud or raucous noise.
      5.   Harsh, Prolonged Or Unusual Noise: To make, continue, create or
cause to be made or continued any noise which is harsh, prolonged, unnatural,
or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any
persons within the neighborhood from which the noise emanates or as to
unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests
or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or
adversely affect such residences or places of business.
      6.   Violations Of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code: Any violation of section
12-602 of the Illinois motor vehicle code.
      7.   Modifications To Equipment: Removal or modification of adequate
sound suppression equipment as set forth in section
4-1(E) of the snowmobile registration and safety act.
      8.   Factors To Determine: Factors for determining whether a sound is
unreasonably loud or raucous may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
         a.   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
         b.   The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
         c.   The time of day the sound occurs;
         d.   The duration of the sound;
         e.   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;
         f.   Proof of violation of this subsection shall not require the use
of any decibel meter or other measuring device.
      9.   Free Speech: Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the
lawful exercise of the right of free speech protected by the Constitutions of
the United States or the State of Illinois.
      10.   Agricultural Noise: Excluded from the provisions of this subsection
is noise generated by agricultural equipment on land zoned and used for
agricultural purposes and work performed for or on behalf of a public body.
      11.   Motorcycles: Nothing herein shall be construed as a limitation on
the operation of duly registered motorcycles as defined in the Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code.
   D.   Animals And Infestations:
      1.   Collection Of Carcasses: To allow the carcass of any animal or any
offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in
any place, to the prejudice of others. To allow to remain carcasses of dead
animals or any part of decaying animal matter, not buried or destroyed or
collected within twenty four (24) hours after death.
      2.   Housing Of Animals Or Fowl: To house animals or fowl fifteen feet
(15') from the property line adjacent to residences, schools, hospitals, public
buildings, playgrounds, parks and other places, if said animals create sanitary
or health problems to persons or property in close proximity to them.
      3.   Housing Of Hobby Animals: To house any animal used for hobby,
racing, show or recreational purposes fifteen feet (15') from the property line
adjacent to residences, schools, hospitals, public buildings, playgrounds,
parks and other places if said animals create nuisance, sanitary or health
problems to persons or property in close proximity to them.
      4.   Housing Of Roosters, Pea-Fowl And Guinea Fowl: To house roosters,
pea-fowl and guinea fowl on properties less than five (5) acres in size unless
permitted by the Kane County zoning ordinance, as amended from time to time, or
permitted by a variance granted according to the provisions of the Kane County
zoning ordinance.
      5.   Insects, Vermin, Rodents And Other Pests: To allow an infestation of
insects, vermin, rodents or other pests. Every owner of a property, building or
structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents,
or other pests therein or on the premises whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain the property, building or structure in
rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition. Furthermore, whenever
infestation exists in the shared or public parts of any property, building, or
structure, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. However,
every occupant of a building unit shall be responsible for extermination within
the building unit when such occupant is responsible for the infestation.
      6.   To keep bees in any manner not in compliance with the following:
The keeping of non-domestic bees is prohibited. Hives may not be located in the
front yard. Hives must be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any property
line. Hives must be a minimum of ten (10) feet away from any sidewalk or
publicly designated path. Parcel must have an adequate water source on site for
the number of hives. All colonies must be registered with the State of
Illinois, who inspects and regulates the colonies, and be kept in compliance
with State rules and regulations. Hives must be accessible for the State
inspectors to check on a routine basis based on their practice and schedule.
The maximum number of permanent hives and temporary hives for swarm control for
not more than a sixty (60) day time period per year that may be located on a
parcel is limited as follows:
Less than one-quarter (1/4) of an acre Two (2) permanent hives and up to two
                                       (2) additional temporary hives
¼ - ½ acre                           Four (4) permanent hives and up to six
                                       (6) additional temporary hives
½- ¾ Acre                            Eight (8) permanent hives and up to ten
                                       (10)) additional temporary hives
¾ - 1 Acre                            Twelve (12) permanent hives and up to
                                       sixteen (16) additional temporary hives
                                       Sixteen (16) permanent hives and up to
1-1.5 Acre                             twenty-five (25) additional temporary
                                       hives
1.5 - 2 Acres                          Twenty (20) permanent hives and up to
                                       thirty (30) additional temporary hives
                                       Twenty-five (25) permanent hives and up
2-2.5 Acres                            to thirty (30) additional temporary
                                       hives
2.5 -3.5 Acres                         Thirty (30) permanent hives and up to
                                       forty (40) additional temporary hives
3.5 - 5 Acres                          Forty (40) permanent hives and up to
                                       fifty (50) additional temporary hives
5 Acres or greater                     No limit for all parcels five acres or
                                       greater
 
   E.   Structures:
      1.   Dangerous Structures: To allow any building, mobile home, shed,
fence or other manmade structure to exist which is hazardous to public health
because of its condition, faulty construction or lack of proper repair. Any
structure not secured against entry by persons or animals shall be considered
dangerous.
      2.   Inside Refuse Storage And Disposal: To place, leave, dump or
accumulate any garbage, rubbish or other refuse in any building or structure.
      3.   Building Exterior: To allow a building exterior to be in poor
repair, structurally unsound, contain unsanitary conditions, to be fully or
partially in a state of uncompleted construction after twelve (12) months from
the commencement of construction, or to pose a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare. The following standards shall apply to existing buildings:
         a.   General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All metal surfaces
subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion
and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to
inhibit future rust and corrosion. Removal of lead based paint to follow State
and Federal laws.
         c.   Premises Identification: Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") (102 mm) high with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Single occupancy buildings with rural fire
numbers may use the sign provided by the fire protection district to satisfy
this requirement if the sign is clearly visible at the street. Multiple-tenant
buildings must additionally have suite letters that conform to the above
standards.
         d.   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained
free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed
dead and live loads.
         e.   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained free
from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
         f.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials and be maintained weatherproof.
         g.   Roofs And Drainage: All roofing and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.
         h.   Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in
good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
         i.   Overhang Extensions: All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and properly anchored so
as to be kept in a sound condition.
         j.   Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
         k.   Chimneys And Towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks,
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and
in good repair.
         l.   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
         m.   Window, Skylight, Door And Frames: Every window, skylight, door
and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
Operable windows required for ventilation shall have fitted screens.
         n.   Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
         o.   Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition.
         p.   Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained
to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
         q.   Guards For Basement Windows: Every basement window that is
openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
         r.   Vehicular Doors: Vehicular openings which were originally
designed and constructed with a closing door shall continue to be maintained in
operating condition and able to be fully closed.
         s.   Furniture On Porches, Accessory Structures, Yards And Landings:
Household furniture such as sofas, stuffed chairs and mattresses, which are not
designed to withstand the elements and outdoor use, shall not be permitted to
be placed on porches, accessory structures, yards and landings. Such furniture
may provide a location where insects, rodents or other vermin may breed or may
reasonably be expected to breed. This section shall not prohibit the storage of
such household furniture on a totally enclosed porch having a roof, walls,
screens or glass windows.
      4.   Accessory Structures: To allow an accessory structure to a
residential, commercial or nonagricultural use, including, but not limited to,
detached garages, sheds, gazebos, decks, platforms, fences and walls to be in
poor repair, structurally unsound, contain unsanitary conditions or to pose a
threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The following standards shall
apply to existing accessory structures:
         a.   General: Accessory structures shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained
free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed
dead and live loads.
         c.   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained free
from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
         d.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials and be maintained weatherproof.
         e.   Roofs And Drainage: All roofing and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.
         f.   Window, Skylight, Door And Frames: Every window, skylight, door
and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
         g.   Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition.
         h.   Vehicular Doors: Vehicular doorways shall have closing doors.
      5.   Pools: All inground pools, aboveground pools, spas and hot tubs and
their barriers including fences, self-closing and self- latching gates,
heights, covers and alarms shall be maintained in working order, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair. Water must be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition or be completely drained. Pools that have been abandoned or
are not in an operable state of condition must be removed.
      6.   Uncompleted Buildings And Accessory Structures: The following
standards shall apply to fully or partially uncompleted buildings and accessory
structures:
         a.   General: The exterior of a structure as determined on the plans
which were submitted in order to obtain the building permit shall be completed
within twelve (12) months of the commencement of any new construction,
addition, alteration or repair, so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the
commencement of construction and thereafter maintained in good condition.
         c.   Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
completed within twelve (12) months of the commencement of construction and
thereafter be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
         d.   Vehicular Doors: Vehicular openings which are designed and
constructed with or for having a closing door shall be completed within twelve
(12) months of the commencement of construction and continue to be maintained
in operating condition and be able to be fully closed.
         e.   Pools: All inground pools, aboveground pools, spas and hot tubs
and their barriers including fences, self-closing and self- latching gates,
heights, covers and alarms shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the
commencement of construction and shall thereafter be maintained in working
order, in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. Water in all
pools, spas, and hot tubs must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
or be completely drained. Pools that have been abandoned or are not in an
operable state of condition must be removed within twelve (12) months.
   F.   Vacant Dwellings:
      1.   Notification To County: The owner of record or any person or entity
with an interest of record (hereafter collectively "owner") of or in any
residential dwelling that has become vacant shall within thirty (30) days after
the dwelling becomes vacant, or within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of this chapter, whichever is later, file a registration statement for
each such dwelling with the community development department on forms provided
by the community development department for such purposes. The registration
shall remain valid for one year from the date of registration. The owner shall
be required to annually renew the registration as long as the dwelling remains
vacant and shall pay an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each registered dwelling; provided, however, that eleemosynary, religious,
educational, benevolent or charitable associations and all governmental
agencies shall be exempt from the payment of the annual registration fee. The
owner shall notify the Community Development Department within twenty (20) days
of any change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Community Development Department for such
purposes. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or
court proceeding instituted by the County against the owner of the dwelling.
Registration of a dwelling in accordance with this section shall be deemed to
satisfy the registration requirements set forth in the County ordinances and
the notification requirement set forth in the County ordinances. In addition to
other information required by the Director of Community Development, the
registration statement shall include the name, street address and telephone
number of a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or older, designated by
the owner as the authorized agent for receiving notices of Code violations and
for receiving process, in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding, on behalf of such owner in connection with the enforcement of this
Code. This person must maintain an office in Kane County, Illinois, or must
actually reside within Kane County, Illinois. An owner who is a natural person
and who meets the requirement of this subsection as to location of residence or
office may designate himself or herself as agent. By designating an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section the owner is consenting to receive
any and all notices of Code violations concerning the registered dwelling and
all process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding
brought to enforce Code provisions concerning the registered dwelling by
service of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who fails
to register a vacant dwelling under the provisions of this section shall
further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the dwelling, any and
all notices of Code violations and all process in an administrative proceeding
brought to enforce Code provisions concerning the dwelling.
      2.   Responsibilities Of Owner Or Manager: The owner of any dwelling that
has become vacant, and any person maintaining, operating or collecting rent for
any dwelling that has become vacant shall, within thirty (30) days, do the
following: a) enclose and secure the dwelling; b) maintain the dwelling in a
secure and closed condition until the dwelling is again occupied or until
repair or completion of the dwelling has been undertaken.
      3.   Rules And Regulations To Be Promulgated: The County may issue rules
and regulations for the administration of this subsection. These rules may
designate board up materials and methods which must be used when securing a
dwelling so that the boarding is reasonably incapable of being removed by
trespassers or others acting without the dwelling owner's consent.
      4.   Inspection Report Required: Each vacant dwelling registered herein
shall be inspected periodically as required by the County, but not less than
annually. The dwelling owner shall, at the owner's expense, submit an
inspection report to the County. The report shall be prepared by a duly
licensed company or individual. The report must include comments on the
condition of the property, the exterior of all structures and the interior of
the dwelling. (Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; Ord. 12-83, 4-10-2012,
eff. 6-15-2012; Ord. 17-190, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017; Ord. 22-70, 3-8-2022)
15-3: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any parcel
which is both zoned and primarily used for any agricultural purpose. For the
purposes of beekeeping, residentially used parcels under five (5) acres and
located within residential neighborhoods and/or adjacent to residential uses
shall not be exempt.
   B.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to structures
which were exempt from the provisions of the County building regulations as an
agricultural use structure when originally erected and continue to be used for
agricultural purposes. Structures which were exempt from the provisions of the
County building regulations as an agricultural use structure when originally
erected but which are currently used for nonagricultural purposes or are vacant
or abandoned are not exempt from the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 22-70, 3-8-2022)
15-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on
reasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the Code
official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. (Ord. 10-186, 6-
8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
15-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the
County, any authorized representative shall give written notice to the owner
and/or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the
person allowing, causing or maintaining the nuisance. The notice of violation
under the provisions of this section shall contain:
      1.   The location of the violation.
      2.   A description of what constitutes the violation.
      3.   A statement of acts necessary to abate or correct the violation.
      4.   A date by which the violation must be abated or corrected to avoid
further legal action.
   B.   Complaint: In the event the owner or occupant of the property upon
which such nuisance exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such
nuisance, then an authorized representative shall file a complaint pursuant to
the processes and methods prescribed by chapter 2, article IX, "Administrative
Adjudication", of this code. Any authorized representative may issue a
complaint against the owners, lessees and/or occupants of said property or the
persons responsible for causing the nuisance charging a violation of any
section or subsection of this chapter. Such complaint may seek any and all
applicable relief available at law or in equity including, but not limited to,
abatement of the nuisance, fines or injunctive relief. Issuance of a notice of
violation shall not be a precondition to the filing of a complaint. (Ord. 10-
186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
15-6: FINES:
The fine for a violation of any subsection of this chapter shall not exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day a violation exists constitutes a
separate offense. (Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
15-7: CLEANUP:
   A.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot neglects
or fails to abate a declared nuisance after due notice and time specified by
the authorized representative, the authorized representative may request a
private hauler to remove such materials and the expense incurred shall be
billed to the owner, agent, occupant or tenant.
   B.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot neglects
or fails to exterminate any infestations of vermin or rodents after due notice
and time, as specified by the authorized representative, the authorized
representative may cause such vermin or rodents to be exterminated and the
expense incurred shall be billed to the owner, agent or occupant.
   C.   If the charge for cleanup or extermination remains unpaid, it shall be
made a special lien against the property at the next tax roll. Such lien shall
be such notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear
interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. (Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010,
eff. 7-1-2010)
15-8: RELIEF FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this
chapter while acting for Kane County and in good faith and without malice shall
not thereby render himself liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   B.   Any suit instituted against the authorized representative because of an
act performed by him in the lawful discharge of duties and under provisions of
this chapter, shall be defended by the legal representative of Kane County
until the final termination of the proceedings.
   C.   In no case shall the authorized representative be liable for cost in
any action, suit, or proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The authorized representative, acting in good faith and without malice,
shall be free from liability for acts performed under any provisions of this
chapter or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of his official
duties in connection thereto. (Ord. 10-186, 6-8-2010, eff. 7-1-2010)
CHAPTER 16
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
16-1: Zoning Ordinance Fee Schedule
16-2 - 16-15: Reserved
16-1: ZONING ORDINANCE FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   The fees to be charged in connection with administering the county's
zoning ordinance shall be as provided in this section.
   B.   The fee for hearings before the zoning board of appeals shall be as
follows:
      1.   For Rezonings And Special Uses:
         a.   Residential use:
            (1)   Less than two (2) acres: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00);
            (2)   Two (2) acres but less than five (5) acres: Nine hundred
dollars ($900.00);
            (3)   Five (5) acres but less than ten (10) acres: One thousand one
hundred twenty five dollars ($1,125.00);
            (4)   Ten (10) acres or more: One thousand two hundred dollars
($1,200.00), plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per acre, or portion thereof over ten
(10) acres;
         b.   Nonresidential use:
            (1)   Less than two (2) acres: One thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00);
            (2)   Two (2) acres but less than five (5) acres: One thousand
eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00);
            (3)   Five (5) acres but less than ten (10) acres: Two thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00);
            (4)   Ten (10) acres or more: Two thousand two hundred fifty
dollars ($2,250.00), plus seventy five dollars ($75.00) per acre, or portion
thereof over ten (10) acres;
      2.   For Variations:
         a.   For variations of greater than ten percent (10%): Five hundred
fifty dollars ($550.00) for each lot;
         b.   For variations of ten percent (10%) or less: Three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for each lot;
         c.   Each additional request for a variation, after the first
variation, on a lot, shall be assessed a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
         d.   Each request for a variation, as part of a rezoning or special
use petition, on a lot, shall be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
For application for hearing by the zoning board of appeals on other matters not
covered by the above schedule, the fee shall be the actual expense of the
hearing. The above fees shall include publication costs. When applicant applies
for more than one type of request, the highest fee specified shall be paid.
Where land and/or the use of land for which a rezoning, special use or variance
is required by chapter 25 of this code is maintained, used or commenced, prior
to obtaining said rezoning, special use or variance, by one who knows or should
have known the requirements for said rezoning or special use, the fees above
specified shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%). The payment of such
additional fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of chapter 25 of this code, in the execution of the rezoning or
special use, nor from any other penalties prescribed therein.
   C.   The fee for zoning use permits shall be as follows:
      1.   For extraction of earth products:
         a.   For five (5) acres but less than ten (10) acres: One thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00);
         b.   For ten (10) acres but less than twenty five (25) acres: Three
thousand dollars ($3,000.00);
         c.   For twenty five (25) acres but less than one hundred (100) acres:
Nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00);
         d.   For one hundred (100) acres but less than two hundred fifty (250)
acres: Nineteen thousand two hundred dollars ($19,200.00);
         e.   For two hundred fifty (250) acres but less than five hundred
(500) acres: Thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00);
         f.   For five hundred (500) acres or more: Thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00) plus thirty dollars ($30.00) per acre in excess of five hundred
(500) acres.
In determining fees, any portion of an acre shall be considered a full acre.
      2.   For establishing any new use or for changing any then existing use
of any building, structure or land, other than subsection C1 of this section,
two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per one thousand (1,000) square feet, or
portion thereof, of the overall land area, with a minimum of fifty dollars
($50.00) and a maximum fee of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). In the case
of a change in use involving a building only, such as a business building where
parking areas have been previously established, the fee shall be applied only
to the overall dimensions of the building, provided, that if any such new use
or change shall be for public or governmental use, no charge shall be made; and
if any such new use or change shall be religious, educational or charitable
use, not for profit, a maximum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); provided further,
that this subsection does not apply to a single-family residence.
   D.   None of the fees specified herein shall be collected from any public
taxing body. (Ord. 76-38, 4-13-1976; Ord. 77-37, 3-8-1977; Ord. 88-64, 5-10-
1988; Ord. 91-282, 11-12-1991; Ord. 94-78, 4-12-1994; Ord. 96-236, 9-10-1996;
Ord. 05-268, 8-9-2005)
16-2 - 16-15: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. HIGHWAY LOCATION MARKERS, RURAL HOUSE NUMBERING, AND ROAD NAMING
SECTION:
16-16: Administration
16-17: Adoption; Purposes
16-18: Location Markers Along Highways
16-19: Rural House Numbering
16-20: Road Names
16-21: Use By Public Officials
16-22: Effect Upon Municipalities
16-23 - 16-35: Reserved
16-16: ADMINISTRATION:
The post office designation or address established by federal authorities for
the delivery of rural mail may be used in connection with rural house numbering
and road names. The development director shall be the administrator of this
article. (Res., §§ 13, 14, 12-12-1962)
16-17: ADOPTION; PURPOSES:
   A.   There is hereby established for this county a system of section line
markers or mile posts to be placed along the numbered highway routes and other
main roads and streets throughout the county so that motor vehicle operators
may better determine their general location and destination, and a system of
rural house numbering, based on the section line markers, requiring each owner
of property located in the unincorporated parts of the county to place an
identifying number on his residence, business or other main building and at the
driveway leading thereto from the public road.
   B.   It is the purpose of the section line markers and house numbers:
      1.   To facilitate the rendering of fire and police protection and
assistance and the giving of medical aid in case of accident or other need,
thus promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the users of
the highways and citizens of the county;
      2.   To expedite the delivery of merchandise, fuel and mail and the
servicing and repair of farm, business and home utilities and equipment; and
      3.   To make possible the gradual development of more efficient methods
of keeping business and public records relating to rural property, residents
and business. (Res., 12-12-1962, § 1)
16-18: LOCATION MARKERS ALONG HIGHWAYS:
   A.   To provide a countywide system of reference for marking locations along
highways, roads and streets and for numbering houses in the rural areas, all
section lines established by government land surveys shall be designated as
follows:
      1.   The east and west section line that forms the south boundary of
sections 7 to 12 in the townships of Kaneville, Blackberry and Geneva shall be
a zero baseline.
         a.   To the north of the zero baseline, all parallel section lines
shall be numbered successively, the first one designated 1N, the second one 2N
and so on to the north boundary of the county, which shall be 20N.
         b.   To the south of the zero baseline, all parallel section lines
shall be numbered successively, the first one designated 1S, the second one 2S
and so on to the south boundary of the county, which shall be 10S.
      2.   The north and south section line that forms the east boundary of
Dundee Township shall be designated 32W. The first parallel section line to the
west thereof and the section line that forms the east boundary of the townships
of Elgin, St. Charles, Geneva, Batavia and Aurora shall be designated 33W. The
next parallel section line to the west thereof shall be 34W, the next 35W and
so on to the west boundary of the county which shall be 51W.
   B.   Wherever a north and south principal highway, road or street intersects
an east and west section line, there may be erected on each side of the roadway
a section line marker or milepost displaying the proper "N" or "S" section line
designation. Similarly on east and west highways at intersections with north
and south section lines, the proper "W" location marker or milepost may be
erected on each side of the roadway. Diagonal and curved highways or major
sections thereof shall be determined by the administrator to be either north
and south or east and west depending on whether the general direction is more
nearly one or the other and whether logical continuity is maintained. Markers
may be placed between section lines at important highway intersections showing
the decimal distance beyond the section line.
   C.   The wording on each section line marker may take the general form of
"MILE 5N", the word "MILE" usually being placed above the number in smaller
sized letters. The administrator shall determine after consultation with
representatives of the several highway jurisdictions in the county any other
features and standards of design and placement.
   D.   The jurisdiction having responsibility for the maintenance of the
various highways, roads and streets in the county may erect location markers on
their respective roads as soon as practicable and shall maintain them as a part
of the roadway improvement. As the system becomes established, map makers shall
be urged to show and explain the system of location markers on new editions of
maps. (Res., 12-12-1962, §§ 2-5)
16-19: RURAL HOUSE NUMBERING:
   A.   In the unincorporated parts of the county the following rules shall
govern the house numbers to be used on the principal buildings, driveways and
potential land divisions:
      1.   999 house numbers shall be available for assignment and use within
each section of land or mile.
      2.   Diagonal and curved highways shall be classified as to direction as
set forth in this article.
      3.   Odd numbers shall be used on the south, east and southeast sides of
highways and shall range across each section from 001 to not over 999.
      4.   Even numbers shall be used on the north, west and northwest sides of
highways and shall range across each section from 002 to not over 998.
      5.   To the north of the zero baseline described above in this article,
house numbering on the north and south highways shall run from south to north;
to the south of the zero baseline, house numbering shall run from north to
south.
      6.   At the half section line numbering shall begin with 501 and 502.
      7.   The house number for all other points shall be apportioned by the
administrator according to distances measured at right angles from the section
lines and half section lines, making such variations as may be necessary in the
case of irregular or fractional sections.
      8.   The complete number to be used in writing or giving an address shall
be formed by combining the section line designation, as established in this
article, and the house number, as illustrated in the following examples:
         5N-502 Dunham Road
         37W-501 Campana Road
   B.   When notified by notice published in the newspapers of the county,
owners or occupants of buildings in the unincorporated parts of the county may
furnish, erect and maintain the house number identifying their properties.
Numerals shall be at least four inches (4") high and be mounted on the main
building in a manner visible from the highway. If the building setback is
greater than one hundred feet (100') from the center of the road, an additional
number shall be placed at or near the driveway entrance in a location visible
from both directions along the highway. The house number may be also displayed
on each highway mailbox. The number on a mailbox which adjoins a driveway
entrance shall be considered as also marking the entrance.
   C.   Where the administrator hereof finds that a small unincorporated area
is wholly or partly surrounded by, or is closely related to, one or more
municipalities and would be best served by the use of adjoining municipal house
numbering, an exception from the use of the rural house number may be granted.
(Res., 12-12-1962, §§ 6, 7, 9)
16-20: ROAD NAMES:
   A.   Existing names and number designations for highways, roads and streets
in the unincorporated parts of the county which the administrator hereof finds
are generally recognized and established by use on current maps and signs shall
be used in connection with rural house numbering unless changed by appropriate
action of the county board.
   B.   The development department shall determine and report to the county
board existing and potential cases of conflicting or confusing names of
highways, roads and streets located in the same or nearby postal service areas
along with recommendations for appropriate changes.
   C.   In order to avoid names which conflict, are similar, or are otherwise
not consistent with good principles of street naming, street names proposed to
be shown on subdivision plats shall be checked with the development department
in advance of completion of the final plat. (Res., 12-12-1962, §§ 10-12)
16-21: USE BY PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
Wherever practicable, section line designations and rural house numbers along
with highway names or numbers may be used in the operation of and records kept
by the county development department, county regional planning commission,
county highway department, assessor, sheriff, state police, state division of
highways, local fire protection districts, townships, civilian defense
officials and other agencies operating in the county. (Res., 12-12-1962, § 8)
16-22: EFFECT UPON MUNICIPALITIES:
This article shall provide an official system of house numbering which may be
adopted by any municipal corporation within the county at the discretion of the
authorities of such corporation. The adoption of this article by the county
board does not imply that the regulations herein contained will be imposed upon
any municipal corporation, but shall be considered permissive authority to
guide the establishment of such a system by those municipal corporations
desiring to use same. (Res., 12-12-1962, § 15)
16-23 - 16-35: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. REGIONAL PLANNING 1
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
16-36: Planning Area
16-37: Comprehensive Plan Adopted
16-38 - 16-45: Reserved
Division 2. Commission
16-46: Created
16-47: Members
16-48: Officers
16-49: Meetings
16-50: Quorum
16-51: Secretary
16-52: Powers And Duties
16-53 - 16-57: Reserved
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/3-3001 et seq.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
16-36: PLANNING AREA:
The entire county is hereby designated as a planning area. (Res. 82-96, 6-8-
1982)
16-37: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
The Kane County, Illinois, comprehensive land use plan, 1982-2000, is hereby
adopted by reference. (Res. 82-96, 6-8-1982)
16-38 - 16-45: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. COMMISSION
16-46: CREATED:
The Kane County regional planning commission is hereby created. (Res., 9-9-
1958)
16-47: MEMBERS:
   A.   The county regional planning commission shall consist of twelve (12)
members of which three (3) members shall be ex officio members as herein
designated and nine (9) shall be citizen members appointed by the chairman of
the county board with the consent of the county board. Appointments of citizen
members shall be made at the December meeting of the county board and
appointees shall take office on January 1 of the following year. The chairman
of the county board, the chairman of the county development committee and the
chairman of the zoning board of appeals shall be ex officio members, but shall
not be entitled to vote.
   B.   Citizen members shall hold office for terms of three (3) years. All ex
officio members shall serve for the term of their elected or appointed office.
If a vacancy occurs by death, resignation or otherwise the vacancy shall be
filled by an appointment for the unexpired term. All members shall serve until
their successors are appointed. (Res., 9-9-1958; Res., 9-11-1962; Res. 74-15, §
2, 2-19-1974)
16-48: OFFICERS:
At the county regional planning commission's first meeting of each year, a
chairman and a vice chairman shall be elected from its membership. The vice
chairman shall act as chairman during the absence or disability of the chairman
and in case of resignation or death of the chairman. (Res., 9-11-1962)
16-49: MEETINGS:
   A.   The frequency, time and place of regular meetings of the county
regional planning commission shall be determined by the commission. Special
meetings may be called at any time on three (3) days' notice by the chairman or
any three (3) members. All commission meetings shall be conducted openly with
the public admitted.
   B.   The commission shall keep minutes of all its meetings, and shall file
them in the office of the planning department. Such minutes are public records
and shall be open to public inspection at any time during office hours. (Res.,
9-11-1962)
16-50: QUORUM:
A minimum of five (5) voting members of the county regional planning commission
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The concurrence of a
majority of the voting members present at a meeting is necessary for the
commission to take any action. (Res., 9-11-1962; Res. 74-15, § 5, 2-19-1974)
16-51: SECRETARY:
The director of the development department or his designee shall serve as
secretary of the county regional planning commission. (Res., 9-11-1962; Res.
74-15, § 4, 2-19-1974; Res. 80-198, 12-9-1980)
16-52: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The county regional planning commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
   A.   To cooperate in the preparation and recommendation to the county board
of a comprehensive plan for the county as a whole.
   B.   To cooperate in the preparation and recommendation to the county board
from time to time of plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the
official plan.
   C.   To give aid to the municipal and county officials charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the comprehensive plan;
to further the making of these projects and generally to promote the
realization of the comprehensive plan.
   D.   To report from time to time, and at least once a year, to the county
board on:
      1.   The status and effectiveness of the comprehensive plan.
      2.   Effectiveness and conformity of county ordinances and regulations as
they relate to the comprehensive plan.
   E.   To transmit directly to the county board and the county zoning board
reports on important problems, conditions and proposals pertinent to the future
development of the county.
   F.   To exercise such other powers pertinent to the powers granted by
statute or as may be conferred by the county board. (Res., 9-11-1962; Res. 74-
15, § 3, 2-19-1974)
16-53 - 16-57: RESERVED:
ARTICLE IV. HISTORIC PRESERVATION 1
SECTION:
Division 1. Purposes, Definitions And General Provisions
16-58: Purposes And Intent
16-59: Definitions
16-60: General Provisions
16-61 - 16-65: Reserved
Division 2. The Historic Preservation Commission
16-66: Organization
16-67: Powers And Authorities
16-68 - 16-72: Reserved
Division 3. Designation Of Landmarks, Preservation Districts And Road Corridors
16-73: Surveys And Research
16-74: Preservation Plan
16-75: Nomination Of Landmarks, Preservation Districts And Road Corridors
16-76: Criteria For Designation
16-77: Reports And Recommendations Of The Preservation Commission
16-78: Notification Of Nomination
16-79: Hearing
16-80: Recommendation Of Preservation Commission
16-81: Designation
16-82: Notice Of Designation
16-83: Publication Of Map
16-84: Appeals
16-85: Interim Code
16-86: Marking By Attachment Of A Plaque
16-87: Amendment And Rescission Of Designation
16-88: Corridor Management Plan
16-89 - 16-92: Reserved
Division 4. Alteration, Construction, Demolition And Maintenance
16-93: Scope
16-94: Certificate Of Appropriateness
16-95: Economic Hardship
16-96: Maintenance Of Historic Properties
16-97: Public Safety Exclusion
16-98 - 16-102: Reserved
Division 5. Enforcement, Penalties And Equitable Relief
16-103: Enforcement
16-104: Penalties
16-105: Equitable Relief
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-30001 et seq.
DIVISION 1. PURPOSES, DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-58: PURPOSES AND INTENT:
The purposes and intent of this article are as follows:
   A.   To identify, designate, protect, preserve and encourage the
restoration, rehabilitation and adaptation for continued use of those
properties, structures and road corridors which represent or reflect the
historical, cultural, artistic, social, economic, ethnic or political heritage
of the nation, state or county, or which may be representative of an
architectural or engineering type inherently valuable for the study of style,
period, craftsmanship, method of construction or use of indigenous materials;
   B.   To safeguard the county's historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such structures, landscape features and areas;
   C.   To stabilize and improve the economic vitality and value of designated
landmarks, preservation districts and road corridors in particular and of the
county in general;
   D.   To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past;
   E.   To protect and enhance the county's attractions to tourists and
visitors and to support and provide stimulus to business and industry;
   F.   To strengthen the economy of the county; and
   G.   To promote the use of preservation districts, landmarks and road
corridors for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of Kane
County. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-59: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, certain words, phrases and terms shall have
the following meanings:
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more historic, architectural
or physical features of an area, site, landscape, place and/or structure,
including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or
removal of any structure; the expansion or significant modification of
agricultural activities; surface mining; and clearing, grading or other
modification of an area, site or landscape that changes its current or natural
condition.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Importance as an area, site, place or landscape
that has yielded or is likely to yield information concerning previous cultures
in Illinois or previous periods of the present culture. Areas, sites or
landscapes of archaeological significance may include, but are not limited to,
aboriginal mounds, forts, earthworks, burial grounds, historic or prehistoric
ruins, locations of villages, mine excavations or tailings.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: Embodying the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, style or method of construction or use of indigenous
construction, or representing the work of an important builder, designer,
architect, or craftsman who has contributed to the development of the
community, county, state or nation.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or constructed for residential, commercial,
industrial, agricultural or other use.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the preservation
commission indicating its approval of plans for alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal affecting a nominated or designated landmark or property
within a nominated or designated preservation district or road corridor.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: A certificate issued by the preservation
commission authorizing an alteration, construction, removal or demolition even
though a certificate of appropriateness has previously been denied or may be
denied.
COMMISSIONERS: Members of the preservation commission.
CONSERVATION RIGHT: A term that includes easements, covenants, deed
restrictions or any other type of less than full fee simple interest as that
term is defined in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 of "an act relating to
conservation rights in real property", approved September 12, 1977, as amended.
CONSTRUCTION: The act of adding an addition to a structure or the erection of a
new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a landmark or
property within a preservation district or road corridor.
DESIGN CRITERIA: Standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic, architectural, scenic or aesthetic character of a landmark,
preservation district or road corridor.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS: The development rights of a landmark or of a property
within a preservation district or road corridor as defined in section 11-48.2-
1A of the Illinois municipal code.
DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS BANK: A reserve for the deposit of development rights as
defined in section 11-48.2-1A of the Illinois municipal code.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: The architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a building or structure, including, but not
limited to, the kind, color and texture of the building material and the type,
design and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and
appurtenant elements.
HIGHWAY AUTHORITY: The Illinois department of transportation with respect to a
U.S. or state highway; the county board with respect to a county highway; the
county engineer if a ministerial function is involved; the highway commissioner
with respect to a township road; or the corporate authorities of a municipality
with respect to a municipal street.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE: Character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or culture of the community, county, state or country; as the location
of an important local, county, state or national event; or through
identification with a person or persons who made important contributions to the
development of the community, county, state or country.
LANDMARK: A property or structure designated as a "landmark" by ordinance of
the county board, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, which is worthy of
rehabilitation, restoration or preservation because of its historic or scenic
or architectural significance.
LANDSCAPE: A natural feature or group of natural features such as, but not
limited to, valleys, rivers, lakes, marshes, swamps, forests, woods or hills;
or a combination of natural features and buildings, structures, objects,
cultivated fields, or orchards in a predominantly rural setting.
OBJECT: Any tangible thing, including any items of personal property,
including, but not limited to, wagons, boats, and farm machinery, that may be
easily moved or removed from real property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person or corporation or other legal entity in whose name
the property appears on the records of the county recorder of deeds.
PRESERVATION DISTRICT: An area designated as a "preservation district" by
ordinance of the county board and which may contain within definable geographic
boundaries one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other
properties, areas, sites, landscapes, or structures which, while not of such
historic or architectural or scenic significance to be designated as landmarks,
nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark
or landmarks located within the district.
REMOVAL: Any relocation of a structure, object or artifact on its site or to
another site.
REPAIR: Any change that is not construction, alteration, demolition, or removal
and is necessary or useful for continuing normal maintenance and upkeep.
ROAD CORRIDOR: A type of preservation district in which the geographic area is
identified with a nominated or designated road. The road corridor minimally
includes the area within the right of way including the road pavement, any
structures such as bridges and signs, shoulders and vegetation, and may also
include: a) all or portions of adjacent properties, b) features located on
adjacent property such as buildings, structures, or vegetation, c) potential
conservation easements or other easements that would protect scenic vistas and
viewsheds, and/or d) existing easements protecting privately owned drives or
lanes.
SCENIC SIGNIFICANCE: Importance as a result of appearance or character that
remains relatively unchanged from and embodies the essential appearance related
to a culture from an earlier historic or prehistoric period; as a result of a
unique location, appearance, or physical character that creates an established
or familiar vista or visual feature; or as a geologic or natural feature
associated with the development, heritage or culture of the community, county,
state or nation.
SITE: The traditional, documented or legendary location of an event,
occurrence, action or structure significant in the life or lives of a person,
persons, group or tribe, including, but not limited to, cemeteries, burial
grounds, campsites, battlefields, settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river
crossings, routes, trails, caves, quarries, mines, or significant trees or
other plant life.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
or temporary location on or in the ground, including (but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing) barns, smokehouses, advertising signs, billboards,
backstops for tennis courts, bridges, fences, pergolas, gazebos, radio and
television antennas, solar collectors, microwave antennas, including supporting
towers, roads, ruins or remnants (including foundations), swimming pools or
walkways.
SURVEY: The systematic gathering of information on the architectural, historic,
scenic and archaeological significance of buildings, sites, structures, areas,
or landscapes through visual assessment in the field and historical research,
for the purpose of identifying landmarks, districts or road corridors worthy of
preservation. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-60: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following are general provisions propounded to make more clear matters
relative to scope and jurisdiction of this article:
   A.   No provision herein shall supersede the powers of other local
legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any property owner from complying
with the requirements of any other state statutes or code or ordinance of the
county or individual municipal ordinance or regulations, and any permit or
license required thereunder shall be required in addition to any certificate of
appropriateness or economic hardship which may be required hereunder; provided
however, that where a certificate of appropriateness or economic hardship is
required, no such other permit or license shall be issued by any other agency
under the jurisdiction of the county board before a certificate has been issued
by the commission as herein provided.
   B.   The use of property and improvements which have been designated under
this article shall be governed by the county zoning ordinance 1 , as amended.
   C.   If any particular section of this article is declared to be
unconstitutional or void, only the particular section is affected, and all
other sections of this article shall remain in full force and effect.
   D.   For purposes of remedying emergency conditions determined to be
dangerous to life, health or property, the commission may waive the procedures
set forth herein and grant immediate approval for a certificate of
appropriateness. The commission shall state its reasons in writing for such
approval.
   E.   No member of the preservation commission shall vote on any matter that
may materially or apparently affect the property, income or business interest
of that member.
   F.   No provision herein shall be contrary to the purpose of promoting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare; conserving the
values of property throughout the county; and reducing or avoiding congestion
in the public streets and highways. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-
2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 25 of this code.
16-61 - 16-65: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
16-66: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Appointment: The county board shall by ordinance appoint members to the
county historic preservation commission from names submitted by the presiding
officer of the county board.
   B.   Composition: The preservation commission shall consist of nine (9)
members. All members shall be residents of Kane County. The chairman of the
county board shall make every reasonable effort to nominate to the preservation
commission at least one attorney, one historian or architectural historian, one
architect/engineer and one real estate professional knowledgeable in
preservation; the other members shall be persons with a demonstrated interest
in prehistory, history or architecture.
In addition to the nine (9) voting members, the director of the county
development department or his designee shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting
member of the commission and shall be responsible for providing staff support,
upon approval of, and as deemed appropriate by the county board development
committee. Also in addition, the director of the county division of
transportation or his designee shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member
of the commission and shall be responsible for providing staff support, upon
approval of, and as deemed appropriate by the county board transportation
committee. The president, Kane County forest preserve or his designee shall
also serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of the commission.
   C.   Terms: Terms of the initial members shall be staggered so that at least
five (5) serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year; one for
two (2) years; one for three (3) years; one for four (4) years; one for five
(5) years. Any additional initial members shall also serve terms staggered in
the same sequence. Successors to initial members shall serve for five (5) year
terms. All ex officio members shall serve the term of their elected or
appointed office. All members shall serve until their successors are appointed.
   D.   Officers: One of the appointed members shall be named chairman at the
time of appointment and vice chairman and secretary shall be elected by the
preservation commission. The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall perform the duties of the
chairman. If both the chairman and the vice chairman are absent, a temporary
chairman shall be elected by those present. The secretary shall ensure that the
following duties are performed:
      1.   That minutes are taken of each preservation commission meeting;
      2.   That copies of the minutes, reports and decisions of the
preservation commission be published and distributed to the members of the
preservation commission;
      3.   That the county board chairman is advised of vacancies on the
preservation commission and expiring terms of members; and
      4.   That there be prepared and submitted to the county board a complete
record of the proceedings before the preservation commission on any matters
requiring county board consideration.
Vacancies shall be filled by the county board from names submitted by the
chairman of the county board. Any commission member may be removed by the
county board for cause after a public hearing.
   E.   Rules And Procedures: The historic preservation commission shall have
the authority to develop and adopt rules and procedures necessary to carry out
its functions under the provisions of this article.
   F.   Meetings:
      1.   Meetings of the commission shall be held no less than monthly,
except in those months when no business is pending, and shall be held at such
times and places within the county as the commission shall decide. All meetings
of the commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing a vote of each
member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, and shall also
keep records of its official actions. Such minutes and records shall be open to
the public for inspection and maintained at offices of the county development
department.
      2.   A quorum shall consist of five (5) members. The transaction of
business shall be made by a majority vote of those members in attendance while
a quorum is present, except that the adoption, modification or rescission of
any rule or part thereof shall require the affirmative vote of five (5)
members.
   G.   Compensation: The members shall serve without compensation, but they
shall be reimbursed for their expenses necessarily incurred in the performance
of their duties as such.
   H.   Annual Report: The commission shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the county board chairman. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988; Ord. 00-186,
7-11-2000)
16-67: POWERS AND AUTHORITIES:
The preservation commission shall have the following powers and authority:
   A.   To conduct an ongoing survey of the county to identify buildings,
structures, areas, roads, sites and landscapes that are of historic,
archaeological, architectural or scenic significance, and therefore potential
landmarks, preservation districts or road corridors;
   B.   To hold public hearings and recommend to the county board the
designation of landmarks, preservation districts or road corridors;
   C.   To compile information concerning and prepare descriptions of the
landmarks, preservation districts or road corridors identified and recommended
for designation and the characteristics that meet the standards for
designation;
   D.   To prepare, keep current and publish a map or maps showing the
locations and exact boundaries of nominated and designated landmarks,
preservation districts and road corridors, and, if the commission so chooses,
the locations and boundaries of designated state or federal landmarks or
districts;
   E.   To keep a register of all designated landmarks, preservation districts
and road corridors;
   F.   To establish an appropriate system of markers or plaques for all
designated landmarks, preservation districts and road corridors, and for
streets, roads, trails and highways leading from one landmark, preservation
district or road corridor to another and to confer recognition upon the owners
of landmarks or property within preservation districts or road corridors by
means of certificates, plaques or markers;
   G.   To nominate landmarks and preservation districts to any state or
federal registers of historic places;
   H.   To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property within
preservation districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on any
state or federal register of historic places;
   I.   To inform and educate the citizens of the county concerning the
historic, archaeological, architectural or scenic heritage of the county by
publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, and by
holding programs and seminars;
   J.   To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal or demolition affecting landmarks or property within
preservation districts or road corridors and issue or deny certificates of
appropriateness for such actions;
   K.   To consider applications for certificates of economic hardship that
would allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness
may be, or has been denied;
   L.   To develop specific criteria and guidelines for the proper alteration,
construction, demolition or removal of landmarks, or of property within
preservation districts or road corridors;
   M.   To review proposed amendments to zoning regulations, applications for
special uses or applications for zoning variations that affect any landmark,
preservation district or road corridor. Proposed zoning amendments,
applications for special use or zoning variations that affect any "landmark",
"preservation district" or "road corridor" as defined in this article shall be
transmitted to the preservation commission for review and comment prior to the
date of the hearing by the county zoning board of appeals;
   N.   To administer on behalf of the county board any property, or full or
partial interest in real property, including a conservation right, upon
designation by the county board;
   O.   To accept and administer on behalf of the county board gifts, grants,
money or other personal property as may be appropriate for the purposes of this
article. Such money may be expended for publishing maps and brochures, for
hiring staff or consultants or performing otherwise appropriate functions for
the purpose of carrying out the duties and powers of the preservation
commission and the purposes of this article;
   P.   To administer any system established by the county board for the
transfer of development rights;
   Q.   To call upon available county agencies and staff as well as other
experts for technical advice;
   R.   To retain specialists or consultants, or to appoint citizen,
neighborhood or area advisory committees, as well as other experts for
technical advice;
   S.   To testify before all boards and commissions including the county
regional planning commission and the zoning board of appeals, on any matter
affecting potential or designated landmarks, preservation districts or road
corridors;
   T.   To periodically review any county comprehensive plan and to develop a
preservation component in any comprehensive plan of the county and to recommend
it to the county regional planning commission and the county board;
   U.   To periodically consult with the zoning administrator, review any
zoning ordinance and building code and to recommend to the county board any
amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or
property within preservation districts or road corridors;
   V.   To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to
the implementation of its powers and duties, or the implementation of the
purposes of this article;
   W.   To recommend to the county board the adoption of intergovernmental
agreements between the county board and Kane County municipalities that allow
for the nomination and designation by the county board of individual landmarks,
preservation districts and road corridors within incorporated areas and afford
the protection of historic landmarks, preservation districts or road corridors
through the provisions of this article. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-
11-2000)
16-68 - 16-72: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS, PRESERVATION DISTRICTS AND ROAD CORRIDORS
16-73: SURVEYS AND RESEARCH:
The preservation commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and research
effort in the county to identify sites, structures, and objects that have
historic, cultural, community, scenic significance, architectural or aesthetic
importance, interest or value. As part of the survey, the commission shall
review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or
private organization and compile appropriate descriptions, facts and
photographs.
Before the preservation commission shall on its own initiative nominate any
landmark or district for designation, it shall first develop a plan and
schedule for completion of a survey of the county to identify potential
landmarks and districts and adopt procedures to nominate them in groups based
upon the following criteria:
   A.   The potential landmarks or districts in one township or distinct
geographical area of the county;
   B.   The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event or
historical period;
   C.   The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or school,
or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman;
   D.   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the preservation commission to
assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential landmarks within the
county. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-74: PRESERVATION PLAN:
   A.   The historic preservation commission shall, through the aforesaid
surveys and research, so to become thoroughly familiarized with buildings,
structures, objects, sites, districts, areas and lands within the county which
may be eligible for designation as historic landmarks or districts, prepare a
"historic landmark and district preservation plan".
   B.   The preservation plan shall be presented to the county board
development committee for consideration and recommendation to the county board
for inclusion in the 2020 land resource management plan, as amended. At least
annually, the commission shall review the plan and insert in the historic
preservation commission minutes a report of such review and take appropriate
action on any amendments to the plan deemed necessary. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988,
eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-75: NOMINATION OF LANDMARKS, PRESERVATION DISTRICTS AND ROAD CORRIDORS:
The preservation commission or any person may nominate landmarks, preservation
districts or road corridors for designation by the county board by filing a
nomination for any property, properties and structures, or area located in an
unincorporated area or in an incorporated area by intergovernmental agreement
with the appropriate municipality within the geographical boundaries of Kane
County.
Nomination forms shall be filed with the county development department. Such
forms shall be provided by the commission and, when submitted for landmarks or
preservation districts, shall include or be accompanied by the following:
   A.   The name and address, as shown on the tax assessor's rolls of the owner
of the nominated property.
   B.   The legal description and common street address of the nominated
property.
   C.   A map delineating the boundaries and location of the nominated
property.
   D.   A written statement describing the nominated property and setting forth
reasons in support of the nomination.
   E.   In nominating an area for designation as a preservation district, a
list enumerating all properties and improvements previously designated, or
currently pending designation, as a landmark by this commission or listed in
any state or federal registers of historic places.
Nominations for road corridors shall include or be accompanied by the
following:
   A.   The name, distance and location of the road corridor nominated.
   B.   A written description of the character of the road corridor and those
factors which make it suitable for preservation and eligible for designation.
   C.   A written description of the vision for the road corridor in the
future.
   D.   A written statement of what will be achieved by the designation.
   E.   Maps showing:
      1.   The location of the road corridor in Kane County; and
      2.   The boundaries of the road corridor and adjacent properties.
   F.   Color prints eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") showing the
significant features of the road corridor.
In the case of a nominated road corridor, the nomination will be placed on the
agendas of the development and transportation committees of the county board
for initial review and discussion of any issues and questions related to the
nomination. Comments from the committees will be forwarded with the nomination
to the commission. Proceeding with the development of a corridor management
plan shall require the approval of the committees.
There shall be no fee for submitting a nomination form for designation of a
historic landmark, preservation district or road corridor. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-
1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-76: CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION:
The commission may recommend to the county board the designation of landmarks,
upon written proof of owner consent, and preservation districts and road
corridors, where a showing of consent by no fewer than fifty one percent (51%)
of the property owners whose property is located within the boundaries of the
nominated district or corridor, when after a thorough investigation results in
a determination that a nomination meets one or more of the following criteria:
   A.   It has character, interest, or value which is part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the area, community, county, state or
nation;
   B.   Its location is a site of a significant local, county, state or
national event;
   C.   It is identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed
to the development of the community, county, state, or nation;
   D.   It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials;
   E.   It is identified with the work of a master builder, designer, architect
or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of
the area, county, state or nation;
   F.   It embodies elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship
that render it architecturally significant;
   G.   It embodies design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
   H.   It has a unique location, natural features, or physical characteristics
that make it an established or familiar visual resource with a high level of
integrity or scenic significance;
   I.   It is a particularly fine or unique example of a utilitarian structure,
including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations or other commercial
structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural significance;
   J.   It is suitable for preservation or restoration;
   K.   It is included in the national register of historic places and/or the
Illinois register of historic places;
   L.   It has yielded, or may be likely to yield information important to
prehistory, history or other areas of archaeological significance.
In the event a property, structure or an area is found to be of such
significant character and quality where it is determined that its designation
as a landmark, preservation district or road corridor is in the overall best
interest of the general welfare, the commission may nominate and recommend to
the county board such appropriate designation without proof of owner consent or
the minimal percentage of owner approval. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-
1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-77: REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
The preservation commission shall within thirty (30) days from its review of a
completed application for designation of a landmark or preservation district
cause to be written an initial recommendation and report stating whether the
nominated landmark or preservation district does or does not meet the criteria
for designation as provided in section
16-76 of this chapter. The report shall contain the following information:
   A.   An explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or preservation district as it relates to the criteria for
designation;
   B.   A description of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated
landmark or preservation district;
   C.   In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for
designation:
      1.   A description of the significant exterior architectural features of
the nominated landmark that should be protected;
      2.   A description of the types of construction, alteration, demolition
and removal, other than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that
should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of
subsections
16-94C and D of this chapter;
   D.   In the case of a nominated preservation district found to meet the
criteria for designation:
      1.   A description of the types of significant exterior architectural
features of the structures within the nominated preservation district that
should be protected;
      2.   A description of the types of alterations and demolitions that
should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of
subsections
16-94C and D of this chapter;
   E.   The relationship of the nominated landmark or preservation district to
the ongoing effort of the preservation commission to identify and nominate all
potential areas and structures that meet the criteria for designation;
   F.   A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and the boundaries
of the nominated preservation district.
In the case of a nominated road corridor, if the commission deems the road
corridor eligible for designation, a corridor management plan shall be prepared
in accordance with section
16-88 of this chapter, following the approval of the development and
transportation committees of the county board. The corridor management plan
shall be completed and presented to the commission within ninety (90) days.
Within thirty (30) days following close of the public hearing as prescribed in
section
16-79 of this chapter, a report and recommendation shall be prepared by staff
and the highway authority and presented to the preservation commission. The
report shall state the findings of the preservation commission and the comments
received during the public hearing and shall include the following:
   A.   A description of features and characteristics within the road corridor
that should be protected; and
   B.   A description of the types of alterations, both included and not
included in the corridor management plan, that should be reviewed for
appropriateness.
In the case of a nominated landmark or preservation district, the
recommendation and report shall be available to the public in the office of the
county development department.
In the case of a nominated road corridor, the recommendation and report shall
be available to the public in the offices of the county development department
and county division of transportation and the office of the highway authority.
(Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-78: NOTIFICATION OF NOMINATION:
In the case of a nominated historic landmark or preservation district, the
preservation commission shall in thirty (30) days from completion of the
initial report and recommendation as described in section
16-77 of this chapter, cause to be scheduled a public hearing on the
nomination. In the case of a nominated road corridor, the preservation
commission shall in thirty (30) days from the date of the completion of the
corridor management plan, cause to be scheduled a public hearing on the
nomination and corridor management plan. Notice of the date, time, place and
purpose of the public hearing and a copy of the completed nomination form shall
be sent by certified mail to the owner(s) of record and to the nominators, as
well as by regular mail to property owners adjoining the nominated landmark,
preservation district or road corridor at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
date of the hearing. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the area surrounding the nominated property, district or
road corridor at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. All
notices shall state the street address and permanent index number or legal
description of a nominated landmark and the boundaries of a nominated
preservation district or road corridor. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988;
Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-79: HEARING:
A public hearing shall be scheduled, and notification made thereof, pursuant to
section
16-78 of this chapter. Oral or written testimony shall be taken at the public
hearing from any person or organization concerning the nomination. The
preservation commission may solicit expert testimony or present its own
evidence recording the historic, archaeological or scenic significance of a
nominated landmark or of any property within a nominated preservation district
or road corridor relative to compliance with criteria for designation set forth
in section 16-76 of this chapter. The owner of any nominated landmark or of any
property within a nominated preservation district or road corridor shall be
allowed reasonable opportunity to present evidence regarding historic,
archaeological, architectural or scenic significance and shall be afforded the
right of representation by counsel and reasonable opportunity to cross examine
expert witnesses. The owner(s) of property within a nominated road corridor may
submit a written statement at or prior to the public hearing to have their
property outside of the right of way, in whole or part, excluded from the
nominated road corridor. Such a written statement shall result in the exclusion
of that portion of the owner's property from the nominated road corridor. The
preservation commission shall not include any properties, or portions thereof,
that have been so excluded in the corridor management plan, and shall determine
whether or not the nominated road corridor remains eligible for designation
with such exclusions. The hearing shall be closed upon completion of testimony.
(Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-80: RECOMMENDATION OF PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
Within thirty (30) days following close of the public hearing, the commission
shall make its determination upon the evidence whether the nominated landmark,
preservation district or road corridor does or does not meet the criteria for
designation as provided in section
16-76 of this chapter. A recommendation to the development committee that the
nominated landmark, preservation district or road corridor does or does not
meet the criteria for designation and should or should not be designated shall
be passed by resolution of the preservation commission. In the case of a
nominated road corridor, the commission's recommendation shall also be made to
the transportation committee. This recommendation shall be accompanied by a
report stating the findings of the preservation commission concerning the
historic, archaeological, architectural or scenic significance of the nominated
landmark, preservation district or road corridor. The preservation commission
shall forward copies of the resolution and report to the applicant, the owner
of the subject property or representative for petitioners of the subject area,
and the highway authority. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186,
7-11-2000)
16-81: DESIGNATION:
The county board, upon a recommendation from the preservation commission that
the nominated landmark, preservation district or road corridor should be
designated, shall review the report and recommendations of the preservation
commission. The county board may schedule a public hearing concerning the
nomination and shall provide notice of any public hearing in the same manner as
provided in section
16-78 of this chapter and conduct the public hearing in the same manner as
provided in section
16-79 of this chapter. The county board after reviewing the report and
recommendation shall within sixty (60) days from receipt of the recommendation
of the preservation commission take one of the following steps: a) designate
the landmark, preservation district or road corridor by ordinance; or b) refer
the report and recommendation back to the preservation commission with
suggestions for revisions stating its reason for such action. (Ord. 88-99, 6-
14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-82: NOTICE OF DESIGNATION:
Notice of the action of the county board including a copy of the ordinance
designating the landmark, preservation district or road corridor, shall be sent
by regular mail to all persons of record, including, but not limited to, each
owner of record of a landmark or property within a preservation district or
road corridor, the highway authority, and to owners of adjacent and immediately
surrounding properties affected by a certificate of appropriateness. Further,
as soon as is reasonably possible, the chairman of the county board shall cause
to be notified the county development department, the recorder of deeds, the
county clerk, the highway authority and the county collector by forwarding to
each a copy of the designation ordinance. The recorder of deeds shall ensure
that the designation be recorded on all directly affected parcels. (Ord. 88-99,
6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-83: PUBLICATION OF MAP:
A map showing the location of all designated landmarks, preservation districts
and road corridors shall be published and amended upon each designation. Copies
of the map shall be available to the public at the office of the county
development department in the same manner as any county zoning map and at the
office of the county division of transportation. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff.
12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-84: APPEALS:
Adoption of an ordinance designating a landmark, preservation district or road
corridor by the county board shall be a final action reviewable under 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 of the Illinois administrative review law.
(Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-85: INTERIM CODE:
No building, zoning, site development, access, utility or other permit shall be
issued by the county development department, the county division of
transportation or other county department without a certificate of
appropriateness issued in accordance with division 4 of this article for the
alteration, construction, demolition or removal of a nominated landmark or the
alteration of any physical feature of a property or structure within a
nominated preservation district or road corridor from the date of the meeting
of the preservation commission, development committee or transportation
committee at which a nomination form is first presented until the final
disposition of the nomination unless such alteration, removal, or demolition is
necessary for public health, welfare, or safety. In no event shall the delay be
for more than one hundred fifty (150) days. The director of the county
development department and the county engineer shall notify other permitting
jurisdictions and utilities of the nomination and encourage the coordination of
permit and development review activities that effect the nomination. (Ord. 88-
99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-86: MARKING BY ATTACHMENT OF A PLAQUE:
Each designated landmark, landmark site, preservation district and road
corridor may be marked by an appropriate plaque carrying a brief description
and account of its historical significance. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-
1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-87: AMENDMENT AND RESCISSION OF DESIGNATION:
The county board, upon recommendation of the preservation commission, may amend
or rescind designation by the same procedure and according to the same
standards and considerations set forth for designation. No amendment or
rescission shall be made to a designation of a landmark, preservation district
or road corridor based solely on a change in owner's consent or a showing of
less than fifty one percent (51%) minimal interest, respectively. (Ord. 88-99,
6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-88: CORRIDOR MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A corridor management plan (design criteria for road corridors) shall be
prepared by cooperative effort and may include the nominator(s) of a road
corridor, owners of properties within the nominated road corridor, local
government jurisdictions and county staff to provide a comprehensive
understanding and vision for the road corridor and a plan to preserve and
enhance it.
The corridor management plan shall be used by the commission in conjunction
with the nomination and report in its determination whether the nominated road
corridor does or does not meet the criteria for designation as provided in
section
16-76 of this chapter, and, if designated, as the criteria for evaluating
certificates of appropriateness.
The corridor management plan shall be used by the property owners and local
government jurisdictions when making applications for certificates of
appropriateness, for guiding proposed changes in the road corridor not
requiring certificates of appropriateness and for responding to future
transportation and community needs.
The corridor management plan shall include the following:
   A.   An inventory in the form of maps, photographs, graphics, or written
documents of the following:
      1.   Physical features;
      2.   Property ownership, parcel boundaries, zoning boundaries and local
government jurisdictional boundaries;
      3.   Existing road classification, conditions and any budgeted and
planned improvements; and
      4.   Adopted land use plans, transportation plans and other related
documents.
   B.   A statement of purpose to reflect the inspiration and aspiration of the
nomination, articulating why the road corridor should be designated and what
designation may accomplish in the long term.
   C.   Enhancement strategies for the following:
      1.   The preservation, maintenance and alteration of the road, right of
way, properties, structures and features in the nominated road corridor;
      2.   Adjacent properties and features that contribute to the road
corridor but are not included in the nomination; and
      3.   Enhancing the long term preservation of the road corridor through
partnerships and public policy actions.
   D.   Signature lines on the final corridor management plan document for all
owners of property (or their authorized agents) within the nominated road
corridor and outside the right of way as well as a signature line for the
highway authority, or the county engineer in the case of county highways.
Signatures of all property owners (or their authorized agents) included within
a nominated road corridor shall be affixed on the final corridor management
plan before consideration of the nomination by the county board. (Ord. 00-186,
7-11-2000)
16-89 - 16-92: RESERVED:
DIVISION 4. ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION AND MAINTENANCE
16-93: SCOPE:
Work on property and improvements so designated pursuant to this article shall
be regulated as follows:
   A.   Landmarks: No significant alterations, exterior construction or
exterior demolition may be performed on property or structures which have been
designated under this article as landmarks, except as shall be approved by a
certificate of appropriateness.
   B.   Preservation Districts: No significant alterations, exterior
construction or exterior demolition may be performed on property or structures
located within an area designated under this article as a preservation
district, except as shall be approved by a certificate of appropriateness.
   C.   Road Corridors: No significant alterations of visible features or
structures, exterior construction, construction of new access drives, exterior
demolition, or removal of trees, vegetation, structures, or other visible
features may be performed in the right of way or on property or structures
located within an area designated under this article as a road corridor, except
as shall be approved by a certificate of appropriateness or expressly defined
by the corridor management plan for the road corridor as not requiring a
certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord.
00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-94: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   Certificate Required: A certificate of appropriateness from the
preservation commission established pursuant to this article shall be required
before any significant alteration, construction, demolition or removal that
affects pending or designated landmarks, preservation districts and road
corridors is undertaken. Such a certificate is required for all such actions
from the date a nomination in proper form for designation is submitted to the
preservation commission.
   B.   Applications For Certificate Of Appropriateness:
      1.   Every application submitted to the county development department,
the county division of transportation or other county department for a permit
wherein the applicant represents and/or delineates plans to commence any action
as immediately described in subsection A of this section affecting any such
property, improvements or areas therein described shall be forwarded to a
representative or representatives of the preservation commission, within three
(3) days following the receipt of said application. The county development
department, county division of transportation or other county department shall
not issue the permit until a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by
the preservation commission. Any applicant may request a meeting with the
preservation commission before the application is sent to the preservation
commission or during the review of the application.
      2.   Application for review of construction, alteration, demolition or
removal not requiring a permit for which a certificate of appropriateness is
required shall be made on a form prepared by the preservation commission and
available at the office of the county development department. The preservation
commission may schedule, provide notice and conduct a public hearing concerning
the application in the manner previously described in sections 16-78 and 16-79
of this chapter.
      3.   If a public hearing is not scheduled the commission may consider the
completed application at its next regular meeting and may grant a certificate
of appropriateness at that time. The commission may further designate staff
support responsible for reviewing routing applications for certificates of
appropriateness when the proposed work is clearly appropriate and in accordance
with the criteria set forth in subsections C and D of this section, and the
purposes of this article.
      4.   The commission may seek technical advice from outside its members on
any application for a certificate of appropriateness. The applicant and each
commissioner shall receive a copy of the consultant's written opinion at least
seven (7) days before a determination is made on the application.
      5.   The commission shall act promptly and in a reasonable manner in its
judgment of plans for new construction or for alteration, removal or demolition
of structures in preservation districts or road corridors that have little
historic value and that are not shown on priority lists, except where such
construction, alteration, removal or demolition would seriously impair the
historic, architectural or scenic value of surrounding structures or the
surrounding area.
   C.   Design Criteria: The commission shall consider the following factors in
reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness:
      1.   Height: The height of any proposed alteration or construction should
be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with surrounding
structures in a preservation district or road corridor.
      2.   Proportions Of Windows And Doors: The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark and with surrounding structures within a preservation
district or road corridor.
      3.   Relationship Of Building Masses And Spaces: The relationship of a
structure within a preservation district or road corridor to open space between
it and adjoining structures should be compatible.
      4.   Roof Shape: The design of the roof should be compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and surrounding structures in
a preservation district or road corridor.
      5.   Landscaping: Landscaping should be compatible with the architectural
character and appearance of the landmark and of surrounding structures and
landscapes in preservation districts or road corridors.
      6.   Scale: The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or
partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a preservation district or road
corridor.
      7.   Directional Expression: Facades in preservation districts or road
corridors should blend with other structures with regard to directional
expression. Structures in a preservation district or road corridor should be
compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding
structures. The directional expression of a landmark after alteration,
construction or partial demolition should be compatible with its original
architectural style and character.
      8.   Architectural Details: Architectural details including materials,
and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark compatible with its
original architectural style or character.
   D.   Standards For Review: The commission, in considering the
appropriateness of any alteration, demolition, new construction, or removal of
any property or structures designated, or pending designation as a landmark or
any area designated, or pending designation as a preservation district or road
corridor, shall be guided by the following general standards in addition to the
corridor management plan or any design criteria in the ordinance designating
the landmark, preservation district or road corridor, as well as conformance to
applicable zoning classification, height and area limitation:
      1.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property that requires minimal alteration of the building, structure or
site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
      2.   The distinguished original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or
alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural or natural
feature should be avoided when possible.
      3.   All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their time. Alterations that have no historical basis and that seek to
create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
      4.   Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are evidence
of the history and development of a building, structure or site and its
environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right,
and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
      5.   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with
sensitivity.
      6.   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new
material should match the material being replaced in composition, design,
color, texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements
from other buildings or structures.
      7.   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
      8.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
      9.   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural, cultural or natural material and
such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character
of the property, neighborhood or environment.
      10.   In the case of a road corridor, every reasonable effort shall be
made to protect and preserve the visible features and structures identified in
the corridor management plan for a designated road corridor or in the
nomination and draft corridor management plan, if applicable, for a nominated
road corridor.
   E.   Determination By Preservation Commission:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days (Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays
excluded) after support staff review, or from the date of the regular meeting,
or from the close of a public hearing concerning an application for a
certificate of appropriateness, or within such further time as the applicant
for said certificate (and/or permit) approves in writing, the commission shall
determine whether: a) the proposed construction, alteration, demolition,
removal or other modification will be appropriate to the preservation of the
particular landmark, preservation district or road corridor and a certificate
of appropriateness may be issued; or b) such proposed modification is
inappropriate to the preservation of the particular landmark, preservation
district or road corridor and a certificate of appropriateness may be denied.
      2.   Written notice of the approval or denial of the application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be provided to the applicant, sent by
certified mail with return receipt requested, and to the county development
department within seven (7) days (Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays
excluded) following the determination and shall be accompanied by a certificate
of appropriateness in the case of an approval.
   F.   Denial Of Certificate Of Appropriateness: A denial of a certificate of
appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the
denial. The preservation commission shall make recommendations to the applicant
concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the
preservation commission to reconsider its denial and shall confer with the
applicant and attempt to resolve as quickly as possible the difference(s)
between the applicant and the commission. The applicant may resubmit an amended
application or reapply for a permit that takes into consideration the
recommendations of the preservation commission.
   G.   Decision Binding On Director, County Development Department, And County
Engineer: The director of the county development department and the county
engineer, shall be bound by the determination of the commission and approve, if
in conformance with other provisions of the building code, or disapprove any
permit application for the proposed construction, alteration, or removal of an
exterior architectural or visual feature, or demolition of any building or
structure, in a preservation district or road corridor or any landmark in
accordance with said determination.
   H.   Failure Of Commission To Review Application In A Timely Manner: Failure
of the commission to act upon an application for a certificate of
appropriateness within ninety (90) days shall constitute approval and no other
evidence shall be needed. This time limit may be waived only by mutual consent
of the applicant and the commission.
   I.   Demolitions:
      1.   Pursuant to subsections C and D of this section, the preservation
commission may deny any application for a certificate of appropriateness where
demolition is proposed upon finding that such proposed action will adversely
affect the historic, archaeological, architectural or scenic significance of a
landmark, preservation district or road corridor. Upon receipt of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition, the
preservation commission shall as soon as possible make a determination,
supported by written findings, whether one or more of the following criteria
are met:
         a.   The structure or visual resource is of such interest or quality
that it would reasonably meet national, state or local criteria for designation
as a historic or architectural landmark.
         b.   The structure or visual resource is of such unusual or uncommon
design, texture or materials that it could not be reproduced, or be reproduced
only with great difficulty and expense.
         c.   Retention of the structure or visual resource would aid
substantially in preserving and protecting another structure or visual resource
which meets the criteria of subsection I1a or I1b of this section.
Where the preservation commission determines that one or more of these criteria
are met, no certificate of appropriateness shall be issued and the application
shall be denied.
      2.   Additionally, the preservation commission shall require the
applicant to submit for review, and consideration postdemolition plans, to
include drawings or sketches with sufficient detail to show, as far as they
relate to exterior appearance, the architectural design of any and all
improvements incorporated in such plans.
   J.   Compliance With Certificate: A certificate of appropriateness will
become void:
      1.   If there is any change in the scope of work pursuant to the approved
application subsequent to the issuance of the certificate; or
      2.   If twenty four (24) months have elapsed after issuance of the
certificate and no permit has been issued or if twenty four (24) months have
lapsed after issuance of the last permit and the project has not been
completed.
   K.   Appeals: A denial of a certificate of appropriateness is an
"administrative decision" as defined in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101
of the administrative review law, and it shall be subject to judicial review
pursuant to provisions of said administrative review law and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted thereto. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988,
eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-95: ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
   A.   Issuance: The preservation commission shall issue a certificate of
economic hardship upon determination that the failure to issue a certificate of
appropriateness has denied, or will deny, the owner of a landmark or of a
property within a preservation district or road corridor all reasonable use of,
or return on, the property. Application for a certificate of economic hardship
shall be made on a form and in the manner as prescribed by the preservation
commission. The preservation commission may schedule a public hearing
concerning the application and provide notice in the same manner as prescribed
in section
16-79 of this chapter.
   B.   Expert Testimony: The preservation commission may solicit expert
testimony and the applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit
any or all of the following information in order to assist the preservation
commission in its determination on the application, including, but not limited
to:
      1.   An estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal and an estimate of any additional cost that would be
incurred to comply with the recommendations of the preservation commission for
changes necessary for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness;
      2.   A report from a licensed engineer or architect with experience in
rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property
and their suitability for rehabilitation;
      3.   Estimated market value of the property in its current condition;
after completion of the proposed construction, alteration, demolition or
removal; after any changes recommended by the preservation commission; and in
the case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the existing property
for continued use;
      4.   In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from an architect,
developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate professional
experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of rehabilitation
or reuse of the existing structure on the property;
      5.   Amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party
from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner of record or applicant and the person from whom the property
was purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer;
      6.   If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two (2) years; itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years; and depreciation deduction and annual
cash flow before and after debt services, if any, during the same period;
      7.   Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the
property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years;
      8.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers
received, if any, within the previous two (2) years;
      9.   Assessed value of the property according to the two (2) most recent
assessments;
      10.   Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years;
      11.   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, limited partnership,
joint venture or other;
      12.   Any other information, including the income tax bracket of the
owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property, considered necessary
by the preservation commission to make a determination as to whether the
property does yield or may yield a reasonable return to the owners.
   C.   Determination Of Economic Hardship: Within one hundred twenty (120)
days from receiving a request for a certificate of economic hardship, the
commission, upon a determination that the denial of a certificate of
appropriateness has denied, or will deny the owner of a landmark or of a
property within a preservation district or road corridor of all reasonable use
of, or return on, the property, shall undertake one or the other of the
following:
      1.   Offer the owner of the property reasonable financing, tax or other
incentives sufficient to allow a reasonable use of, or return on, the property;
or
      2.   Offer to purchase the property at a reasonable price or institute
eminent domain proceedings pursuant to article VII of the Illinois code of
civil procedure; or
      3.   Issue a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed
construction, alteration, demolition or removal. Written notice of the
determination shall be provided in the same manner as required by subsection
16-94E of this chapter.
   D.   Appeals: A denial of a certificate of economic hardship is an
"administrative decision" as defined in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101
of the administrative review law, and it shall be subject to judicial review
pursuant to provisions of said law and all amendments and modifications
thereof, and the rules adopted thereto. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988;
Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-96: MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance
of any exterior elements of a property or structures designated or nominated as
a landmark or located within a designated or nominated preservation district or
road corridor. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-97: PUBLIC SAFETY EXCLUSION:
None of the provisions of this division shall be construed to prevent any
measures of construction, alteration or demolition necessary to correct or
abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any structure, other feature or part
thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the
director, county development department, the county health department or any
fire protection district and where the proposed measures have been declared
necessary, by such department or departments to correct the said condition;
provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct
the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section. In
the event any structure or other resource shall be damaged by fire or other
calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy, to such an extent that, in
the opinion of the aforesaid department or departments, it cannot reasonably be
repaired or restored, it may be removed in conformity with normal permit
procedures and applicable laws. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord.
00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-98 - 16-102: RESERVED:
DIVISION 5. ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND EQUITABLE RELIEF
16-103: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The county development department shall give written notification, sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of any violation of this article
to the owner of record, lessor, the trustee or other legally responsible party
for such property, stating in such notification that they have inspected the
property and have found it in violation of this article. They shall state in
the notification in clear, precise terms a description or explanation of the
violation. The property owner of record, trustee, lessor or legally responsible
party shall have thirty (30) days from the date he receives the notice in which
to correct such violation or to give satisfactory evidence that he has taken
steps that will lead to correcting such violation within a stated period of
time, which must be agreeable to the county development department as being
fair and reasonable.
   B.   Upon petition of the preservation commission, the circuit court for
Kane County may restrain and/or enjoin any construction, removal, alteration or
demolition in violation of this article and may order the removal in whole or
part of any exterior architectural or visual feature existing in violation of
this article and may further order such reconstruction as may be necessary or
desirable to redress any alteration or demolition in said violation. (Ord. 88-
99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-104: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this article shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any
such violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each offense may be
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months,
or both, at the discretion of the court. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-
1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
16-105: EQUITABLE RELIEF:
In addition to other remedies provided by law, the county may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, abate or correct a
violation of this article, including, but not limited to, requiring the
restoration of property and improvements to its appearance prior to the
violation. (Ord. 88-99, 6-14-1988, eff. 12-1-1988; Ord. 00-186, 7-11-2000)
CHAPTER 17
ROADS AND BRIDGES
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
SECTION:
17-1: General Authority Of Superintendent Of Highways
17-2: Contracts For Bridge Design
17-3: Freeways Designated
17-4: Encroachments
17-5: Vehicle Size And Weight Limitations On County Highways
17-6: Reserved
17-7: Open Burning Prohibited On Right Of Way
17-1: GENERAL AUTHORITY OF SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS 1 :
The superintendent of highways is hereby authorized:
   A.   To issue permits for the use of highways under the jurisdiction of the
county by vehicles or loads which are overweight or oversize under the law; and
at his discretion, prescribe the routes to be traveled, the number of trips to
be made, and to otherwise regulate such vehicles upon the roads under the
jurisdiction of the county as permitted by law.
   B.   To issue permits with regard to the establishment of entrances to and
exits from roads and highways under the jurisdiction of the county.
   C.   To issue permits for the construction of underground installation on
and across any public highway, upon such conditions and limitations as he in
his discretion shall see fit.
   D.   To require such undertaking or other security, as he may deem
necessary, to compensate the county for any injury or damage to any roadway,
highway or road structure which may result in granting of any such permit.
(Res., 6-10-1957)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-301.
17-2: CONTRACTS FOR BRIDGE DESIGN:
The county superintendent of highways, with the approval of the transportation
committee of the county board is hereby authorized to enter into contracts for
professional services for the design of such bridges as deemed necessary in
connection with the construction of roads and highways within the county.
(Ord., 9-10-1958)
17-3: FREEWAYS DESIGNATED 1 :
The following described roads or portions of roads are hereby designated as
freeways:
Fabyan Parkway from Randall Road to DuPage County line.
Fabyan Parkway from Randall Road West to Kaneville Road.
Kane County Highway No. 37 (Stearns Road) from its intersection with Kane
County Highway No. 34 (Randall Road) to its intersection with the Kane - DuPage
county line.
Kane County Highway No. 86 (Longmeadow Parkway) from its intersection with Kane
County Highway No. 30 (Huntley Road) to its intersection with Illinois Route
62.
Kirk Road from E-W Toll Road to Route 64.
Kirk Road from Route 64 to Dunham Road.
Orchard Road from F.A. Route 192 to Jericho Road.
Orchard Road from Jericho Road to Mooseheart Road.
Randall Road from Dean Street to Highland Avenue.
Randall Road from Dean Street to Illinois Route 38.
Randall Road from Highland Avenue to Huntley Road.
Randall Road from Huntley Road to North County Line Road.
Randall Road from Sullivan Road to Alt. U.S. Route 30. (Ord. 82-163, 12-1-1982;
amd. Res. 10-385, 12-14-2010; Res. 24-369, 9-10-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 605 ILCS 5/8-101.
17-4: ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   The following definitions shall apply to this section:
   ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under, or over any portion of the project
right of way or the roadway right of way where no project right of way line has
been established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the project right of way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas within the project right of way lines
established jointly by the county and state which will be free of encroachment.
   ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to
retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment within the limits of the
project right of way or roadway right of way where no right of way lines have
been established.
   C.   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   D.   This section shall apply only to the following areas of the county:
      1.   The intersection of Butterfield Road with Kirk Road and Church Road
(FAP Route 131), known as state section 60L, county section 192-2L-MFT.
      2.   Main Street (FAS Route 107, state sections 33 and 50) W&RS-1, 34-BY,
50-BY; county section 33W&RS-1-MFT, 50W&RS-MFT from Randall Road to Harter
Road.
      3.   Fabyan Parkway from Illinois Route 25 easterly to the Kane- DuPage
County line.
      4.   Randall Road from Big Timber Road southerly to Highway Avenue (state
section 1976-014 W&RS, B county section 77-00176-00 BR).
      5.   FAS Route 102 (Illinois Route 72) state section 61-N, county section
155-1 MFT. (Ord. 73-149, §§ 1-4, 11-13-1973; Ord. 74-39, §§ 1-4, 3-12-1974;
Ord. 76-62, §§ 1-4, 4-13-1976; Ord. 77-16, §§ 1-4, 1-11-1977)
17-5: VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON COUNTY HIGHWAYS:
See section 21-9 of this code. (Ord. 92-162, §§ I-IV, 7-14-1992; Ord. 04-345,
9-14-2004)
17-6: RESERVED:
17-7: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED ON RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to burn in an
open fire any material, including, but not limited to, leaves, trash, garbage,
automotive equipment or parts, and construction materials on the county highway
right of way.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be fined
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and
every day during which a violation continues or exists. (Ord. 87-258, 12-8-
1987)
ARTICLE II. ROAD IMPROVEMENT IMPACT FEE
SECTION:
17-8: Title
17-9: Purpose And Authority
17-10: Definitions
17-11: Interpretation Of Ordinance, Fee Schedule, And Appeals
17-12: Developers Of New Development To Pay Road Improvement Impact Fee
17-13: Intergovernmental Agreements
17-14: Assessment Of Impact Fees And Impact Fee Schedule
17-15: Exemptions
17-16: Demolition Credits
17-17: Discounts
17-18: Payment Of Impact Fees
17-19: Impact Fee Payment Agreements
17-20: Individual Assessment Of Impact - Simplified And Standards Analysis
17-21: Impact Fee Credit Agreements
17-22: Refunds
17-23: Establishment Of Service Areas
17-24: Use Of Impact Fees Collected
17-25: Advisory Committee
17-26: Review Of Land Use Assumptions And Update Of Comprehensive Road
Improvement Plan
17-27: Review Of Ordinances
17-28: Effective Date Of Ordinance
17-29: Penalties
17-30: Distribution
17-31: Recordation
17-32: Severability
17-8: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Kane County Road
Improvement Impact Fee Ordinance", hereinafter the “chapter.” (Ord. 22-27, 1-
11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-9: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The County Board recognizes that new development in Kane County
requires the capacity of the County highway system be expanded and that without
a funded program for County highway system improvements, new development will
have an adverse impact on the safety and efficiency of the County highway
system.
   B.   The County Board further recognizes that all new development in Kane
County generates traffic on the County highway system and requires direct or
indirect access to those highways that are a part of the County highway system,
regardless of the location of the new development.
   C.   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that new development pays a
fair share of the cost of County highway improvements expended to serve new
development. To that end, the imposition of impact fees is designed to
supplement other funding sources so that the burden of paying for County
highway improvements necessitated by new development is allocated in a fair and
equitable manner and orderly growth is promoted throughout Kane County. (Ord.
22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-10: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms as used in this chapter:
                The group of people selected from the public and private sectors in accordance
ADVISORY        with the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-907) and the provisions of Section
COMMITTEE:      17-25 of this chapter to advise the County in the development and implementation
                of the CRIP and the periodic update thereof.
                Decent, safe, sanitary, and appropriate housing units that low and moderate-
                income households can own or rent without having to devote more than
                approximately thirty percent (30%) of their yearly gross income for monthly
                housing expenses. "Household expenses" are: (1) rent and utilities for rental
                housing; and (2) debt service (principal and interest), property taxes, and home
AFFORDABLE      insurance for home ownership. To qualify as affordable housing, the maximum
HOUSING:        purchase price of owner-occupied units shall not exceed that specified in the
                "Owner Occupied Affordability Chart for Chicago Metro Area" published annually
                by the Illinois Housing Development Authority. For rental housing to be
                considered affordable housing, the monthly rent for a dwelling unit may not
                exceed that specified in "Affordable Rental Units for Chicago Metro Area"
                published annually by the Illinois Housing Development Authority.
                Single-family detached or single-family attached housing units that are
AGE-RESTRICTED  restricted by deed so that at least one resident thereof must be fifty-five (55)
HOUSING:        years of age or older and no person under the age of nineteen (19) may reside in
                the unit more than ninety (90) days during any consecutive twelve (12) months.
                The financing of residential new development by the Illinois Housing Development
ASSISTED        Authority, including loans to developers for multi-unit residential development
FINANCING:      and loans to purchasers of single-family residences, including condominiums and
                townhouses.
                Either a finished or an unfinished product of construction or a structure,
BUILDING:       carrying no implication as to size or condition. The terms "building" and
                "structure" as used herein are interchangeable.
BUILDING        Any form of approval issued or granted by the County or a municipality that
PERMIT:         grants or otherwise allows the commencement of construction of a building.
CERTIFICATE OF  Any form of approval granted by either the County or a municipality as a
OCCUPANCY:      condition to occupy a building, and includes any temporary occupancy approval as
                well as any permanent occupancy approval.
                Entities, corporations, and any trust, fund, foundation or other entity
                certified by the Internal Revenue Service as tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3)
                of the Internal Revenue Code organized and operated exclusively for religious,
                charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the prevention
CHARITABLE      of cruelty to children or animals. Charitable organization includes
ORGANIZATION:   organizations dedicated to the relief of the poor, the distressed, the disabled
                or the underprivileged; advancement of religion; advancement of education or
                science; erecting or maintaining public buildings, monuments or works; lessening
                the burdens of government; lessening neighborhood tensions; eliminating
                prejudice and discrimination; defending human and civil rights secured by law;
                and combating community deterioration and juvenile delinquency.
                The highway improvement plan, also referred to as the CRIP, prepared by the
COMPREHENSIVE   County in consultation with the Advisory Committee. The plan is an analysis of
ROAD            the Kane County highway network, identification of the highway network
IMPROVEMENT     deficiencies, formulation of a program of improvements and projects with
PLAN:           associated costs thereof all of which ultimately results in the determination of
                a fee per trip calculation(s).
COUNTY:         The County of Kane, of the State of Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD:   The County Board of the County of Kane, of the State of Illinois.
COUNTY          The County Engineer of Kane County as "County Engineer" is defined as set forth
ENGINEER:       in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-201 et seq.).
COUNTY HIGHWAY: Shall have the same definition as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/2-
                204).
COUNTY HIGHWAY  Shall have the same definition as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/2-
SYSTEM:         102).
CRIP:           See definition for Comprehensive Road Improvement Plan.
DEMOLITION      A credit against an assessed impact fee which credit is determined by the dollar
CREDIT:         value of impact fees that would have otherwise been assessed on a building or
                buildings being demolished as part of a new development.
                An impact fee assessment factor that is calculated for residential new
                development by dividing the total number of residential units by the total
                buildable land area in acres of the new development. Buildable land excludes
                land occupied by nonresidential structures, and land excluded from residential
DENSITY:        development by law (e.g. wetlands, floodplains and rights of way for arterial
                and major collector roads), but includes areas devoted to public rights of way
                for local and minor collector streets internal to the new development, storm
                water management for the new development, parking areas, and common open space.
                For detached residential units on individual lots, the average density for the
                entire new development shall be used.
DEVELOPER:      Any person, corporation, organization, or other legal entity initiating or
                conducting new development.
DIVISION OF     The Kane County Division of Transportation located at 41W011 Burlington Road,
TRANSPORTATION: St. Charles, Illinois 60175.
ENCUMBERED:     Legally obligated or otherwise committed to use under contract or purchase
                order.
                To increase in size, make larger, bigger or to add onto so as to increase the
ENLARGE:        useable floor area square footage of a building. Enlarged does not necessarily
                mean "structurally altered".
                The highway intersections and/or highway segments under the jurisdiction of the
EXISTING        County that operated at level of service "E" or below (as defined by the
DEFICIENCIES:   Transportation Research Board) in the year 2003 and that are identified as
                "existing deficiencies" in the latest version of the CRIP.
                Any person initiating new development which pays, or is required to pay an
FEE PAYER:      impact fee in accordance with the terms of this or any previous version of the
                chapter.
                The floor area of a structure or structures on a zoning lot divided by the area
FLOOR AREA      of such zoning lot, or, in the case of planned unit developments, by the net
RATIO (FAR):    site area. In all cases, the lot area or site area used to calculate the floor
                area ratio shall include the land areas allocated to parking and storm water
                management.
HIGHWAY:        Shall have the same definition as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-
                102 et seq.).
                The improvement, expansion, enhancement, enlargement or construction of those
                highways and/or the parts thereof under the jurisdiction of the County that are
                designated for improvement as set forth in the CRIP, which improvements include,
                but are not limited to bridges, right-of-ways and traffic control improvements
HIGHWAY         owned and operated by the County. The term "highway improvement" shall not
IMPROVEMENT:    include tollways but may include tollway ramps at County highway intersections.
                The term "highway improvement" does not include any highways that are not
                designated for improvement in the CRIP even though they are under the
                jurisdiction of the County nor does it include site improvements related to the
                new development. Highway improvements must address capacity deficiencies on the
                highways as set forth in the CRIP.
                Include, but are not limited to, capital costs associated with the construction
                of a highway improvement designated in the CRIP, the need for which is generated
                by new development, which highway improvement has a life expectancy of three (3)
HIGHWAY         or more years, and the land acquisition, land improvement, planning, design, and
IMPROVEMENT     engineering related thereto. Such costs do not include routine and periodic
CAPITAL COSTS:  maintenance expenditures, resurfacing or rehabilitation of existing pavement
                structures, personnel, training, or other operating costs, but do include the
                costs of financing such highway improvements and reasonable administrative costs
                for administering the impact fee program, provided that such administrative
                costs do not exceed five percent (5%) of the impact fee paid.
IMPACT FEE:     The "road improvement impact fee" as defined herein.
INDUSTRIAL:     Manufacturing, production, light manufacturing/industry, construction, assembly,
                service and/or warehousing activity.
                Undeveloped land or vacant land having at least seventy-five percent (75%) of
                its perimeter bordering land that has been developed. Developed land includes
INFILL:         land either having or that has had pre-existing structures thereon. Land that is
                currently in agricultural use or forestry use is not considered developed. Park
                and forest preserve properties that border an infill site shall not be counted
                as part of the perimeter of undeveloped land.
IMPACT FEE      An executed, fully approved, written agreement between the County and a
AGREEMENT:      developer and/or fee payer as provided for in Section
                17-19 of this chapter.
IMPACT FEE      An executed, fully approved, written agreement between the County and a
CREDIT          developer and/or fee payer as provided for in Section
AGREEMENT:      17-21 of this chapter.
IMPACT FEE      An executed, fully approved, written agreement between the County and a
PAYMENT         developer and/or fee payer as provided for in Section
AGREEMENT:      17-19 of this chapter.
                A description of the service area(s) and the roads, streets or highways
LAND USE        incorporated therein, which includes projections relating to changes in land
ASSUMPTIONS:    uses, densities and population growth rates which affect the level of traffic
                within the service area(s) for a ten (10) year period of time.
                The measure of roadway sufficiency of traffic flow, in which acceptable
LEVEL OF        operating speeds are assessed, and in which changes in operating conditions,
SERVICE:        fluctuations in traffic volume, and temporary restrictions to traffic flow are
                evaluated.
MUNICIPALITY:   Any city or village or district or other unit of local government with territory
                within the boundaries of Kane County.
                Shall have the same definition as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-
NEW             903), that for purposes of this chapter, occurs within the boundaries of Kane
DEVELOPMENT:    County. For the purpose of Section
                17-17 of this chapter, new development shall additionally constitute a structure
                or group of structures that require site specific development approval.
NON-            The cancellation of new development prior to commencing construction thereof.
COMMENCEMENT:
NONRESIDENTIAL  New development consisting of a building(s) or other structure(s) suitable or
NEW             capable of being used for all purposes other than residential purposes.
DEVELOPMENT:
ORDINANCE:      Kane County Road Improvement Impact Fee Ordinance No. 04-21 as has been and many
                be amended from time to time.
                Any individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation,
PERSON:         organization, limited liability company or business, charitable trust or
                governmental agency, person, unit of local government or any other legal entity.
                A private, nonprofit educational facility serving one or more of grades,
PRIVATE SCHOOL: kindergarten through grade-12 and formally recognized by the Illinois State
                Board of Education.
PROCEDURES      The document developed by the County Engineer and available from the Division of
MANUAL:         Transportation that sets forth the procedures, processes, forms and operating
                definitions to be used in the administration of this chapter.
PROJECT:        The construction of a new development.
REDEVELOPMENT:  A new development site in which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the land
                area thereof has been previously developed.
RESIDENTIAL NEW House(s), building(s) or other structure(s) that is suitable or capable of being
DEVELOPMENT:    used for residential purposes.
                Any charge or fee levied or imposed by the County pursuant to the Road
ROAD            Improvement Impact Fee Law as a condition to the issuance of a building permit
IMPROVEMENT     or certificate of occupancy in connection with a new development, when any
IMPACT FEE:     portion of the revenues collected is intended to be used to fund any portion of
                the costs of system improvements.
                Any one of the three (3) land areas within Kane County delineated by the
SERVICE AREA:   boundaries shown on Exhibit A of Ord. 22-7, and amended by Ord. 22-478, and
                which are so designated in the CRIP.
                Any capital improvement elated in any manner to a highway, street or road
                necessary or convenient for ingress to and egress from a new development. Site-
                related improvements include among other things:
                A.   Site driveways, streets and roads;
                B.   Right- and left-turn lanes for or leading to or otherwise benefitting site
                driveways, alleys streets and roads;
                C.   Traffic control measures for or leading to or otherwise benefitting site
                driveways, alleys, streets and roads;
SITE-RELATED    D.   Acceleration and deceleration lanes;
IMPROVEMENTS:   E.   Medians, median openings and closings;
                F.   Roads necessary to provide direct access to the development;
                G.   Landscaping and berms;
                H.   Lighting and other utilities;
                I.   Sidewalks and bike trails, and
                J.   Any right of way needed for any of the above.
                The term "site related improvements" includes any improvements made to alleys,
                roads, streets, or highways and any appurtenances thereto that are not
                designated for or as a highway improvement in the CRIP.
SITE SPECIFIC   Shall have the meaning as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-903 et
DEVELOPMENT     seq.). If the site specific development approval is preliminary in nature, the
APPROVAL:       final plat or plan for the new development must be in substantial conformance
                with the approved preliminary plat or plan.
SPECIFICALLY,   Shall have the meaning as set forth in the Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/5-903 et
AND UNIQUELY    seq.).
ATTRIBUTABLE:
                Industrial or warehouse new development where the developer intends to lease or
                otherwise convey parts thereof to parties not yet determined at the time of
                issuance of the building permit or occupancy permit and where construction will
SPECULATIVE     commence prior to the new development or the part(s) thereof being leased or
INDUSTRIAL NEW  otherwise conveyed. Speculative industrial new development is otherwise defined
DEVELOPMENT:    as Light Industrial/Industrial Park or Warehouse/Distribution Terminal, and
                allows for the collection of impact fees based on an assumption of 20% General
                Office (ITE LUC 710) and 80% Warehousing (ITE LUC 150) prior to the
                identification of a tenant(s) or interior architectural plan.
STRUCTURALLY    Any change or addition to the load bearing elements of a building that increases
ALTERED:        the useable internal floor area square feet thereof. Structurally altered does
                not necessarily mean "enlarged".
                Any final plat or plan for new development which is generally consistent with
                the approved preliminary plat or plan virtually including the same mix of land
SUBSTANTIAL     uses and density. A final plat or plan in substantial conformance with the
CONFORMANCE:    preliminary plat or that generates the same or fewer peak hour trips, which peak
                hour trips are determined using the methodology as set forth in Appendix A of
                the CRIP.
SYSTEM          See "highway improvement".
IMPROVEMENT:
TECHNICAL       Those documents that contain the impact fee calculation factors necessary for
SPECIFICATIONS: computation of the impact fee for a particular land use, an individual
                assessment, and the impact fee schedule attached to this chapter.
                A building or structure designed or intended for temporary human occupancy or
TEMPORARY       for the temporary protection of animals, chattels, or property of any kind. For
STRUCTURE:      the purposes of this chapter, "temporary" is defined as a period of time no
                greater than two (2) years.
TRANSIT         Shall be as defined in the report titled Implementation of the Kane County 2040
SUPPORTIVE      Long Range Transit Plan Transit-Supportive Corridors: Existing Conditions and
CORRIDORS:      Implementation Tools, prepared by the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning
                (CMAP) (dated May 2015) which report may be amended from time to time.
TRANSPORTATION  The Transportation Committee as designated by the County Board.
COMMITTEE:
UNIT OF LOCAL   Any city, village, district or governmental entity with territory in Kane
GOVERNMENT:     County. The terms "unit of local government" and "municipality" as used herein
                are interchangeable.
                The distance that a pedestrian must travel between destinations without
WALKING         obstruction, in a safe and comfortable environment. Walking distance is measured
DISTANCE:       in linear feet along such paths, sidewalks or ways with one thousand three
                hundred twenty feet (1,320') equaling a one-fourth (1/4) mile and two thousand
                six hundred forty feet (2,640') equaling a one-half (1/2) mile.
WAREHOUSE:      A structure utilized in whole or part for the storage of materials, merchandise
                or goods only without any processing, fabrication, direct transfer or assembly.
                Any day on which the offices of the County are officially open, not including
WORKING DAY:    Saturdays, Sundays, and other holidays as designated by the County Board. (Ord.
                22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
 
17-11: INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCE, FEE SCHEDULE AND APPEALS:
   A.   Application of the provisions of this chapter, the impact fee
schedules, standard individual assessment, and simplified individual assessment
shall be made by the County Engineer. Whenever necessary, the County Engineer
may use the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
Generation Manual, the latest edition of the Transportation Research Board
Highway Capacity Manual, or locally obtained empirical data, in applying this
chapter. The County Engineer shall establish a Procedures Manual identifying
the procedures the Division of Transportation will utilize in administering
this chapter.
   B.   Any decision by the County Engineer with respect to this chapter may be
appealed by the fee payer to the County Board through its Transportation
Committee. Any appeal shall be made by written petition within fourteen (14)
calendar days of written notice of a decision by the County Engineer.
   C.   Upon receipt of a petition for appeal of a decision of the County
Engineer, the Transportation Committee shall schedule consideration of such
appeal at its next regularly scheduled committee meeting that will comply with
the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.). The
Transportation Committee shall notify the petitioner in writing of the date and
time of such meeting and shall consider such written or oral testimony that the
petitioner may present in conjunction with the decision and recommendation of
the County Engineer. The Transportation Committee shall affirm, reverse, or
modify the County Engineer's decision at said regularly scheduled meeting.
   D.   The fee payer shall have seven (7) calendar days after the date of the
decision of the Transportation Committee to appeal the Transportation
Committee's decision to the County Board. The County Board shall schedule
consideration of such appeal at its next regularly scheduled County Board
meeting that will comply with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings
Act,. Failure by the County Board to render a decision within sixty (60) days
of said County Board meeting shall constitute a denial of the petitioner's
appeal.
   E.   Upon a final decision by the County Board, a fee payer may seek any
subsequent relief in a de novo proceeding in the Circuit Court of the Sixteenth
Judicial Circuit, Kane County, Illinois. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-
478, 12-13-2022)
17-12: DEVELOPERS OF NEW DEVELOPMENT TO PAY ROAD IMPROVEMENT IMPACT FEE:
Any developer initiating or conducting new development shall pay an impact fee
to the County in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-13: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
At any time after the adoption of this chapter, the County may enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with any municipality the boundaries of which are
within Kane County regarding the impact fee imposed by this chapter. Such
intergovernmental agreements shall be adopted in accordance with law and may
include provisions governing administrative issues involving the collection of
the impact fee assessed and any other matters deemed necessary or appropriate
by the County and the municipality. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478,
12-13-2022)
17-14: ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT FEES AND IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   An impact fee assessment shall be calculated pursuant to the impact fee
schedules set forth in Exhibit B of Ord. 22-7, and Ord. 22-478, and shall be
due upon issuance of a building permit, unless otherwise provided for herein.
Unless the project is otherwise covered by an impact fee agreement, impact fees
shall be assessed based on the predominant use of each building.
   B.   Any new development shall be assessed an impact fee under the terms of
the Ordinance in effect at the time of site specific development approval. For
any new development, the assessed impact fee shall not be greater than the
impact fee calculated under the most current version of this chapter and its
attached impact fee schedules as may be amended. New development assessed an
impact fee under Ordinance #04-22 shall not be eligible for any discounts
provided for in Section
17-17 of this chapter.
   C.   When a land use of a new development is not listed in Exhibit B of Ord.
22-7, and Ord. 22-478, the County Engineer may determine the land use
classification which most closely compares with the new development, which land
use shall apply for purposes of determining the applicable impact fee under
this Section. For land uses not specifically listed in Exhibit B of Ord. 22-
7 and Ord. 22-478, the County may, at the discretion of the County Engineer,
determine an appropriate impact fee based on data published in the latest
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual
pursuant to Section
17-20  of this chapter. Where land uses are not specifically listed in Exhibit
B of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478, or the latest edition of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual, the County may, at the
discretion of the County Engineer, determine an appropriate impact fee based on
accepted traffic engineering practices, published data, the impact fee per trip
provided in Exhibit D of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478, and the formula set forth
in Section
17-20  of this chapter.
   D.   Where new development is a change in the existing land use, the amount
of the impact fee shall be based on the net increase in trips generated by the
new development, and the formula set forth in Section
17-20 of this chapter shall be used to calculate the impact fee.
   E.   Speculative industrial new development for which the use of the
building(s) therein has not been determined at the time a building permit is to
be requested will be assessed by one of the following methods:
      1.   Assessed at the highest rates of the impact fee based on the new
development.
      2.   Assessed at a reduced contingent fee via a Fee Payment Agreement per
Section
17-20.
      3.   Assessed pursuant to a standard individual assessment or simplified
individual assessment contained in Section
17-20.
   F.   Where a proposed new development is to be located within two (2)
service areas, the County Engineer shall assess the impact fee as follows:
      1.   In the case of residential new development, the impact fee shall be
determined by counting the number of dwelling units located within each service
area of the new development and charging a per-unit cost for the dwelling units
within each service area.
      2.   In the case of non-residential new development, the impact fee shall
be determined by calculating the average of the impact fees that would
otherwise be charged if the new development were located entirely within each
service area. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-15: EXEMPTIONS:
The following new development shall be exempt from payment of any impact fees
imposed by this chapter:
   A.   Alterations or expansion of an existing dwelling unit where no
additional units are created and the use of the unit is not changed;
   B.   Nonresidential new development where an existing building will be
structurally altered or enlarged and does not exceed the lesser of:
      1.   Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area; or
      2.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing floor area square footage
of the building; where
         a.   The nonresidential new development does not require a zoning
change; and
         b.   Where additional trips created by the alteration or enlargement
does not exceed ten percent (10%) of trips per the existing land use; or
         c.   Where the alteration is required by the County's or a
Municipality's building code;
   C.   The construction of nonresidential accessory buildings which do not
constitute an increase in intensity of the existing use;
   D.   The reconstruction of a destroyed or partially destroyed building with
a new building of the same size and use;
   E.   Publicly owned and operated school buildings;
   F.   Public buildings owned, operated and occupied by government agencies;
   G.   Temporary structures;
   H.   Affordable housing. Each housing unit (or a designated percentage of
the housing units in multi-family housing developments) meeting the definition
of "affordable housing" and the requirements of this Section shall be exempt
from payment of an impact fee. The County Engineer shall establish procedures
to ensure that rental housing developments qualifying for this exemption
continue to meet the minimum affordability requirements of the Illinois Housing
Development Authority for a period of ten (10) years. If a rental housing
development fails to meet the affordability requirement in any year, the impact
fee that would otherwise have been due shall be paid in full by the owner of
record; and
   I.   Private schools. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-16: DEMOLITION CREDITS:
   A.   A fee payer or developer shall be entitled to a demolition credit equal
to the dollar value of the reduced impact fee that would have been charged on
the building(s) being demolished if part of a redevelopment plan or new
development. A demolition credit shall not exceed the reduced impact fee for
the new development.
   B.   At the time of application for an impact fee receipt, the person
applying for an impact fee receipt shall present to the County a copy of the
demolition permit or letter of authorization from the unit of local government
issuing the demolition approval. The demolition permit shall be attached to the
impact fee receipt application and demolition credits shall be calculated based
upon the impact fee schedule in effect as of the date the impact fee is
assessed. Demolition credits shall be deducted from the gross impact fee
calculated for the new development.
   C.   The County shall not grant demolition credits for demolitions not
associated with new development. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-
13-2022)
17-17: DISCOUNTS:
   A.   A new development shall be eligible for a discount from impact fees
assessed in accordance with Section
17-14 of this chapter, provided that the following criteria are satisfied:
      1.   Mobility Options Discounts (up to a maximum of 10%):
         a.   Ten percent (10%) Discount if the new development is within one-
quarter mile walking distance from an existing Pace Suburban Bus route;
         b.   Ten percent (10%) Discount if the new development is within one-
half mile walking distance from an existing Metra station;
         c.   Ten percent (10%) Discount if the new development is within one-
half mile from a Transit Supportive Corridor;
         d.   Ten percent (10%) Discount if the new development is within one-
half mile from a regional bicycle trail and provides connecting bicycle
infrastructure. The bicycle trail shall be depicted on the Kane County Bike Map
or Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning (CMAP) Regional Greenways and
Trails Plan Map.
   B.   New development meeting any requirements set forth in A.1. above may be
eligible for additional discounts as follows:
      1.   Ten percent (10%) Discount for Mixed-Use Developments with a
residential use and at least two (2) of the following land uses incorporated.
Accessory uses within a principal use may not be counted as a separate use.
         a.   Parks;
         b.   Forest preserves;
         c.   Community or civic centers;
         d.   Recreation facilities;
         e.   Schools or daycare centers;
         f.   Libraries;
         g.   Places of worship;
         h.   Post offices;
         i.   Convenience stores;
         j.   Laundry/dry cleaners;
         k.   Neighborhood retail centers;
         l.   Restaurants;
         m.   Pharmacies;
         n.   Grocery stores;
         o.   Banks;
         p.   Medical/dental offices or hospitals; and
         q.   General offices.
      2.   Up to a maximum 30% Discount for Residential Density where the
residential new development provides an average density of at least seven (7)
units per acre. Where the Residential Density Discount is applied, the new
development shall not be eligible for the Mixed-Use Development Density
Discount.
         a.   Ten percent (10%) Discount for an average residential density of
at least seven (7) units per acre and no more than fourteen (14) units per
acre;
         b.   Twenty percent (20%) Discount for an average residential density
of at least fifteen (15) units per acre and no more than twenty-eight (28)
units per acre; or
         c.   Thirty percent (30%) Discount for an average residential density
greater than twenty-nine (29) units per acre.
   C.   Twenty percent (20%) Discount for Downtown Development where the new
development is located on an infill or redevelopment site defined in a
municipal adopted downtown subarea, comprehensive plan or within an established
downtown Tax Increment Finance (TIF) district.
   D.   Up to twenty percent (20%) Discount for Industrial Developments where
the following criteria are satisfied.
      1.   Ten percent (10%) Discount for redevelopment or infill; or
      2.   Ten percent (10%) Discount for onsite railroad spur access, airport
access for freight, or direct access to a state designated truck route.
   E.   Discount for local skilled manufacturing job creation within the Light
Industrial/Industrial Park and related land use categories on the Impact Fee
Schedule. New development which generates skilled manufacturing jobs can apply
for a discount. Skilled manufacturing jobs are defined and classified as
follows:
      1.   Highly trained, educated, or experienced employees that can complete
more complex mental or physical tasks on the job.
      2.   Often specialized and may require a prolonged period of training and
experience.
      3.   Skills in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) are
essential in many industries.
Skilled job creation must be verified in writing by the permitting municipality
or agency, local economic development organization, or local workforce
development board and submitted for approval prior to the discount being
granted.
      1.   Ten percent (10%) discount for one (1) through one hundred (100)
jobs created.
      2.   Twenty percent (20%) discount for one hundred and one (101) or more
jobs created.
Any new development within the Speculative Industrial new development category
on the Impact Fee Schedule is not eligible for this discount.
   F.   Except for charitable organizations, the maximum impact fee discount
that any new development may receive under this Section is seventy percent
(70%). Impact fees calculated through any individual assessment are not
eligible for any of the discounts in this Section.
   G.   Impact Fee Discount Application: In order to receive the impact fee
discount described in this Section, the developer shall submit an impact fee
discount application to the Division of Transportation Impact Fee Program
Manager. The impact fee discount application shall include an overall plan of
the new development, a description of the permitted and anticipated land uses,
and detailed calculations clearly demonstrating that the new development meets
the requirements listed in this Section and a schedule indicating the
anticipated year of construction of the various phases and elements of the new
development. The Division of Transportation may establish further requirements
for an impact fee discount application as needed for proper administration of
the requirements of this Section.
      1.   Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of a written impact fee
discount application, the County Engineer shall determine if all pertinent
information has been provided by the developer. If the County Engineer
determines that additional documentation is required, the County Engineer shall
send a written statement to the developer specifying the deficiencies. Until
the deficiencies are corrected, the County shall take no further action on the
application for an impact fee discount.
      2.   When the County Engineer determines that the application for an
impact fee discount is complete, the County Engineer shall draft an impact fee
payment agreement for the review and approval of the fee payer pursuant to
Section
17-19.
   H.   Impact Fee Discount Payment: As a condition of receiving an impact fee
discount of greater than twenty percent (20%) under this Section, the developer
shall enter into a Memorandum of Agreement with the County Engineer. The
Memorandum of Agreement shall provide that the developer will construct the new
development in accordance with the supporting documents submitted with the
impact fee discount application, within a period not to exceed ten (10) years.
The agreement shall also include a commitment by the developer that if the new
development is not completed in accordance with the impact fee discount
application within ten (10) years of the date of the impact fee payment
agreement, or if there is a material change in the new development that would
result in:
      1.   Its ineligibility to receive an impact fee discount; or
      2.   Its receiving a lesser impact fee discount, then the developer shall
pay or cause to be paid to the County an amount equal to the impact fee
discount or excess impact fee discount received.
The duration of the impact fee discount may be extended beyond the ten (10)
year period upon mutual agreement of the County and the developer, provided
that portions of the new development completed within ten (10) years meet the
qualification requirements for the discount obtained and that additional
portions of the development receiving the discount after the ten (10) year
period continue to meet the requirements for the discount obtained. The County
Engineer may, as a condition of the Memorandum of Agreement, require an impact
fee payment agreement with the County in accordance with Section
17-19 of this chapter, which also may include provision of a guaranty in a form
acceptable to the County to ensure such payment.
   I.   Impact Fee Discount Exemptions: New development shall be eligible for a
one hundred percent (100%) discount from the impact fee assessed in accordance
with Section
17-14 of this chapter, provided:
      1.   It is solely owned and solely occupied by a charitable organization
certified by the Internal Revenue Service as tax-exempt under section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code; and
      2.   The total site generates fifty (50) or fewer weekday P.M. peak hour
trips as determined using the methodology contained in Appendix A of the CRIP.
Sites that generate greater than fifty (50) weekday P.M. peak hour trips but
otherwise meet the requirements of this Section shall receive a total maximum
discount the amount of which is determined by multiplying the applicable impact
fee per trip from Exhibit D of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478, by the applicable
impact fee multiplier from Exhibit C of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478, and
multiplying the result by fifty (50). In order to receive this discount, the
charitable organization shall provide satisfactory evidence of its federal tax-
exempt status. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-18: PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES:
   A.   Except as may be otherwise provided in subsections B. and C. of this
Section, impact fees for any new development assessed pursuant to any previous,
or current Ordinance shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit by
either a municipality or the County, be paid in full, or in the case of
Speculative Industrial new development, upon the issuance of an occupancy
permit therefor.
   B.   In the event that a building permit or certificate of occupancy is
issued by a municipality without an impact fee having been paid, the County may
collect the impact fee from the fee payer or the fee payer's successor in title
at any time thereafter. In conjunction with the collection of any impact fee or
portion thereof that remains unpaid or is otherwise due, the County may file in
the Office of the Kane County Recorder notification of an unpaid impact fee.
Any judgement obtained by the County as result of any action filed in a court
of competent jurisdiction for the collection of impact fees that remain due,
owing and unpaid, shall bear the rate of interest as provided in the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-1303).
   C.   Payment of an impact fee may be authorized at a time earlier than as
otherwise specified in subsections A. of this Section if the County and the fee
payer enter into an impact fee payment agreement that provides for such earlier
payment of the impact fee. At the option of the County, the County may enter
into an impact fee payment agreement with a fee payer pursuant to Section
17-19 hereof that provides for the installment payment of the impact fee at a
rate of interest which is three percent (3%) over the prime commercial rate in
effect at the time that the impact fee is imposed, for a period of up to ten
(10) years after the impact fee is due, provided that the County receives, in
the opinion of the County, adequate security ensuring such later payment of the
impact fee. In all impact fee payment agreements, interest on any unpaid Impact
fee or part thereof shall begin accruing on the first business day following
submittal of the impact fee application.
   D.   Developers of residential new development which receives assisted
financing, or who have received a written commitment for assisted financing and
whose assisted financing has been provided within six (6) months of the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, may enter into an impact fee payment
agreement with the County whereby the impact fee may be paid in installments
over a ten (10) year period of time at a rate of interest which is three
percent (3%) over the prime commercial rate in effect at the time that the
impact fee is assessed.
   E.   The County and any municipality may enter into an intergovernmental
agreement that provides for the cooperative collection of impact fees and/or
for the conditioning of the issuance of municipal building permits or
certificates of occupancy upon proof of payment of the County's impact fee.
   F.   Municipalities shall provide the County with a notice of issuance of
any building permit in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal
Code of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (65 ILCS 5/11-39-1), and shall submit a
copy of the fee payer's receipt of payment of the impact fee or a County
approved impact fee payment agreement along with such notice. (Ord. 22-27, 1-
11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-19: IMPACT FEE PAYMENT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   At any time prior to the issuance of a building permit, a fee payer may
enter into an impact fee payment agreement with the County providing for the
payment of the impact fee imposed by this chapter, in accordance with
requirements specified by the County Engineer. Such impact fee payment
agreement may provide for the following:
      1.   Installment payments of the impact fee for a period up to ten (10)
years, (only in the case of new development funded by assisted financing);
      2.   Recapture payments for improvement credits;
      3.   Credit and security arrangements; and
      4.   Other matters relating to the impact fee.
In addition, any impact fee payment agreement may also include an improvement
credit agreement as provided for in Section
17-21 of this chapter.
   B.   For new development eligible for deferred payment of an impact fee, the
impact fee payment agreement may require security, the form of which shall be
determined at the sole option of the County. Security may be in the form of a
promissory note, cash bond, security bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or
a lien or mortgage on the lands to be covered by the building permit, among
other things. The impact fee payment agreement may provide that such security
may be partially releasable upon receipt of partial payments of the impact fee.
Fee payers receiving assisted financing shall be charged a rate of interest
which is three percent (3%) over the prime commercial rate in effect at the
time that the impact fee is assessed, on any deferred impact fee payments.
   C.   Fee payers for any new development other than residential new
development and fee payers for multi-unit residential new development will be
allowed to enter into impact fee payment agreements to defer payment of some
portion of the impact fees due upon the issuance of a building permit. Impact
fee payment agreements shall provide that a payment of at least fifty percent
(50%) of the assessed impact fee or any impact fee credits in lieu of cash
shall be payable upon the issuance of a building permit, and the balance shall
be payable in twelve (12) months from the date of issuance of the building
permit. Fee payers shall be charged a rate of interest that is three percent
(3%) over the prime commercial rate in effect at the time that the impact fee
is assessed, on any impact fees deferred in accordance with this Section for
new development eligible for deferred payment of an impact fee, through an
impact fee discount agreement.
   D.   For new development approved for impact fee discounts pursuant to
Section
17-17 of this chapter, the impact fee payment agreement shall provide that the
developer will construct the new development in accordance with the supporting
documents submitted with the impact fee discount application, within a period
not to exceed ten (10) years. The impact fee payment agreement must also
include a commitment by the developer that if the new development is not
completed in accordance with the impact fee discount application within ten
(10) years of the date of the impact fee payment agreement, or if there is a
material change in the new development that would result in:
      1.   Its ineligibility to receive an impact fee discount; or
      2.   Its receiving a lesser impact fee discount, then the developer shall
pay or cause to be paid to the County an amount equal to the impact fee
discount or excess impact fee discount received.
The duration of the impact fee discount may be extended beyond the ten (10)
year period upon mutual agreement of the County and the developer, provided
that portions of the new development completed within ten (10) years meet the
qualification requirements for the discount obtained and that additional
portions of the development receiving the discount after the ten (10) year
period continue to meet the requirements for the discount obtained. The County
may, as a condition of the impact fee payment agreement, require a guaranty in
a form acceptable to the County to ensure such payment.
   E.   Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of a written application
for an impact fee payment agreement, the County Engineer shall determine if all
pertinent information has been provided by the fee payer. If the County
Engineer determines that additional documentation is required, the County
Engineer shall send a written statement to the fee payer specifying the
deficiencies in the application. Until the deficiencies are corrected, the
County shall take no further action on the application for an impact fee
payment agreement.
   F.   When the County Engineer determines that the application for an impact
fee payment agreement is complete, the County Engineer shall draft an impact
fee payment agreement for the review and approval of the fee payer. Upon
acceptance of the impact fee payment agreement by the fee payer, the
Transportation Committee shall consider the impact fee payment agreement at its
next regularly scheduled meeting that will comply with the requirements of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act. If the Transportation Committee approves the impact
fee payment agreement, the County Engineer may execute the agreement on behalf
of the County. The Transportation Committee's denial of an impact fee payment
agreement shall be based on written findings. Said written findings shall
indicate that the impact fee payment agreement is not in the best interest of
the County. Reasons for such finding may include but are not necessarily
limited to the extraordinary potential adverse impact of the new development
among other things. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-20: INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT - SIMPLIFIED AND STANDARD ANALYSIS:
   A.   Any developer may choose to provide an individual assessment of the
impacts of the proposed new development upon the County highway system. The
individual assessment may be used by the County to determine:
      1.   Whether the share of the highway improvement capital costs
necessitated by the proposed new development should be less than the impact fee
established in Section
17-14 of this chapter; or
      2.   The impact fee for a particular land use or combination of uses not
otherwise identified in Section
17-14 of this chapter. There are two types of individual assessments available.
   B.   Simplified:
      1.   Where the impact fee assessed under Section
17-14  of this chapter does not reflect the impact of the proposed new
development, and where the latest version of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers Trip Generation Manual provides trip generation data for another Land
Use Code(s) which more closely represents the data for the new development, the
developer may complete a simplified individual assessment.
      2.   Any developer who requests a simplified individual assessment is
required to submit an application for a simplified individual assessment to the
County Engineer (see Exhibit E of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478).
      3.   The County Engineer will review the application for a simplified
individual assessment within fifteen (15) working days of receipt. If the
County Engineer determines the application is not complete, the County Engineer
shall send a written statement specifying the deficiencies to the person
submitting the application. Until the deficiencies are corrected, the County
Engineer shall take no further action on the application for simplified
individual assessment, other than further reviews for completeness.
      4.   The County may, at the discretion of the County Engineer, have the
simplified individual assessment reviewed by an approved transportation
professional. The County Engineer shall approve the proposed impact fee if the
County Engineer determines that the data provided in the latest version of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual accurately
represents the trip generation characteristics anticipated for the new
development. If the County Engineer determines that use of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual data does not fairly assess the
highway improvement capital costs to the County highway system in accordance
with the formula set out in subsection H. of this Section the proposed impact
fee shall be denied, and the developer shall pay the impact fee according to
the schedule established in Section
17-14  of this chapter if the new development's proposed land use has not
previously been identified in the impact fee schedule or an amount as otherwise
determined by the County Engineer.
      5.   If the simplified individual assessment is denied by the County
Engineer, the developer retains the ability to perform a full standard
individual assessment pursuant to this Section.
   C.   Standard:
      1.   Any developer who chooses to provide a standard individual
assessment is required to submit to the County Engineer a written statement of
intent to perform a standard individual assessment, including its intended
methodology, prior to performing the standard individual assessment and
commencing the new development.
      2.   The individual assessment shall be calculated according to the
following formulas (See Technical Specifications for detailed information):
PRIMARY TRIP RATE = GROSS TRIP RATE x TOTAL TRIP REDUCTION
TRIPS = PRIMARY TRIP RATE x NUMBER OF IMPACT UNITS
GROSS IMPACT FEE = TRIPS x IMPACT FEE PER TRIP
NET IMPACT FEE = GROSS IMPACT FEE minus DEMOLITION CREDIT minus IMPROVEMENT
CREDIT
REDUCED IMPACT FEE = NET IMPACT FEE x IMPACT FEE MULTIPLIER
Where:
GROSS TRIP RATE; equals the number of trips generated by one IMPACT UNIT of the
new development on a weekday during the peak hour, between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m., of adjacent street traffic, as defined in the latest edition of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual. 
TOTAL TRIP REDUCTION: equals the percentage of trips generated by a new
development that are pass-by trips or diverted-linked trips as defined in the
latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation
Handbook.
PRIMARY TRIP RATE; equals the portion of the GROSS TRIP RATE that represents
new trips on the County highway system, discounting pass-by and diverted-linked
trips.
IMPACT UNITS; equals a measure of the size of the new development that
correlates with the number of peak hour trips generated by the new development
between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. For residential new developments, the IMPACT
UNIT is the number of dwelling units of various types in the new development.
For non-residential new developments, the IMPACT UNIT is generally a multiple
of the number of gross interior square feet of the buildings constructed in the
new development.
IMPACT FEE PER TRIP: equals the GROSS IMPACT FEE for the service area for new
development that generates one trip during the peak hour of adjacent highway
traffic between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. (See Exhibit D of Ord. 22-7 and Ord.
22-478).
DEMOLITION CREDIT: equals the GROSS IMPACT FEE that would have been assessed on
a building that a fee payer demolishes in conjunction with new development.
IMPROVEMENT CREDIT: equals the value of impact fee eligible highway
improvements constructed by a developer in conjunction with new development and
pursuant to an improvement credit agreement with the County.
IMPACT FEE MULTIPLIER; equals the percentage determined by the County Board by
which the NET FEE shall be multiplied to determine the REDUCED FEE (See Exhibit
C of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478).
      3.   The standard individual assessment shall include the following
information:
         a.   The trip generation rates for the proposed new development, on an
average daily and on a peak design hour basis. The trip generation rates shall
be based on local empirical surveys for the same or similar land use types.
Empirical surveys shall include data collected from 4:00 pm to 6:00 pm at a
minimum of three (3) locations having the same or similar land uses, or three
(3) consecutive days at the same location. Survey locations should be similar
to the location of the new development in terms of land use, adjacent street
daily traffic, and mobility options. Coordination with the Division of
Transportation impact fee program manager is required for survey locations
outside of Kane County
         b.   The proposed trip reduction rates for pass-by and diverted-linked
trips, if any. The trip reduction rates shall be based on data provided in the
latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation
Handbook or local empirical surveys for the same or similar land use types.
         c.   Any other data and supporting calculations that demonstrate a
lower impact fee would be justified due to the unique nature or location of the
new development.
      4.   An individual assessment shall be prepared only by a Professional
Traffic Operations Engineer (PTOE) licensed in the state of Illinois utilizing
established procedures, in the field of transportation planning and engineering
and impact analysis. The standard individual assessment shall be stamped and
signed by the qualified engineer.
      5.   The maximum reduction in any impact fee determined through any
individual assessment, standard or simplified shall not exceed seventy percent
(70%) of the impact fee as initially determined by and set forth in the impact
fee schedule.
      6.   Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of an individual
assessment, the County Engineer shall determine if the standard individual
assessment application materials are complete. If the County Engineer
determines the standard individual assessment application is not complete, the
County Engineer shall send a written statement specifying the deficiencies to
the person submitting the standard individual assessment. The County may, at
the discretion of the County Engineer, have the individual assessment reviewed
by an approved transportation professional. Until the deficiencies are
corrected, the County Engineer shall take no further action on the standard
individual assessment, other than further reviews for completeness.
      7.   When the County Engineer determines the standard individual
assessment is complete, the standard individual assessment shall be reviewed by
the County within thirty (30) days thereafter. The County Engineer shall
approve the proposed impact fee if the County Engineer determines that the
traffic information, traffic factors, and methodology used to determine the
proposed impact fee are professionally acceptable and fairly assess the highway
improvement capital costs to the County highway system in accordance with the
formula set out in subsection H. of this Section. If the County Engineer
determines that the traffic information, traffic factors, or methodology does
not fairly assess the highway improvement capital costs to the County highway
system in accordance with the formula set out in subsection H. of this Section,
the proposed impact fee shall be denied, and the developer shall pay the impact
fee according to the schedule established in Section
17-14 of this chapter or as otherwise determined by the County Engineer if the
new development's proposed land use has not previously been identified in the
impact fee schedule. If the individual assessment is denied by the County
Engineer, the decision of the County Engineer may be appealed in the manner
provided for in Section
17-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-21: IMPACT FEE CREDIT AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Any fee payer may request an impact fee credit against the impact fee
imposed by this chapter for any contribution, payment, recapture or
construction of a system improvement or conveyance of land accepted and
received by Kane County for any system improvement in accordance with the
provisions of this Section. Highway related improvements made primarily for the
benefit of the new development or municipalities or individuals or entities
other than the County, including but not limited to highway related
improvements such as turn lanes, traffic signals at private entrances,
improvements to cross streets not on the County highway system over and above
those necessary for the efficient operation of County intersections, and
improvements to private property, together with the engineering and right of
way costs therefor, are not eligible for an improvement credit. Any
contribution, payment, recapture, construction of a highway related improvement
or conveyance of land accepted and received by the County that does not address
a capacity deficiency as set forth in the CRIP or that is received by the
County as third party beneficiary as consideration included in any annexation
agreement or as consideration for a grant from the County of any benefit to the
new development that the new development is not otherwise entitled to as a
matter of law, is not eligible as an improvement credit. The County Engineer
shall determine which improvements are system improvements eligible for an
improvement credit.
   B.   The County shall not be required to refund any impact fee or part
thereof for any impact fee credits that exceed any impact fee assessed by this
chapter for the new development. However, a fee payer or his or her successor
in interest may apply an improvement credit which has not otherwise been used
in any other improvement credit agreement against an impact fee which would
otherwise be due and owing under the provisions of this chapter, provided that
the highway improvement for which the credit is being applied is located within
the same service area as the new development which would be the beneficiary of
the credit and provided that the credit application is made within five (5)
years of the date of execution of the original improvement credit agreement.
   C.   A fee payer shall be entitled to an improvement credit equal to the
dollar value of the cost of any eligible system improvement contributed, paid
for or committed to by the fee payer or his or her predecessor in interest in
conjunction with the County's approval of the new development which is subject
to the impact fee for which an improvement credit is being sought. The cost of
such highway improvements shall be based on the following criteria:
      1.   The actual cost of the system improvements based on a valid contract
proposal or bid tabulations for work performed within Kane County on the County
highway system; and
      2.   The mean value of two legitimate, unbiased, qualified appraisals,
conducted by an Illinois licensed real estate appraiser, of the fair market
value of any land or interest therein which is part of the system improvement
for which an impact fee credit is being sought. The fee payer or developer and
the County shall each provide the legitimate, qualified unbiased appraisal from
which the mean shall be determined.
   D.   To be eligible to receive an impact fee credit, the fee payer or
developer shall initiate such determination requesting an improvement credit by
submitting a written application prepared by an Illinois licensed civil
engineer for an improvement credit agreement to the County Engineer, no later
than the fee payer's application for:
      1.   The related building permit; or
      2.   The related highway access permit; whichever occurs first. The
application for an improvement credit agreement shall include the following
information:
         a.   A plan of specific proposed system improvements, prepared and
certified by a duly qualified and licensed Illinois civil engineer; and,
         b.   The projected costs for the proposed system improvements, which
shall be based on local information for similar highway improvements, along
with the construction timetable for the completion of the proposed system
improvements. Such estimated costs shall include the cost of all labor and
materials, the appraised value or cost of all lands, property, rights,
easements and franchises acquired, financing charges, interest prior to and
during construction and for one (1) year after completion of construction, cost
of plans and specifications, surveys of estimated costs and of revenues, costs
of engineering and legal services and all other expenses necessary or
incidental to determining the feasibility or practicability of such
construction or reconstruction.
   E.   Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the application for an
impact fee credit agreement, the County Engineer shall determine if all
pertinent information has been provided. If the County Engineer determines that
additional information is required, the County Engineer shall send a written
statement outlining the application's deficiencies to the applicant. The County
Engineer shall take no further action on the proposed improvement credit
agreement, other than further reviews for completeness, until all deficiencies
have been corrected or otherwise settled.
   F.   Once the County Engineer determines that the applicant's proposed
improvement is a system improvement and the proposed costs for the suggested
system improvement are professionally acceptable and fairly assess its cost,
the County Engineer shall draft an impact fee credit agreement that shall be
reviewed and approved by the applicant submitting the request for the impact
fee credit agreement. The impact fee credit agreement shall specifically
outline the system improvements that will be constructed by the applicant, the
time by which the system improvements shall be completed and the total dollar
value of the proposed system improvements. If the County Engineer determines
that either the proposed system improvement is not a system improvement or that
the proposed costs thereof are not acceptable, the County Engineer shall notify
the applicant of his/her decision and may propose an alternative system
improvement and proposed costs therefor consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
   G.   Upon written acceptance of the impact fee credit agreement by the
County Engineer and the applicant, the Transportation Committee shall consider
the impact fee credit agreement at the next regularly scheduled committee
meeting that will comply with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings
Act. If the Transportation Committee approves the impact fee credit agreement,
the County Engineer may execute the impact fee credit agreement on behalf of
the County. Any impact fee credit agreement that includes system improvements
with a total dollar value over one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall
be reviewed and ratified by the County Board before it is executed by the
County Engineer.
   H.   The Division of Transportation shall maintain records of the use of
impact fee credits toward payment of impact fees due and shall provide upon
written request a quarterly statement to the beneficiary of each impact fee
credit agreement indicating use of any impact fee credits during the reporting
period and the balance of impact fee credits remaining. Upon execution of an
impact fee credit agreement, the beginning balance shall be equal to the total
dollar value of the impact feet credits as specified in the impact fee credit
agreement. Impact fee credits will be applied against new development in the
following manner:
      1.   The recipient of the impact fee credit shall indicate on the impact
fee application that impact fees assessed will be paid by utilizing impact fee
credits and shall indicate the impact fee credit agreement number.
      2.   For each portion of the new development to which an impact fee
credit is intended to be applied, the Division of Transportation shall
calculate the gross impact fee in accordance with Exhibit B of Ord. 22-7 and
Ord. 22-478 or in accordance with Section
17-20 of this chapter. The remaining impact feet credit balance shall be
reduced by the gross impact fee for that portion of the new development. The
impact fee receipt shall note that the impact fees were paid through
application of impact fee credits and the amount of impact fee credit expended.
      3.   If the impact fee credits remaining are insufficient to cover the
gross impact fee for the new development, the remaining gross impact fee shall
be multiplied by the impact fee multiplier then in effect and the applicant
notified of the impact fee due. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-
13-2022)
17-22: REFUNDS:
   A.   Any impact fee collected may be refunded to the fee payer for the new
development due to non-commencement before the impact fees have been expended
or otherwise encumbered. Refunds may be made in accordance with this Section,
provided that the fee payer or his or her successor in interest files a written
petition for a refund of impact fees paid, within one (1) year of the date that
the impact fees were required to be encumbered or expended.
   B.   Impact fees collected shall be encumbered for any of the purposes
listed in Section
17-24 of this chapter within five (5) years of the date of receipt thereof. In
determining whether the funds have been encumbered, the impact fees shall be
accounted for on a first-in - first-out (FIFO) basis.
   C.   The impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter that have not been
encumbered in accordance with subsection B. of this Section shall be returned
to the owner of record only upon receipt of a petition therefor. The petition
shall include the following information:
      1.   A notarized sworn statement that the petitioner is the owner of
record of the new development for which the impact fee was paid and that the
petitioner is entitled to a refund under the terms of this chapter;
      2.   A certified copy of the latest recorded deed for the property that
comprises the new development for which the impact fee was paid; and
      3.   A copy of the most recent ad valorem property tax bill for the
property that comprises the new development for which the impact fee was paid.
   D.   Within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of the written request, the
County Engineer shall determine if the written request is complete. If the
County Engineer determines the refund request is not complete, the County
Engineer shall send a written statement by U.S. mail or email specifying the
deficiencies to the petitioner. Unless the request's deficiencies are
corrected, the County Engineer shall take no further action on the request.
   E.   When the County Engineer determines the written petition for refund of
impact fees paid is complete, the County Engineer shall review the petition
within fifteen (15) working days, and shall approve the requested refund if the
County Engineer determines the fee payer has paid an impact fee which the
County has neither expended nor encumbered within five (5) years from the date
the impact fee was paid.
   F.   If any impact fee has not been expended or otherwise encumbered within
five (5) years of the date the impact fee were received, upon receipt of a
complete refund petition as determined by the County Engineer, the impact fee
shall be refunded along with interest at a rate which is seventy percent (70%)
of the prime commercial rate in effect at the time that the impact fee is
imposed, less five percent (5%) of the total fee to defray the costs of
administration.
   G.   Impact fee refunds may be made at the discretion of the County Engineer
without petition in any case where inadvertent mathematical error resulting in
overpayment has been made.
   H.   Any charitable organization certified by the Internal Revenue Service
as tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and when so
certified paid an impact fee under Kane County Ordinance 04-22 for new
development that is solely owned and solely occupied by the charitable
organization shall, upon written application to the Kane County Engineer,
receive a one-time refund in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the impact fee that would have been assessed on an equivalent land use that
generates fifty (50) weekday PM peak hour trips, or an amount equal to one
hundred percent (100%) of the impact fee paid, whichever amount is less. (Ord.
22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-23: ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREAS:
There are hereby established service areas within the County in accordance with
the boundaries set forth on Exhibit A of Ord. 22-7 and Ord. 22-478. The impact
fee funds collected pursuant to this chapter shall be expended within the
service area(s) from which they were collected, in accordance with the
provisions of Section
17-24 of this chapter. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-24: USE OF IMPACT FEES COLLECTED:
   A.   The impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used in the
same manner and for the same purposes as motor fuel tax money allotted to the
County under the provisions of the Highway Code, (605 ILCS 5/5-701 et seq.)
solely for highway improvement capital costs that are specifically and uniquely
attributable to the new development assessed the impact fee. In no event shall
impact fees be expended to alleviate existing deficiencies in the County's
highway system which were identified in the CRIP that was the basis for the
original Road Improvement Impact Fees adopted by the County. The impact fees
shall be expended on system improvements within the service area(s) from which
the impact fees were collected, as specified in the CRIP. In the event that a
service area boundary is the centerline of a County highway or intersection,
the County Engineer may use the impact fees to complete the system improvements
to the opposite side of the highway or right of way. Co-mingling of impact fees
with regular highway, local gasoline or state motor fuel tax funds on highway
improvements is permissible to the extent that regular tax funds are used to
pay for the cost of alleviating any existing deficiencies. The County Engineer
shall provide a written justification of the allocation of impact fees whenever
such impact fees are allocated to highway improvements that will remedy
existing deficiencies, demonstrating that the impact fees are not used to
improve said existing deficiencies.
   B.   Impact fees shall be expended or encumbered within five (5) years from
the date of receipt thereof.
   C.   Impact fees collected by the County pursuant to this chapter shall be
kept separate from other funds of the County.
   D.   Impact fees collected shall accrue to the fund established for the
service area(s) in which the new development is proposed or occurs.
   E.   Impact fees on deposit and not immediately necessary for expenditure
shall be invested in interest bearing accounts designated solely for the impact
fees for each service area(s). All interest derived therefrom shall be retained
in the appropriate fund and used for highway improvements authorized in this
chapter.
   F.   The County shall provide for an annual accounting of any fund or
account containing impact fees and interest earned thereon. Such accounting
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the total impact fees collected,
the source of the impact fees collected, the total amount of interest accruing
on such impact fees, the amount of impact fees expended on highway
improvements, and a list of the impact fee credits granted. The County shall
publish the results of the accounting once a year in a newspaper of general
circulation within Kane County. The notice shall also state that a copy of the
accounting report shall be made available for public inspection at reasonable
times. A copy of the report shall be given to the Advisory Committee.
   G.   Impact fees collected pursuant to Ordinance 04-22 and impact fees
assessed pursuant to Section
17-14 of this chapter may be expended on any eligible highway improvement
identified in the CRIP in effect at the time of award of the contract for
expenditure of the impact fees; however, impact fees collected pursuant to
Ordinance 04-22 and impact fees assessed pursuant to Section
17-14 of this chapter shall be expended within the service area as defined in
Ordinance 04-22 from which the impact fees were collected. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-
2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-25: ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   An Advisory Committee has been established by the County in compliance
with the requirements of the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law to assist the
County in the recommendation of land use assumptions and the development of the
CRIP. After the effective date of this chapter, the Advisory Committee shall,
among other duties, continue to:
      1.   Report to the County on all matters relating to the imposition of
impact fees;
      2.   Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the CRIP and the
assessment of impact fees;
      3.   Report annually to the County with respect to the progress of the
implementation of the CRIP;
      4.   Advise the County of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, CRIP, or impact fees;
      5.   Review the County's highway program with respect to impact fee
expenditures; and
      6.   Discuss relevant development trends in the County.
   B.   The County shall adopt procedural rules to be used by the Advisory
Committee in carrying out the duties imposed by this Section. The rules shall
provide that any three (3) members of the Advisory Committee may call a meeting
of the Committee to discuss issues that fall within the duties listed above.
The County shall assist the Advisory Committee and shall make available all
professional reports reasonably relating to the development and implementation
of the land use assumptions, the CRIP, and the periodic up-dates of the CRIP.
Meetings of the Committee shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5
ILCS 120/1 et seq.). (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-26: REVIEW OF LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS AND UPDATE OF COMPREHENSIVE ROAD
IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
The Advisory Committee shall periodically review the land use assumptions and
the CRIP, approved by Resolution 04-21 as amended from time to time, in
accordance with Section
17-25 of this chapter and shall advise the County of the need to update any of
these documents. The CRIP shall be updated at least once every five (5) years
in accordance with statutory requirements. The five (5) year period shall
commence on the date of the most recent adoption of the CRIP. (Ord. 22-27, 1-
11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-27: REVIEW OF ORDINANCE:
   A.   The Advisory Committee shall periodically review the factors used to
calculate the impact fee schedule in Section
17-14 of this chapter, the criteria defined for a simplified individual
assessment provided for in Section
17-21, the factors used for a standard individual assessment provided for in
Section
17-21, the administration of this chapter and the Procedures Manual, and shall
revise the impact fee schedule in accordance with any changes in the factors
used in calculating the impact fee. The review shall not affect the
applicability of the impact fee schedule in Section
17-14 or the factors in Section
17-17 until a revision to the schedule or the factors is approved by the County
Board. If the County Engineer determines that the arithmetic average of any
proposed increase in the impact fees will be five percent (5%) or greater from
the previous impact fee schedule, the County shall hold a public hearing
regarding the proposed revisions to the impact fee schedule. The County shall
give thirty (30) days' notice of such public hearing by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within Kane County. A majority vote of the
members of the County Board then holding office is required before the impact
fees may be increased. In no event shall this subsection or any other Section
of this chapter be construed to prevent the County Board from taking any action
to amend this chapter after its effective date.
   B.   Regarding any revision of the impact fee schedule, the maximum annual
increase for any one year shall not be more than ten percent (10%) plus any
increase in the Construction Cost Index (as published by the Engineering News
Record) for said year.
   C.   Any impact fee increase or decrease shall become effective on April 1st
of the year that the impact fee schedule is approved by the County Board. If
there has been a State or County gas tax increase or decrease, a revised fee
schedule may be considered by the Transportation Committee at a regularly
scheduled meeting and subsequently by the County Board at the next regularly
scheduled County Board meeting thereafter. Any revised impact fee schedule
approved by the County Board shall reflect the allocation of such gas tax funds
to transportation capacity improvements.
   D.   An annual report shall be provided to the County Board that examines
the expenditure of the impact fees collected under the provisions of this
chapter and analyzes the effectiveness of such expenditures. The annual report
shall be produced prior to June 1 of every year.
   E.   The limitations contained in subsections A. and B. of this Section
shall not apply to any amendment to this chapter resulting from a complete
update of the Land Use Assumptions and Comprehensive Road Improvement Plan in
accordance with the Road Improvement Impact Fee Law. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022;
amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-28: EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter shall become effective upon adoption by the County Board. (Ord.
22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-29: PENALTIES:
   A.   The County Engineer shall initiate, through the office of the Kane
County State's Attorney, judicial proceedings to collect any impact fee to
collect any impact fee that has become due and is unpaid under this chapter and
any interest accruing on any judgement resulting therefrom.
   B.   Unless a fee payer is actively prosecuting the appeal of an impact fee,
or actively prosecuting any other remedy provided by law for relief against an
impact fee, if an impact fee required by this chapter has not been timely paid,
the County or the County Engineer shall not issue to the delinquent fee payer
any subsequent approvals or permits for any other development or work within
the County of Kane in which the delinquent fee payer has an interest and shall
suspend review of any and all pending applications or petitions of the
delinquent fee payer pending before the County until all impact fees owed have
been paid in full. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-30: DISTRIBUTION:
Certified copies of this chapter shall be sent to every municipality having
territory within Kane County, the Illinois Department of Transportation, the
Division of Transportation, and the Kane/Kendall Council of Mayors, and one
copy to the Treasurer, Auditor, Finance Department, Development Department, and
State's Attorney's Office. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-
2022)
17-31: RECORDATION:
A certified copy of Ord. 22-478 shall be recorded in the office of the Kane
County Recorder. (Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-32: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any portion or section of this chapter is determined to be
invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions or sections of
the Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 22-27, 1-11-
2022; amd. Ord. 22-478, 12-13-2022)
17-33 - 17-34: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. COUNTY TOLL BRIDGE
SECTION:
17-35: Title
17-36: Purpose And Authority
17-37: Definitions
17-38: General Authority
17-39: Toll Collection System
17-40: Toll Rates And Charges
17-41: Revenues
17-42:    Toll Payment Required
17-43:    Toll Account
17-44:    Toll Exemptions
17-45: Discounts
17-46: Notice Of Nonpayment
17-47: Toll Violation; Civil Penalty
17-48: Administrative Hearing And Adjudication
17-49: Defense To Nonpayment; And Reassignment
17-50: Enforcement
17-51: Promotion Of Toll Bridge
17-52: Effective Date
17-53: Toll Bridge Fiscal Year
Appendix A: County Toll Bridge Rates And Charges
17-35: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the KANE COUNTY TOLL BRIDGE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 20-
52, 2-11-2020)
17-36: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   The county board is empowered pursuant to the County Toll Bridges Act
(605 ILCS 5/10-301 et seq.) to borrow money, issue bonds and enact and enforce
all needful rules and regulations in connection with the acquisition,
construction, maintenance, operation, management, care or protection of a
county toll bridge.
   B.   The purpose of this article is to establish rules and regulations
including the manner in which toll rates and charges are set, collected and
enforced to ensure sufficient revenue to pay the costs of such toll bridge and
its approaches. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-37: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms as used in this article:
ELECTRONIC  A system utilizing a combination of technologies, including but not limited to,
TOLL        cameras, transponders, and mobile applications that together or individually work
COLLECTION: to determine the appropriate toll and charges for the use of the toll bridge.
DEPARTMENT: The Kane County Division of Transportation.
RESPONSIBLE The registered owner of the vehicle, or the person to whom liability for toll
PERSON:     payment is transferred pursuant to Section
            17-49  of this article.
REVENUE:    All tolls, fees, charges, interest, and monies collected or generated as related
            to the ownership, use, operations, financing or maintenance of the toll bridge.
TOLL:       A fee or charge for the use of the toll bridge as hereinafter defined.
            The Kane County Highway No. 86 (also known as Longmeadow Parkway), Bridge over
TOLL        the Fox River in Algonquin Township, County of Kane, State of Illinois including
BRIDGE:     the approaches thereto, and all necessary structures and appurtenances associated
            therewith from which a toll, fee or charge is assessed for the use of the bridge.
TOLL BRIDGE The Longmeadow Parkway toll bridge, and any improvement, extension, or expansion
PROJECT:    to that toll bridge, including:
           (1)   An improvement to relieve traffic congestion and promote safety;
           (2)   A tunnel, overpass, underpass, interchange, service road, ramp, entrance
            plaza, approach, or tollhouse;
 
            (3)   An administration, storage, or other building the county considers
             necessary to operate the toll bridge project;
             (4)   A parking area or structure, rest stop, park, and other improvement or
            amenity the county considers necessary, useful, or beneficial for the operation
             of the toll bridge; and
            (5)   Property rights, easements, and interests the county acquires to
             construct or operate the toll bridge.
TOLL         Any system or process used to assess and/or collect a toll or charge for the
COLLECTION   use of the Longmeadow Parkway Toll Bridge. Such system or process may include
SYSTEM:      cash, credit card, web-based or mobile payment applications, electronic toll
             collection, subscription-based pass systems, or invoice systems.
             A radio frequency identification unit attached to a vehicle from which the
TRANSPONDER: identification unit transmits a signal to a reader mounted to automatically
             identify the existence of a valid toll account associated with the same
             vehicle.
(Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-38:    GENERAL AUTHORITY:
   A.    The County Board, may do all things necessary and appropriate to:
      1.   Acquire, construct, improve, operate, and maintain the toll bridge;
      2.   Issue tax bonds, revenue bonds, or combination tax and revenue bonds
to pay the cost of the construction, acquisition, or improvement of the toll
bridge;
      3.   Impose tolls or charges as otherwise authorized by this ordinance
and set and revise such toll rates and charges herein by subsequent ordinance;
      4.   Procure and contract for all services, equipment, technology and
systems necessary and appropriate to facilitate the implementation, operations
and maintenance of the toll bridge;
      5.   Employ such personnel as it deems necessary and appropriate for the
implementation, management, operations and maintenance of the toll bridge;
      6.   Enter into agreements with a private entities to design, develop,
finance, construct, maintain, repair, operate, extend, or expand the existing
toll bridge.
   B.   The county may enter into an agreement with any local, state or federal
governmental entity to implement this Article through the cooperation,
including but not limited to shared funding and resources, of the parties to
the agreement.
   C.   The county may exercise the right to acquire by purchase or otherwise,
to construct, repair, maintain and operate the toll bridge and its approaches
across, above or under any railroad or public utility right-of-way, and in,
upon, under or above any public or private road, highway, street, alley or
public ground, waterway, or upon any property owned by any municipality,
political subdivision or agency of the state of Illinois, and for the purpose
of acquiring property or easements necessary or incidental in the construction,
repair, maintenance or operation of the toll bridge and the approaches thereto,
and the County may exercise the right of eminent domain as provided by the
Illinois Eminent Domain Act. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-39: TOLL COLLECTION SYSTEM:
   A.   The department shall determine the manner in which tolls may be
collected and may use whatever toll collection system, or combination thereof,
that it deems appropriate to assess and collect tolls and charges for the use
of a toll bridge.
   B.   A toll collection system(s) may be used to collect tolls, determine and
classify vehicle usage to support the management of customer toll accounts,
detect the non-payment of tolls, and to support violation enforcement and
adjudication.
   C.   Any electronic toll collection system selected by the department shall
be compatible with the electronic toll collection system used by the Illinois
State Toll Highway Authority. The county may enter into an intergovernmental
agreement with the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority to provide for such
compatibility or to provide electronic toll collection or toll violation
enforcement services. The county may enter into such other agreements that it
deems necessary or appropriate to facilitate interoperability for toll
collection on or for the utilization of the toll bridge. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-
2020)
17-40:    TOLL RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   The county board shall set and may revise the toll rates and charges
for the toll bridge.
   B.   Except as otherwise exempted pursuant to section:
17-44 , Toll Exemptions, the county will assess and collect a toll for the use
of the toll bridge.
   C.   Any toll rate or charges to be assessed by the county shall be set
forth in
Appendix A  to this ordinance, County Toll Bridge Rates and Charges. Upon
county board initial approval of, or any subsequent amendment to, the toll
rates or charges, the Appendix shall be published, attached and incorporated
herein. Any modifications to the toll rates or charges shall be made by
amendment of this ordinance.
   D.   Duly authorized toll and charges shall be published on the county
website and posted at and near the toll bridge.
   E.   If bonds are issued evidencing the debt incurred pursuant to the County
Toll Bridges Act for the toll bridge that are payable in whole or in part from
the revenue of the toll bridge, the county shall impose tolls and charges that
are, together with other money or revenues available for the toll bridge
sufficient to:
      1.    Pay the maintenance and operating expenses of the toll bridge
project;
      2.   Pay the principal of, premium of, if any, and interest on the bonds
when due;
      3.   Establish, as may be specified in the proceedings authorizing the
issuance of such bonds, a reserve for payment of bond principal, premium and
interest; and
      4.   Establish a fund the amount of which is adequate for toll bridge
project depreciation and replacement.
   F.   The county may establish different vehicle classifications based on
vehicle type, size, shape, weight, or any combination thereof.
   G.   The county may assess different toll rates based on vehicle
classifications; the method of payment of the toll, and/or frequency of use of
the toll bridge.
   H.   The county may assess charges related to the invoicing of individuals
who fail to timely pay a toll, for administrative costs related to toll account
management, the cost of collection thereof and for toll violation external
collection efforts as set forth in
Appendix A . (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-41:   REVENUES:
The county may not use revenue from the toll bridge in a manner not authorized
by this Article. Revenues generated from the toll bridge may not be applied for
a purpose or to pay a cost other than a cost or purpose that is reasonably
related to or anticipated to be for the benefit of the toll bridge. If bonds
are issued evidencing the debt incurred to pursuant to the County Toll Bridges
Act for the toll bridge are payable, in whole or in part, from the revenue of a
toll bridge project, the county shall not use such revenue in a manner not
authorized by the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. (Ord. 20-
52, 2-11-2020)
17-42:    TOLL PAYMENT REQUIRED:
   A.   The registered owner of any motor vehicle that is driven on the toll
bridge shall pay the applicable toll required to use the toll bridge, unless
otherwise exempted pursuant to Section:
17-44 , Toll Exemptions.
   B.   Toll payment shall be made at the time of use of the toll bridge
through the establishment of a pre-paid toll account, or within seven days of
using the toll bridge, or by the due date set forth in a toll invoice.
   C.   If a vehicle is not associated with a valid pre-paid toll account, the
toll shall be assessed utilizing the license plate of the vehicle using the
toll bridge (“license plate toll”) and the registered owner of the vehicle
shall thereafter have seven (7) days from the date of usage of the toll bridge
to pay the license plate toll amount online to avoid being assessed additional
charges associated with the issuance of a toll invoice.
   D.   If the license plate toll amount is not received within seven (7) days,
the registered owner of the vehicle with the unpaid toll(s) shall be
responsible for paying the license plate toll amount plus processing fees,
which shall constitute the toll invoice amount.
   E.   The county will send a toll invoice to the registered owner at the
address shown in the vehicle registration records of the Illinois Secretary of
State or similar departments of motor vehicles of any other state by first-
class mail. Toll invoices will be sent monthly and include as many of the
unpaid tolls that may have accrued prior to the monthly invoice date. If the
address to which the invoice was mailed is determined to be incorrect, upon
determination of the new address, the county may resend the invoice to the new
address of the registered owner.
   F.   The invoice may include one or more unpaid tolls. Each invoice shall
include (1) the date, time and location of the toll transaction; (2) a general
description of the nonpaying vehicle; (3) the date by which the toll(s) must be
paid; (4) how payment can be made; and (5) information regarding the
establishment of toll account. The invoice may, but is not required to, include
an image of the nonpaying vehicle.
   G.   Payment of the invoiced amount is due within 30 days after the invoice
issuance date.
   H.   The county may employ the services of a collection agency at any time,
including after a person’s failure to pay any civil penalty, to assist with
identifying individuals who fail to pay and collecting the tolls and charges
that are due. The person responsible for paying the tolls and charges may be
assessed additional fees of collection. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-43: TOLL ACCOUNT:
   A.   A pre-paid toll account is required to be eligible to pay the
electronic toll rate and to obtain any discounted toll offered by the county.
   B.   In order to establish a prepaid toll account, a person must complete an
account application providing the person’s name, address, vehicle description,
license plate state, number, plate type, method of payment, and such other
information that may be required to facilitate the collection and payment of
tolls and charges.
   C.   All accountholders must comply with the conditions for establishing and
maintaining a valid toll account. A valid toll account is one that has the
correct vehicle, license plate and contact information of the accountholder and
sufficient funds on hand to pay the toll at the time the vehicle is driven on
the toll bridge.
   D.   Toll account information shall be confidential and not subject to
release to any third party, except as required by the county to collect or
enforce payment of tolls and charges or as otherwise required by statute or
court order. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-44: TOLL EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   An entity that is the registered owner of an authorized emergency
vehicle, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1 105, is eligible for exemption from the
payment of toll bridge tolls. The county may also provide toll exemption to
special vehicles such as school buses or municipal-owned vehicles. To receive a
toll exemption the entity must establish a toll exempt account with the county.
   B.   An application to establish a toll exempt account must be completed by
an authorized representative of the entity claiming an exemption. The entity
must provide information required by the county to establish a toll-exempt
account, including, but not limited to, the names of the entity and point of
contact, entity address, an email address, phone number, and the vehicle(s)
registration information, description and license plate state, number(s) and
plate type.
   C.   In order to obtain the exemption, the registered owner of the vehicle
shall obtain a toll-exempt transponder and properly affix it to the exempted
vehicle. The toll exempt transponder is not transferrable and shall not be
moved or transferred from one vehicle to another without updating the
applicable exempt account information.
   D.   An entity that improperly transfers a transponder to another vehicle
without updating the applicable account information may lose its eligibility
for the toll exemption.
   E.   The county may assess an entity processing fees for providing and
distributing the toll-exempt transponder(s) and for account management. (Ord.
20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-45:    DISCOUNTS:
   A.    The county may establish one or more toll discount programs or offer
discounts to Class 1 passenger vehicle toll bridge users in consideration of
their usage of the toll bridge, method of payment or residency
   B.    Discount Toll Pass Subscription. The county may offer local resident
and non-resident discount toll pass subscriptions that allow unlimited 12-month
or 90-day usage of the toll bridge for a lump-sum price, as set forth in
Appendix A . The discount toll pass shall only be used as payment for the use
of the toll bridge.
      1.   To subscribe to a discount toll pass, the local resident or non-
resident must complete an    application to register the person’s eligible
Class 1 passenger vehicle and establish a pre-paid discount toll account with
the deposit of the full amount set for the particular discount toll pass
program. The discount toll pass will be issued to one specific eligible Class 1
passenger vehicle and is not transferrable. A person who transfers a discount
toll pass to another vehicle without first completing an application to
register the vehicle to which the discount toll pass is to be transferred shall
lose eligibility for the discount
      2.   To receive a local resident discount toll pass, the person must also
provide proof of residency within Kane County or the Village of Algonquin which
shall be established by presenting a current and valid Illinois driver’s
license and a current valid Illinois vehicle registration, along with one of
the following: utility bill, lease or rental agreement, or property tax bill
with some reasonably certain indication of the person’s residency.
      3.   The discount toll pass shall be available for a 90-day or 12-month
subscription. Full payment is due at the time of subscribing.
      4.   The discount toll pass charge is non-refundable and shall not be
subject to proration. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-46: NOTICE OF NONPAYMENT:
   A.   If the registered owner of the nonpaying vehicle fails to pay a license
plate tolls and charges included in the invoice mailed under section
17-42  by the date specified in the invoice, the county shall send a notice of
nonpayment by first class mail to the registered owner as described by
subsection
17-42 (E) Toll Payment.
   B.   The notice of nonpayment shall include (1) the date, time and location
of each unpaid toll transaction; (2) a general description of the nonpaying
vehicle; (3) the date by which the toll(s) and any charges must be paid; and
(4) how payment can be made. The notice may, but is not required to, include an
image of the nonpaying vehicle. The payment due date shall be not less than 30
days after the issuance date of the notice of nonpayment
   C.   The county may charge a late fee of not more than $50 for each notice
of nonpayment.
   D.   The registered owner of the nonpaying vehicle shall pay both the unpaid
tolls included in the invoice and any late fee(s), as set forth in
Appendix A , before the expiration of the notice due date.
   E.   The county shall send the notice of nonpayment to the registered owner
not later than 60 days after the expiration of the invoice due date. If due to
events outside of the county’s reasonable control, the county requires
additional time to issue the notice of nonpayment, the county may send the
notice not later than the 120 days after the expiration of the invoice due
date. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-47: TOLL VIOLATION; CIVIL PENALTY:
   A.   No person shall evade or attempt to evade the payment of tolls or other
charges for the use of the toll bridge.
   B.   The registered owner of a vehicle for which the toll bridge toll was
not paid who is mailed a notice of nonpayment under section
17-46  and fails to pay the toll and charges within the time specified by the
notice of nonpayment commits a toll violation. The toll violator will be
assessed a toll violation penalty as listed in
Appendix A  for each notice of nonpayment that is unpaid in whole or in part.
   C.   The county shall mail a notice of the alleged toll violation by first
class U.S. mail to the registered owner of the vehicle. The notice of toll
violation shall include the amount owed and the payment due date, which shall
be no less than 30 days after the date of issuance of the notice.
   D.   The notice of toll violation shall include a statement that the person
may contest the merits of the violation by requesting an administrative hearing
and adjudication of the toll violation prior to the payment due date, and shall
provide the manner in which a contest may be made, the options to have an
administrative hearing; the location for an in-person hearing, and the
consequence for failure to submit evidence/documentation or appear for the
administrative hearing.
   E.   A toll violation under this section imposed as the result of an
administrative adjudication shall result in a civil penalty not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-48: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING AND ADJUDICATION:
   A.   A person may contest the merits of the alleged toll violation and
request an administrative hearing and adjudication of the toll violation within
30 days of the notice of toll violation issuance date.
   B.   To contest a toll violation the person must submit a request for
administrative hearing within the time and manner specified in the notice of
toll violation. A request must be made in writing by mail to the address
specified in the notice of toll violation or through the toll bridge website,
or by contacting the customer service center by phone or in person.
      1.   If the person fails to timely request an administrative hearing, as
required under subsection
17-48 (C), the person shall be determined liable for the toll violation, unpaid
tolls, and any applicable unpaid administrative fees, collection fees and
penalties.
      2.   If the person timely requests an administrative hearing, the county
shall set a date and time for the hearing and provide written notice thereof to
the person.
   C.   The person may elect a hearing by mail or in person, or any other means
made available by the county.
      1.   Hearing by Mail. To obtain a hearing by mail, the person shall
submit with a request for hearing by mail all documents the person deems
appropriate to contest liability for the toll violation and the related unpaid
tolls, unpaid fees and penalties. The administrative judge shall consider the
information provided by both the alleged violator and the county regarding the
toll violation. The administrative judge shall make a determination of
liability and if determined liable for the toll violation the person shall be
required to pay the unpaid tolls, unpaid fees and penalty, assess the
appropriate penalty, as provided in
Appendix A . If the person fails to submit any supporting evidence (i.e.
documentation), the person shall be found liable for the toll violation and
required to pay the unpaid tolls, unpaid fees and penalty, as provided in
Appendix A .
      2.   Hearing in Person. To obtain a hearing in person, the person shall
submit a request there. The county shall provide the person written notice of
the date, time and location for the administrative hearing. If the person fails
to appear at the administrative hearing, the person shall be found liable for
the toll violation and required to pay the unpaid toll, unpaid fees and
penalty, as provided in
Appendix A .
      3.   Other Means for Hearings. The county may offer other reasonable
means by which an administrative hearing may be held. The county shall provide
notice of and specify the requirements for such alternative(s) in the notice of
toll violation. Any such alternative shall allow the contesting person an
opportunity to submit supporting documentation and receive a review by an
administrative judge.
   D.   If the person requesting an administrative hearing is a minor, that
person shall be permitted to appear at an administrative hearing or admit
responsibility for a toll violation without the necessity of the appointment of
a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against that person in the same
manner as if that person were an adult.
   E.   The administrative hearing shall be conducted before an impartial
administrative judge designated by the county to conduct the hearing. The
administrative judge shall have the demonstrated qualifications, training, and
objectivity necessary and consistent with the duties and responsibilities set
forth in this article. The administrative judge’s continued employment,
performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not be directly or
indirectly linked to the amount of fees or penalties collected by the
administrative judge.
   F.   The administrative judge shall determine liability for a toll violation
based on a preponderance of the evidence with proof of the following elements:
      1.   the vehicle was driven on the toll bridge;
      2.   notice was mailed to the address of the registered owner as
contained in the Illinois Secretary of State, or to an address contained in the
department of motor vehicles of any other state or other credible sources;
      3.   the amount included in the second notice of nonpayment was not paid
before the date specified in the notice; and
      4.   the alleged violator was the registered owner or the driver of the
vehicle when the unpaid toll was assessed. Such proof may be established by a
record from the Illinois Secretary of State, the department of motor vehicles
of any other state, or other credible source; or by affidavit or contract
document from the registered owner indicating that the vehicle was in the
possession of the alleged violator pursuant to a valid rental car agreement at
the time of the incurrence of the toll and the registered owner was not the
driver at the time that the unpaid toll was assessed.
   G.   Proof may be established by testimony of a peace officer or a county
employee, video surveillance records, records of the county toll bridge
customer service center or agent of the county responsible for processing toll
invoices, copies of notices of non-payment and violations, or any other
reasonable evidence, including a copy of the rental, lease, or other contract
document or the electronic data provided to the county. Nonpayment by the
registered owner of the vehicle also may be established by a copy of a written
agreement between the county and the registered owner for the payment of unpaid
tolls and administrative fees; and evidence that the registered owner is in
default under the agreement.
   H.   The administrative judge shall issue a final order of liability, if the
person responsible for paying a toll violation:
      1.   is found liable for the toll violation pursuant to Sections
17-47  and
17-48 ;
      2.   requests an administrative hearing and fails to appear or fails to
submit supporting documentation and fails to pay the fine;
      3.   fails to pay any or all of the amounts due by the toll violation due
date.
      Upon the issuance of the final order of liability, the liable person is
responsible for paying the civil penalty in addition to all of the unpaid tolls
and administrative fees.
   I.   The administrative judge may find a person not liable for
administrative fees and/or civil penalty. Notwithstanding the same, in all
cases, where the administrative judge finds that the alleged violator used the
toll bridge but did not pay, the administrative judge shall assess, at a
minimum, the applicable license plate toll(s) for the use of the toll bridge.
   J.   Judicial review of final determinations of ordinance violations are
subject to the provisions of the Administrative Hearing Law.
   K.   The county may enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the
Illinois State Toll Highway Authority under which the Authority may provide
administrative adjudication of toll violations occurring on a county toll
bridge.
   L.   Payment of toll amounts, administrative fees and civil penalties shall
be made as directed in the notice of nonpayment and notice of toll violation.
Such funds shall be promptly turned over to the county treasurer to be credited
to the toll bridge fund. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-49: DEFENSE TO NONPAYMENT; AND REASSIGNMENT:
   A.   It is a defense to nonpayment under this Article if the vehicle in
question was:
      1.   stolen at the time of the incurrence of the toll and was not
recovered by the time of the failure to pay;
      2.   sold and transferred to another individual at the time of the
incurrence of the toll, provided that the owner being held liable for the
unpaid toll provides proof of sale and transfer along with an affidavit that
includes the name and address of the person to whom the vehicle was sold and
date of the transfer of possession of the vehicle;
      3.   driven by a lessee of a car whose registered owner is a rental
company, as defined in 625 ILCS 27/10, at the time of the incurrence of the
toll, and the rental company timely provided proof acceptable to the county to
transfer liability to the lessee.
   B.   Liability for an unpaid toll or toll violations may be reassigned to
another person in the event of a vehicle sale or transfer or lease pursuant to
a valid rental agreement.
      1.   In the case of a vehicle sale, to reassign a toll violation the
person who received the toll invoice or notices must comply with section
17-49 A(2).
      2.   In the case of a vehicle lease, to reassign a toll violation the
rental car company must:
         a.   Be the registered owner of the vehicle.
         b.   Have included a provision in its rental agreement advising the
renter/lessee that the renter/lessee will be responsible for payment of tolls
and any charges related to the nonpayment of tolls and violations.
         c.   Have posted a sign at the rental/leasing counter notifying the
renter/lessee of the responsibility to pay tolls and any related charges. (Ord.
20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-50:    ENFORCEMENT:
The county may pursue any and all legal means available to it to enforce the
final order and collect sums due to the county, including but not limited to
the use of a collection agency, litigation, wage garnishments, bank liens or
tax liens, and the like to the extent allowed by law. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-51: PROMOTION OF TOLL BRIDGE:
The county board may promote the use of the toll bridge by appropriate means,
including advertising or marketing as the county determines appropriate. (Ord.
20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-52: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance is effective as of February 11, 2020. (Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
17-53: TOLL BRIDGE FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year for the toll bridge shall begin on December 1st of each year.
(Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
ARTICLE IV. PERMIT REGULATIONS AND ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17-60: Permit Regulations And Access Control Regulations
17-61: Fees
17-60: PERMIT REGULATIONS AND ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS:
The Permit Regulations and Access Control Regulations, a copy of which is on
file with the Kane County Clerk's Office, is hereby adopted by reference as if
fully laid out herein. (Ord. 25-093, 3-11-2025, eff. 4-1-2025)
17-61: FEES:
Permit Type Current    Proposed
            (1-1-2004) (4-1-2025)
Permit Type                 Current                 Proposed
                            (1-1-2004)              (4-1-2025)
Access
 Agricultural Access       $50                     $100
 Temporary Access          $450                    $750
 Minimum Use Access        $300                    $500
 Minor Access              $2,500                  $4,000
 Major Access              $4,500                  $7,500
Utility
 Emergency                 No fee                  No fee
 Minor Maintenance         No fee                  No fee
 Major Maintenance         $150                    $250
 Modification or New       $950                    $1,600
  Construction
Right-of-way Alteration     $450                    $750
Detour                      $450                    $750
Special Events              $50                     $100
Unincorporated Subdivision  No fee                  No fee
Roadway
Renewal or Extension of any $100                    $100
permit type
Multiple Permit             Highest permit fee plus Highest permit fee plus
                            $300                    $2500
 
(Ord. 25-093, 3-11-2025, eff. 4-1-2025)
Appendix A. County Toll Bridge Rates and Charges
   A.   Longmeadow Parkway Toll Bridge Vehicle Classifications. Effective:
 
Vehicle         Vehicle Type        Height                Length*
Classificatio n
Class 1         Passenger Vehicles  Less than or equal to Less than or equal to
                                    7 ft                  23 ft
                                    Less than or equal to Greater than 23 ft
Class 2         Small and Medium    7 ft
                Commercial Vehicles Greater than 7 ft but Any Length
                                    less than 10 ft
Class 3         Heavy Commercial    Greater than or equal Any Length
                Vehicles            to 10 ft
*Length dimension only used to determine annual discount plans eligibility
(Class 1 Passenger Vehicles Only)
   B.   Longmeadow Parkway Toll Bridge Toll Rates. Effective:
 
Toll Rate             Vehicle Type        Electronic Toll  License Plate Toll*
                      Class 1 Passenger
                      Vehicles with       Flat Rate for    $2.45
Tier 1 (Vehicles      Discount Toll Pass  Unlimited Travel
eligible for Discount Subscription
Toll Pass             Class 1 Passenger
Subscription)         Vehicles without    $0.95            $2.45
                      Discount Toll Pass
                      Subscription
Tier 2 (Vehicles not  Class 2 Small and
eligible for Discount Medium Commercial   $0.95            $2.45
Toll Pass             Vehicles
Subscription)         Class 3 Heavy       $7.00            $8.50
                      Commercial Vehicles
*Additional $1.50 fee added for a license plate toll
   C.   Longmeadow Parkway Toll Bridge Discount Programs. Effective:
 
Program Type            Toll Amount                Eligibility
                                                   (1) Must be a resident of
                        - 12-month pass            Kane County or the Village
                        subscription - $200        of Algonquin. (2) Proof of
Local Resident Discount - 90-day pass subscription residency required. (3)
Toll Pass Subscription  - $55                      Discount Toll account and
                        - Non-refundable,          transponder required. (4)
                        nontransferable; and not   Subscription must be pre-
                        subject to proration       paid in full. (5) Class 1
                                                   Passenger vehicles only.
                        - 12-month pass            (1) Discount Toll account
                        subscription - $300        and transponder required.
Non-Resident Discount   - 90-day pass subscription (2) Subscription must be
Toll Pass Subscription  - $80 - Non-refundable,    pre-paid in full. (3)
                        nontransferable; and not   Class 1 Passenger vehicles
                        subject to proration       only.
 
   D.   Longmeadow Parkway Toll Bridge Administrative Charges. Effective:
 
Charge Type                 Amount                    
Toll Invoice Processing Fee $5 per notice            Invoice may have more than
                                                     one unpaid toll
Notice of Nonpayment Late   $15 per notice           Notice may have more than
Fee                                                  one unpaid toll
Toll Violation Penalty      $25 per unpaid notice of Notice may have more than
                            nonpayment               one unpaid toll
Toll Violation Payment                               Incorporated into the
Agreement Administrative    $10.00                   agreement.
Fee
(Ord. 20-52, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 18
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
18-1 - 18-24: Reserved
18-25: Definitions
18-1 - 18-24: RESERVED:
(Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-25: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CURTAIN DRAIN: A subsurface drain installed at or above the moderately slowly
permeable subsoil with gravel to within maximum of twelve inches (12") of the
surface to intercept the movement of subsurface water from higher ground toward
the private sewage disposal system and discharging by means of a positive
outlet, to a lower area.
LIMITING LAYER: A horizon or condition in the soil profile or underlying strata
which includes:
   A.   A seasonal high water table, whether perched or regional, determined by
direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling where
common mottles comprise at least two percent (2%) to twenty percent (20%) of
the soil in a progressive downward direction in the soil.
   B.   Masses of loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient
fine soil to fill the voids between the fragments.
   C.   Rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of effluent.
MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is needed to keep the private sewage disposal
system operating properly, such as, but not limited to, the following: pumping
the tank, replacement of tank lid, replacement of septic tank baffles,
replacement of drop box lids, raising inspection ports to grade, adjusting
water elevation in drop boxes, replacing sewer line between tank and seepage
field, replacing pumps, replacing the line between the tank and the seepage
field, or the elimination of depressions over lines, or the installation of
water conservation devices.
REPAIR: Any change to a private sewage disposal system beyond maintenance, such
as replacing the septic tank(s) or removing and replacing any portion of the
septic field, and does require a permit.
RESTRICTIVE LAYER: See definition of Limiting Layer.
SOIL BORING: An observation pit, dug by hand or backhoe, or an undisturbed soil
core taken intact and undisturbed by a probe. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
ARTICLE II. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE
SECTION:
18-26: Adoption
18-27: Scope
18-28: Plat Approval
18-29: Interpretation
18-30: Compliance
18-31: Required
18-32: Occupancy
18-33: Discharges Of Sewage; Improper Operation Of Systems
18-34: Approved Private Sewage Disposal Systems
18-35: Alternative Systems
18-36: Variances
18-37: Soil Suitability
18-38: Soil Investigation
18-39: Requirements For Subsurface Seepage Systems Utilizing Fill
18-40: Aerobic Treatment Plants
18-41: Requirements For Septage Disposal
18-42: Registration And Licensure Of Private Sewage Disposal System
Installation Contractor And Pumping Contractor
18-43: Suspension Or Revocation Of Registration
18-44: Inspections
18-26: ADOPTION:
In addition to the other provisions stated herein, this chapter shall adopt, by
reference, and shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with provisions
set forth in the current, unabridged form of the licensing act, 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 225/1 et seq., and the "private sewage disposal code 1996",
77 Illinois administrative code 905, three (3) copies of which shall be on file
in the office of the county clerk. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-27: SCOPE:
The Illinois department of public health, private sewage disposal licensing
act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/1 et seq., and the "private sewage
disposal code 1996", 77 Illinois administrative code 905, shall apply except
for the following sections:
   A.   Section 905.30 approved private disposal systems.
   B.   Section 905.90 waste stabilization ponds.
   C.   Section 905.100 b aerobic treatment plants/class II effluent.
   D.   Section 905 appendix A illustration R exhibit A, B and C waste
stabilization pond. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-28: PLAT APPROVAL:
The county health department is required by 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/
2, to sign all plats within the county with respect to sewage disposal systems
if any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer system. In
order to accomplish this, county health department will review and evaluate all
plats by the criteria established in this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-29: INTERPRETATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for
the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. In any case where a
provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
zoning, building, safety, or health ordinance, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the promotion of the health and safety of the people
shall prevail. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-30: COMPLIANCE:
All private sewage disposal systems within the limits of Kane County shall be
constructed, installed, repaired, and maintained by an individual with a valid
private sewage disposal system installation contractor's registration; and all
such systems shall be pumped, cleaned, and the contents disposed of by
individuals with a valid private sewage disposal system pumping contractor's
registration. All private sewage systems shall be cleaned, pumped, or serviced,
and the contents disposed of in accordance with the provisions of sections 18-
41 and 18-42 of this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-31: REQUIRED:
All buildings or dwellings where people live, work, or assemble shall be
provided with an individual sewage treatment and disposal system, designed and
constructed to promote and safeguard the public health, or shall be connected
to a public sewer system. Each single-family residence and each unit in a
multi-family residence using an individual sewage treatment and disposal system
shall be provided with a separate individual sewage treatment and disposal
system. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-32: OCCUPANCY:
No person shall occupy or permit occupancy of any building, structure, or
dwelling not in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-33: DISCHARGES OF SEWAGE; IMPROPER OPERATION OF SYSTEMS:
Every private sewage disposal system shall be maintained in a proper sanitary
condition and in a proper state of repair by the owner. It shall be unlawful
for any person to permit or cause the discharge of improperly treated sewage
directly or indirectly to any lake, stream, ditch, ground surface or abandoned
well, or to allow the contents of any privy, vault, septic tank, or private
sewage disposal system or component thereof, to emit any offensive odor, or to
become objectionable so as to be dangerous or prejudicial to the health, safety
and welfare of the public. Upon verification of such unsanitary conditions, the
county health department shall give written notice to the owner and/or legal
occupant responsible for such acts or omissions, ordering abatement of same.
Failure of any person to obey such an abatement order shall constitute a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-34: APPROVED PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
The following systems are approved for private sewage disposal when designed,
constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the applicable
sections in this chapter:
   A.   Septic tank in addition to one of the following:
      1.   Subsurface seepage system.
      2.   Buried sand filter.
      3.   Recirculating sand filter.
   B.   Aquarobic raised filter bed as approved by the Illinois department of
public health (IDPH).
   C.   Aerobic treatment plants discharging to supplementary treatment as
provided in subsection A1, A2 or A3 of this section.
   D.   Alternative systems:
      1.   Privy.
      2.   Chemical toilets.
      3.   Incinerator toilets.
      4.   Compost toilets.
      5.   Recirculating toilets. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-35: ALTERNATIVE SYSTEMS:
When an application for a private sewage disposal system permit on an existing
platted lot or parcel of record with residential zoning has been denied due to
the limitations of the soil, or the lot or parcel is too small to install the
required minimum size disposal system and expansion area, an application may be
submitted to the county health department for an alternative system. All other
sections of this chapter shall be met. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-36: VARIANCES:
The county health department may grant a variance provided it does not conflict
with the stated purpose of this chapter. A variance may be requested by
submitting a written proposal to the county health department. Such written
request shall include pertinent data such as soil suitability, drainage
patterns, and distances to water supplies. The capability of the system to
comply with the intent of this chapter will be the basis for approval or denial
of the variance. The county health department shall respond to all variance
requests in writing within ten (10) working days. If the county health
department refuses to issue a variance, the property owner may file with the
county health department a written request for an appeal and hearing as
specified in section
18-48 of this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-37: SOIL SUITABILITY:
All subsurface seepage fields and seepage beds shall be designed with primary
consideration to soil type. The county health department or contractor may
request a percolation test to provide additional information where it is needed
to assist in determining extent of compaction of soil. Upon notification
percolation tests may be submitted by the installation contractor to the county
health department in lieu of soil evaluations for repairs. Information about
the location of the seasonal high water table must be included. The method that
provides for the largest seepage field or seepage bed will be required. The
soil type shall be determined by the indication of the soil property of three
(3) or more soil borings in the private sewage disposal system area and
designed as to that which most closely compares to the typical soil profile as
described in the soil survey. Subsurface seepage systems shall have at least
two feet (2') of vertical separation distance between the bottom of the
subsurface seepage system and the top of the limiting layer. For soils which
are moderately rapid or rapidly permeable, a vertical separation of three feet
(3') between the bottom of the subsurface seepage system and the top of the
limiting layer is required. When a limiting layer has been identified by a
mottling depth of twenty four inches (24") or less, a curtain drain may be used
to intercept the movement of subsurface water from higher ground toward the
private sewage disposal system provided soils with permeabilities of 0.6 inch/
hour or greater are present, in the area and surrounding area of the subsurface
seepage system from the ground surface to the depth where the curtain drain
tile is to be placed, and a proper drain outlet exists. Full credit for two
feet (2') of vertical separation from seasonal high water table will be given
when the curtain drain is installed in topography of minimum slope of one
percent (1%), two feet (2') lower than seepage field, and soil of a minimum
permeability of 0.6 to one inch (1") per hour. The curtain drain must have a
minimum separation of ten feet (10') from the nearest seepage trench. All
systems installed or repaired in areas designed as special flood hazard areas
must be so constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-38: SOIL INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Determination of soil characteristics on sites proposed for development
with private sewage disposal systems shall be based on the soil data collected
by a certified soil classifier recognized by the Illinois Soils Classifiers
Association or the American Registry Of Certified Professionals In Agronomy,
Crops, And Soils. United States department of agriculture (USDA) natural
resources conservation service soil classifiers may be available for periodic
quality control sessions conducted with all scientists available for the
performance of on site soil borings. USDA natural resources conservation
service soil scientist may be available to provide needed soils expertise to
the department and other county agencies in connection with the needs of this
chapter. Soil reports shall be provided in a form uniform with county needs and
requirements.
   B.   There shall be a minimum of three (3) soil borings per private sewage
disposal system site in the area where the private sewage disposal system is
intended to be installed. Additional soil borings may be required for accurate
and appropriate evaluation of a site where there is some concern about the
consistency of the soil materials.
   C.   Soil borings shall be dug to a minimum depth of five feet (5') with a
minimum width of two feet (2'), and one end of the pit shall be stepped or
sloped to permit adequate ingress and egress.
   D.   Soil borings shall be excavated at the perimeter of the expected
private sewage disposal system area to minimize damage to the natural soil
structure and potential disruptions of the soil distribution network that may
be caused by settling after installation of the system.
   E.   Soil borings shall not be made when frost depth is ten inches (10") or
greater.
   F.   Site characteristics to be described include zones of estimated
seasonal high ground water table, observed water table, depth to bedrock, frost
depth, USDA soil textural changes, USDA soil structural features of note,
consistence, location of fill soil, compaction and depth, soil coloration,
depth of mottling (depth to low chroma equal to or less than 2 and a value of 4
or more Munsell color chart), and estimated permeability at a depth twelve
inches (12") to thirty six inches (36"). A site location map showing the
location of the soil test sites shall be included with the soil report. The
subsurface seepage system should be sized using section
18-39, table I, "Soil Suitability Chart For On Site Sewage Disposal Design", of
this chapter.
   G.   The county health department reserves the right to review site soil
characteristics with assistance from a staff or USDA natural resources
conservation service soil scientist. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-39: REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBSURFACE SEEPAGE SYSTEMS UTILIZING FILL:
Subsurface seepage systems utilizing fill shall be designed with the following
criteria:
   A.   If fill is used on systems to maintain at least two feet (2')
separation between the bottom of the trench and the limiting layer, it may not
exceed eighteen inches (18") in depth. Fill soils may be used to cover a
private sewage disposal system provided no part of the system is located in the
fill and the material is at least equal to or better than the original soil or
meets the requirements in subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   Where less than twelve inches (12") of fill is to be placed over a
disposal field, the suitability of the fill materials shall be determined by a
soil classifier. Soils that are to be used for fill shall meet the following
criteria:
      1.   The fill shall conform to soils in design groups II, III, and IV as
identified in the private sewage disposal code 1996.
      2.   The fill shall be of a porous material that is not compacted or wet.
      3.   The fill shall be free of other nonsoil materials such as concrete,
brick or other extraneous material.
   C.   Where more than twelve inches (12") of fill is required, for previously
platted lots the suitability of the fill materials shall be determined by a
soil classifier.
      1.   The clay content shall be less than twenty five percent (25%).
      2.   Sand content shall be less than sixty five percent (65%).
      3.   Less than five percent (5%) of the content shall be greater than two
millimeter (2 mm) stones.
      4.   Organic matter shall be three percent (3%) or greater.
      5.   No clods greater than ten percent (10%) by volume or greater than
four inches (4") in size.
      6.   The fill shall be free of other nonsoil materials such as concrete,
brick or other extraneous material.
   D.   All of the following conditions shall be met for a private sewage
disposal system to be installed in fill:
      1.   Satisfactory original soil shall be at least four feet (4') above
bedrock.
      2.   A maximum of eighteen inches (18") of fill soil shall be used.
      3.   Fill shall not be placed on original soil with a slope greater than
ten percent (10%).
      4.   When adding fill to a depth of less than twelve inches (12"), the
fill may be added after the installation of the seepage field system. When fill
depth is from twelve (12) to eighteen inches (18"), the fill shall be placed
before installation of the seepage field.
      5.   The fill shall be placed at the site so that a minimum of compacting
occurs and the fill shall be allowed to settle undisturbed for a period of at
least twelve (12) months.
      6.   After the fill has been settled, a percolation test shall be
conducted.
   E.   Site preparation for use of fill soil:
      1.   Excess vegetation shall be cut and removed. The site shall be plowed
with a mold board plow seven (7) to eight inches (8") deep with the plowing
done parallel to the slope. Chisel plowing may be used in place of mold board.
Rototilling is prohibited.
      2.   Once the site is plowed, all vehicular traffic must be kept off the
site. The fill material can be deposited on the top with a long reach backhoe
or pushed on from the upslope side, using a track type tractor, keeping six
inches (6") of fill beneath the tracks. At no time shall ruts be made in the
plowed area. The fill shall be placed immediately after site preparation to
avoid the possibility of precipitation falling on the plowed area.
      3.   Traffic on the downslope side of the fill area shall be minimal to
reduce compaction. All work shall be performed from the ends and upslope side.
Compaction of the natural soil down slope will reduce the lateral movement of
the effluent.
      4.   The fill shall not be placed on frozen ground or when the soil is
wet. Moisture content of the soil is very important when filling. Site
preparation shall not take place when the soil is too wet and subject to
compaction. To check moisture content, take a soil sample from the plow layer
(7 to 8 inches) and roll it between the palms of the hands. If it rolls into a
ribbon, it is too wet to prepare. If it crumbles, site preparation can then
proceed.
   TABLE I
   SOIL SUITABILITY CHART FOR ON SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL DESIGN
Permeability         Minimum                                Commercial/
Range                Separation  Percolation   Residential  Industrial
(Estimated   In./Hr. To Limiting Rate          Required     Gallons
From Soil            Layer       (Minute/Inch) Ft.2/Bedroom Per Day/Ft.2
Boring)                                                     Application Rate
Permeability                                                      Commercial/
Range                      Minimum     Percolation   Residential  Industrial
(Estimated   In./Hr.       Separation  Rate          Required     Gallons
From Soil                  To Limiting (Minute/Inch) Ft.2/Bedroom Per Day/Ft.2
Boring)                    Layer                                  Application
                                                                  Rate
Very rapid      >20.0   n/a         <6            n/a          n/a
Rapid           6.0 - 203 feet            6 2002         1.0
Moderately      2.0 - 6.3 feet            1325024        0.84
rapid
Upper           1.0 - 2.2 feet            2535049        0.68
moderate
Lower           0.6 - 1.2 feet            5048059        0.52
moderate
Moderately      0.2 - 0.2 feet      n/a           740*         0.27
slow
Slow            <0.2    2 feet      n/a           1,000*       0.20
 
Note:
   *    Class I aerobic treatment plant required.
(Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-40: AEROBIC TREATMENT PLANTS:
   A.   New Construction: Aerobic treatment plants approved for new
construction shall not be designed for surface discharge for lots platted after
the effective date hereof.
   B.   Existing Building: Aerobic treatment plants designed to serve an
existing building or dwelling with a malfunctioning private sewage disposal
system may use an approved surface discharge method, provided conditions for a
subsurface seepage system cannot be met.
   C.   Service And Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   Service Policy: All aerobic treatment plants, regardless of the date
of installation, shall have in force, at all times, a service policy, for that
identified product, from the private sewage disposal installation contractor
through the manufacturer or the distributor or qualified homeowner to perform
the necessary service for as long as the unit is in operation. A qualified
homeowner is one who has received on site training on his aerobic treatment
plant by the dealer of that product. The dealer will submit documentation, to
the county health department, that the homeowner has been trained to service
their aerobic treatment plant.
This service policy shall provide:
         a.   For an inspection/service call, at least once every six (6)
months, which includes inspection, adjustment, and servicing of the mechanical
and electrical component parts to ensure proper function.
         b.   For an effluent quality inspection, at least once every six (6)
months, consisting of a visual check for color, turbidity, scum overflow, and
an examination for odors and a chemical test for chlorine residual.
         c.   For improper operation which cannot be corrected at the time, to
be reported to the owner immediately. This shall be followed with a written
report which includes the date for the condition to be corrected.
         d.   For a written report describing each inspection and/or service
call for each aerobic treatment plant available to the county health department
upon request provided by the servicing agency. Such report shall include date
of inspection/service call, and a description of the inspection/service
performed.
         e.   A telephone response shall be returned to the customer within
twenty four (24) hours after the customer calls for service.
         f.   A service call to the property to physically service the aeration
unit shall be made within forty eight (48) hours after the customer calls for
service.
      2.   Standby Parts: Standby mechanical and electrical component parts
shall be stocked by the local distributor for use when an aerobic treatment
plant's mechanical or electrical components must be removed from the site for
repairs.
      3.   Guarantee Against Defects: The mechanical and electrical component
parts shall be guaranteed against any defects in materials and workmanship as
warranted.
      4.   Alarms: A clearly visible, permanently attached label or plate
giving instructions for obtaining service shall be placed at the audible and
visible alarm.
      5.   Responsibility Of The Property Owner: Property owners of aerobic
treatment plants shall be required to obtain and maintain at all times a
continuing service policy as described in this subsection C.
      6.   Responsibility Of The Servicing Agent: A copy of all service
contracts shall be submitted to the county health department within thirty (30)
days of occupancy of the premises.
      7.   Responsibility Of The Manufacturer's Representative: The aerobic
treatment plant manufacturer's representative shall submit annual lists of all
existing aerobic treatment plants and indicate if a service contract is in
effect. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-41: REQUIREMENTS FOR SEPTAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Application To Agricultural Land: Septage may be applied to
agricultural land provided that a permit for such application has first been
approved by the county health department. Applications for permits to dispose
of septage on agricultural land shall be made on forms provided by the county
health department. All methods of disposal shall comply with the U.S.
environmental protection agency (USEPA) regulations 40 CFR part 503: "standards
for the use of disposal of sewage sludge", three (3) copies of which shall be
on file in the office of the county clerk. In addition, any application for a
permit shall meet the following criteria to be considered suitable as a septage
disposal site. Inspection and approval by the county health department shall be
conducted using the following criteria:
      1.   Any site being utilized as a septage disposal site shall be
inspected and approved by the county health department.
      2.   The depth to the seasonal high ground water table is at least four
feet (4') below the ground surface.
      3.   The depth to fractured limestone formations is at least six feet
(6') below grade.
      4.   It originates from private sewage disposal systems which treat only
domestic wastes.
      5.   It is not applied to land which has received more than one- fourth
inch (1/4") of rainfall during the twenty four (24) hour period preceding the
intended application time.
      6.   It is not applied to land with water ponded upon it, or is in a
floodplain or wetland.
      7.   It is not applied to land having greater than five percent (5%)
slope.
      8.   It is applied at a rate which does not exceed five thousand (5,000)
gallons of septage per acre per month.
      9.   It is not applied to land within two hundred feet (200') of a water
well, homes, or other water supplies, ponds, wetlands, streams, or within
twenty five feet (25') of property lines.
      10.   It shall be an area covered with vegetation to prevent erosion or
it shall be contour plowed.
      11.   If it is within municipal limits, written approval by corporate
authorities of the municipality is mandatory prior to issuance of a permit.
      12.   The soil type on the site shall have a permeability at least six-
tenths inches (0.6") per hour in the upper twelve inches (12") of the soil to
allow dewatering of the septage without ponding.
      13.   A soil thickness of at least two feet (2') without limiting layers
will be required.
      14.   The soil shall have a pH value ranging between 6.5 and 8.2.
      15.   Pasture or hay ground that has received septage shall not be
harvested for livestock grazing for a period of at least one month after
application.
   B.   Discharge To Municipal Sewer: Discharge to a municipal sewer shall be
only with permission of the sanitary district or municipality which operates or
governs said sewer. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-42: REGISTRATION AND LICENSURE OF PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR AND PUMPING CONTRACTOR:
   A.   Registration And Licensure Required: All private sewage disposal system
installation contractors and pumping contractors shall be registered in
accordance with this chapter, and licensed with the Illinois department of
public health.
   B.   Knowledge Of Laws: Persons who design private sewage disposal in
systems in Kane County shall be knowledgeable of all laws and rules and
regulations of both the state of Illinois and the county of Kane governing such
design, construction, installation, repair, modification and renovation.
   C.   Continuing Education: At least once per year, the private sewage
disposal installation contractor, and/or pumping contractor, shall attend a
workshop, conference and/or complete a course on private sewage treatment and
disposal approved by the county health department. Approved workshops and
conferences shall be reviewed annually by an advisory committee representing
the county health department and private sewage disposal installation and
pumping contractors. Attendance at this workshop, conference and/or course is
mandatory prior to requesting and obtaining a county private sewage disposal
system installation contractor/pumping contractor registration. This course
must contain information specific to their area of licensure. Documentation of
registration must be submitted. Failure to comply with this section will cause
a written notice to be mailed to such person advising that they will not be
registered by the county health department until such time as they have
attended a workshop, conference and/or completed a course in private sewage
treatment and disposal. Such course must first be approved as acceptable by the
county health department.
   D.   Compliance With County Standards: The county health department shall
issue a private sewage disposal system installation contractor/pumping
contractor registration to persons applying for such who comply with the
standards for private sewage disposal system installation contractors/pumping
contractors adopted by Kane County. All such registration shall run from April
1 to March 31 of the following year.
   E.   Issuance Of Registration:
      1.   Pumping Contractors: Registration for private sewage disposal system
pumping contractors or persons who pump portable toilets in the county shall
have a valid registration from the county health department and must comply
with the requirements of this chapter. All registration shall be issued
annually for the period April 1 to March 31 of the following year.
      2.   Installation Contractors: Every private sewage disposal system
installation contractor in the county shall have a valid private sewage
disposal system installation contractors registration from the county health
department and must comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 97-327,
11-12-1997)
18-43: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION:
A registration may be suspended or revoked by the county health department for
failure of the registrant to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
Whenever a registrant has failed to comply with any notice issued under this
chapter, the registrant shall be notified in writing that the registration is,
upon service of the notice, immediately suspended or revoked and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing
is filed with the county health department by the registrant within five (5)
days from receipt of the notice. Any person to whom such an order is issued
shall comply immediately therewith, but upon written petition to the county
health department, shall be afforded a hearing before the public health
committee within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request for a hearing.
(Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-44: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No private sewage disposal system shall be put into use until it has
been inspected and has written approval from the county health department.
   B.   The county health department is hereby authorized and directed to make
such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with
this chapter.
   C.   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the
county health department free access to the property at reasonable times for
the purpose of making such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
ARTICLE III. FEES AND PERMIT
SECTION:
18-45: Fees And Refunds
18-46: Application For A Permit
18-47: Plot Plan
18-48: Appeals
18-49: Sanitary Officer Relieved From Personal Responsibility
18-50: Violations
18-51: Term And Expiration
18-45: FEES AND REFUNDS:
Fees shall be charged according to the schedule as published in section
11.5-17 of this code with payment to be made upon submission of each request.
(Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997; Ord. 02-278, 9-10-2002; Ord. 03-194, 6-10-2003)
18-46: APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
install or repair a private sewage disposal system with Kane County unless that
person holds a valid permit issued by the county health department for the
specific construction, installation or repair.
   B.   New Construction: For the purpose of this chapter, new construction is
considered to be a new structure when twenty five percent (25%) or more of the
square footage of an existing structure is added, or when additional bedrooms
or sleeping rooms are added to an existing structure, or when an addition to an
existing structure will detrimentally infringe upon an existing or future
replacement septic system area.
   C.   Applications: Applications for permits shall be in writing on forms
provided by the county health department, and, prior to acceptance by the
county health department, shall be signed and dated by both the property owner
and the installation contractor, duly licensed under the provisions of this
chapter, who will do the construction, and shall include the following:
      1.   Sanitary Sewer: New or renovated private sewage disposal systems
shall not be approved where a public sanitary sewer is available for
connection. A public sewer is reasonably available for connection when it is
within two hundred feet (200') of the property unless a physical barrier or
local ordinance exists which prevents connection to the sewer.
The county health department shall refuse to grant a permit for the
construction or renovation of a private sewage disposal system where a public
sewer is reasonably available and accessible.
      2.   Soil Borings Log: The soil boring log of the on site soil boring(s)
shall be provided as required on forms provided. The exact locations of the
soil borings on the property shall be shown on the plot plan.
Percolation tests or soil identification tests shall be required for major
renovation to a private sewage system.
   D.   Removal Of Trees And Shrubs: All trees and shrubs that have invasive
root systems that are located within the private sewage disposal system
absorption field area should be removed prior to the issuance of the permit.
Removal shall occur only when ground conditions are such that the risk of soil
compaction is minimized.
   E.   Examination Of Plans: An examination of a private sewage disposal
system plan application shall be made within ten (10) days of receipt of said
application and plans, by or under the direction of the county health
department. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-47: PLOT PLAN:
   A.   The application for a permit to construct a new private sewage disposal
system shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of a plot plan seventeen inches
by twenty two inches (17" x 22") or, for a renovation, by four (4) copies of a
plot plan eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), and folded to
approximately nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12"). A copy of the on site
soil investigation report along with a copy of the county health department's
soil suitability interpretation sheet, if one was applied for, shall also be
submitted with the application form.
   B.   Plans shall be drawn to scale (1 inch equals 10 feet, 20 feet or 30
feet) and fully dimensional, and specifications necessary to fully describe the
private sewage disposal system as follows:
      1.   It is recommended that the person designing the private sewage
disposal system contact the subdivision developer or county development
department to review the final record drawing or the accepted engineering plans
for the subdivision to determine locations of required setbacks, drainage
design requirements, easements, floodplains, surface drainage systems,
detention/retention ponds, or other required engineering features.
      2.   The location, legal description, parcel number and fire number, if
available, of the property and a sketch of geographical location of the
property with all road names clearly indicated.
      3.   Location of lot boundaries and easements on the property and within
seventy five feet (75') of the private sewage disposal system.
      4.   Locations of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
driveways, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, patios, swimming pools, and other
improvements.
      5.   Locations of all water lines within fifty feet (50') of the private
sewage disposal system.
      6.   The locations of all existing and proposed wells on the property and
within seventy five feet (75') of the property. Isolation distances from the
well shall be kept within the lot where possible. The well location shall be
flagged and shall not be relocated without prior approval of the county health
department.
      7.   Two (2) clearly described and permanent bench marks which will be
maintained throughout the construction period and which shall be used to
determine the following specifications:
         a.   Existing and proposed finished grade topography at one foot (1')
contours over the entire lot regardless of the lot size, up to two (2) acres.
For any lot larger than two (2) acres the topographic study may be limited to
the two (2) acre area encompassing the building and seepage field area.
         b.   All elevations necessary to describe the sewage flow to and
through the private sewage disposal system.
         c.   Top of foundation (TOF).
      8.   Location of any lake, stream, pond, creek, river, drainage ditch,
retention area, floodplain, wetlands, easements of any other surface water
within one hundred feet (100'). The bottom of the seepage trench must be above
the water elevation of any stream or body of water. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-48: APPEALS:
   A.   If the county health department refuses to issue a permit for
construction or renovation of a private sewage disposal system, the property
owner may file with the county health department a written request for an
appeal and hearing.
   B.   An appeal may be taken before the public health committee of the county
board by any person aggrieved from any order, requirement, rule, decision or
determination made by the county health department. Such appeal shall be taken
within twenty (20) days of the date of the action from which it is taken by
filing with the county health department and with the public health committee a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds. The public health committee shall
thereupon set a reasonable date, time and place for a hearing of said appeal
and shall cause written notice thereof to be mailed to the appealing party, or
his or her attorney, and to the county health department.
   C.   The public health committee may revise or affirm wholly or partially,
or may modify the order, requirement, rule, decision or determination as in its
opinion should be implemented in the private sewage disposal system, and to
that end shall have all the powers vested in the county health department by
this chapter.
   D.   The public health committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings
hereunder, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-49: SANITARY OFFICER RELIEVED FROM PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY:
All county health department employees and officers charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not
thereby render themselves liable personally, and they are hereby relieved from
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of this official
duty. Any lawsuit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act
performed by him or her in the lawful discharge of his or her duty and under
the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal representative of
the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. Employees or
officers of the county health department shall not be liable for any costs in
any action, suit or proceedings that may be instituted in the pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter; any officer or employee of the county health
department, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from
liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any
act of omission in the performance of his or her official duty in connection
therewith. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-50: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who violates this chapter, or who violates any determination or
order of the county health department under this chapter shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation. All penalties shall be consistent with the private sewage
disposal licensing act and code, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 225/19. The
state's attorney or the attorney general shall bring such action in the name of
the people of the state of Illinois, or the county health department may, in
addition to other remedies provided in this chapter, bring action for an
injunction to restrain such violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such
establishment. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
18-51: TERM AND EXPIRATION:
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter is valid for a period of twelve (12)
months from date of issuance. If construction is not started within this
period, the permit is void. (Ord. 97-327, 11-12-1997)
CHAPTER 18.5
SOLICITING
SECTION:
18.5-1: General
18.5-2: Definitions
18.5-3: Posting Of Notice Regulating Soliciting
18.5-4: Duty To Comply With Notices And Requests To Leave Premises
18.5-5: Registration
18.5-1: GENERAL:
It is declared to be the policy of the Kane County board that the occupant or
occupants of the residences in unincorporated Kane County shall make the
determination of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their
respective residences and the Kane County board declares that only solicitors
having a valid certificate of registration shall be invited. The provisions of
this chapter do not apply to officers or employees of any city, county, or
federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business, nor
shall this chapter apply to volunteers seeking donations for not for profit
organizations. (Ord. 99-174, 6-8-1999)
18.5-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
OWNER OR OCCUPANT: Any person who is the lawful owner, resident, or the lawful
tenant of a residence.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities without prior consent
of the occupant:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, real property or personal property or services of any kind for any
consideration whatsoever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind, or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers, and every other type or kind of publication.
SOLICITOR: A person engaged in the act of soliciting. (Ord. 99-174, 6-8-1999)
18.5-3: POSTING OF NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by this
chapter shall comply with the following:
   A.   Notice of the determination by the occupants of refusal of invitation
to solicitors, to any residence shall be given by exhibiting or posting upon or
near the front entrance door to the residence a card, decal or sticker with a
minimum size of three inches by four inches (3" x 4") containing the following
language or language similar to the following:
         NO SOLICITORS
   B.   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor that solicitation of the occupants of the premises is prohibited.
(Ord. 99-174, 6-8-1999)
18.5-4: DUTY TO COMPLY WITH NOTICES AND REQUESTS TO LEAVE PREMISES:
   A.   It shall be the duty of every solicitor entering upon any residential
property to be observant for the presence of a "No Solicitors" sign. If such a
sign is present the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
residence.
   B.   Any solicitor who has gained entry onto any residential property shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by
the occupant.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any premises and ring
the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon or rap or
knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting contrary to the
notice exhibited. (Ord. 99-174, 6-8-1999)
18.5-5: REGISTRATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to engage in business
as a solicitor calling at residences for the purpose of soliciting orders,
sales, subscriptions, or business of any kind, without first having registered
with the Kane County clerk's office with a copy to be delivered by the
registrant to the Kane County sheriff's office. The registrant shall provide
his or her complete name, address and date of birth along with a recent picture
identification, his or her signature, the name of his or her employer, the
nature of his or her product or services in which he or she is interested, the
names of the manufacturers of such products or of the organization which he or
she is representing and the proposed method of operation. No person shall make
any false statement upon an application for a certificate of registration.
   B.   Each person shall, at all times while engaged in the business of
soliciting in Kane County carry upon his or her person the registration
certificate or a legible photocopy thereof issued pursuant to this chapter.
This certificate shall be exhibited by the registrant whenever he or she is
requested to do so by a sheriff's deputy or by any person being solicited.
   C.   Any registration pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the sheriff
of Kane County upon conviction of or plea of guilty to any violation by the
registrant of this chapter, or any other similar ordinance, or any state or
federal law for any offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
   D.   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a petty
offense for any person to engage in soliciting prior to eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. local time or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of any weekday, Monday
through Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
   E.   Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be fined an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) but not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense.
   F.   The Kane County sheriff and his duly sworn deputies are authorized and
directed to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 99-174, 6-8-1999)
CHAPTER 19
SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
19-1: Short Title
19-2: Purpose
19-3: Interpretation
19-4: Scope
19-5: Definitions
19-6: Variations And Exceptions
19-7: Appeals
19-8: Violations
19-9 - 19-20: Reserved
19-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF
KANE COUNTY, ILLINOIS. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the county.
   B.   To guide the future growth and development of the county in accordance
with the planning and historic preservation policies and generalized land use
plan of the county and in accordance with local plans and policies.
   C.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger; and to preserve the integrity, stability, and
natural beauty of the county.
   D.   To prevent the pollution of air and surface waters; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the county.
   E.   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land
and buildings and the safe circulation of traffic throughout the county, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion and hazards in the roadways,
and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of roads and
building lines.
   F.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the county and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
   G.   To guide public and private policy and action in facilitating adequate
provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation and other public requirements.
   H.   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout
of the land while preserving the density of land as established in the zoning
ordinance.
   I.   To protect natural areas and wildlife habitats and to maintain the
diversity of flora and fauna throughout the county.
   J.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions; to further the orderly layout and use of land
and to ensure proper legal description and monumenting of subdivided land.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-3: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and effectuation of the
purposes set forth herein. Nothing herein shall repeal, abrogate, annul or in
any way interfere with any provision of law, or any rules or regulations other
than subdivisions adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to subdivisions or
development of land. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or
requirements than one imposed or required by other provisions of laws, rules,
regulations, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall
control, but nothing herein shall interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between parties which
impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 12-268,
10-9-2012)
19-4: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to subdivisions of land made within the county
subsequent to April 9, 1991; provided, however, that this chapter shall apply
to subdivisions having, prior to April 9, 1991, preliminary but not final plat
approval, sixty (60) days from such date. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ACCESS CONTROL REGULATIONS: A document entitled "Kane County Division Of
Transportation Access Control Regulations For County Designated Freeways And
Design Standards For Access Driveways To County Highways And County Designated
Freeways", by the Kane County division of transportation.
ALLEY: A strip of land along the side of or in the rear of lots intended to
provide secondary access to and from roads and such lots, and shall not be
designed for general travel.
AN ASSESSMENT OF WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITATS OF KANE COUNTY, ILLINOIS: A
report by the Kane County development department, 1982.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application or required document for any
portion of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: As defined in the Kane County stormwater management
ordinance as amended.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by roads, or by a combination of roads and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, shorelines of waterways, or
corporate boundary lines of a municipality.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line, generally parallel with and measured from the
lot line, establishing the required distance between said lot line and the
permitted structure or building area.
COMMITTEE: For the purposes of this chapter shall be known as the Kane County
development committee.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The latest and most current land resource management plan
or other land use plan adopted by the Kane County board, including any part of
such plan separately adopted, any amendment to such plan and parts thereof, and
any binding plan agreements with other jurisdictions adopted by the Kane County
regional plan commission and the Kane County board. "Comprehensive plan" shall
also include the county's latest and most current Kane County transportation
plan adopted by the Kane County board and subsequent amendments or
restatements.
CONCEPT PLAN: A drawing and any accompanying information which shows existing
and proposed development conditions as described in this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE: Certificate of deposit or irrevocable letter of credit,
or surety bond or other good and sufficient security as approved by the
appropriate legal authority of the county to guarantee the proper installation
of land improvements.
COUNTY: The county of Kane unless the context indicates a reference to the
county board or appointed county official.
COUNTY ENGINEER: As defined in 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-201.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor road having one open end and being permanently terminated
by a vehicle turnaround.
DEPARTMENT: That office or department of county government having
responsibility for administering this chapter.
DEVELOPER: Any person:
   A.   Who, having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to
be divided into a subdivision; or
   B.   Who directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to
sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any
interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or
   C.   Who engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling,
leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision
or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; and who
   D.   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct, or indirect
common control with any of the foregoing.
DEVELOPMENT: The total improvement of land through building and development of
housing, commercial and recreational uses in a coordinated manner, including
the division, or redivision of any tract or parcel of land.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or other public or private entity, or certain
persons for a specific purpose or purposes.
ENGINEER, DESIGN: A professional engineer, registered and licensed as such in
the state of Illinois, responsible for the design of site improvement plans and
specifications for a project or subdivision.
ENGINEER, PROJECT: A professional engineer, registered and licensed as such in
the state of Illinois, responsible for assuring that the site improvements are
constructed and/or installed according to approved plans and specifications and
according to good engineering practice.
FINAL PLAT: The map or plan or record of a subdivision and any accompanying
material, as described in this chapter.
FRONTAGE: That side of a lot abutting on a road or road right of way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot.
IEPA: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: An individual system for the treatment and
disposal of domestic sewage by means of a septic tank, soil absorption system,
or any other approved sewage treatment system as described and allowed for in
chapter 18, "Private Sewage Disposal", of this code.
LAND EVALUATION AND SITE ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (LESA): A system to determine the
quality of land for agricultural uses and to access sites for their
agricultural economic viability, by the Kane County development department and
Kane-DuPage soil and water conservation district in cooperation with the U.S.
department of agriculture soil conservation service, 1984, or most current
edition.
LAND IMPROVEMENTS: All required improvements including, but not limited to,
roads, road lighting, road signs, permanent monuments, grading and surface and
subsurface drainageways and facilities, retention and detention basins, soil
erosion control, community water distribution systems and water supply
facilities, community sewage systems, community sewage treatment plants and
sanitary sewers, fencing and required landscaping.
LOT: Any tract, plot, or any parcel of land created as part of a subdivision or
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or for building development.
NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply
with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for either passive or active recreational uses, and/or
for the preservation and conservation of natural resources and manmade uses or
buffers, including, but not limited to, wetlands, floodplains, roads, trails
and similar uses. Public open space is any such parcel or area owned or leased,
operated and maintained by a political jurisdiction. Private open space is any
such area or parcel under private ownership and management.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or a sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter.
OWNERSHIP, COMMON: Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated
association.
PLAT OFFICER: The officer designated by the Kane County board to administer the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with section 19-22 of this chapter.
PREAPPLICATION SKETCH: A graphic exhibit which shows basic resource features,
proposed land uses, roadway layout and general drainage features.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: The preliminary drawing or drawings, and all accompanying
information required in this chapter, indicating the proposed manner of layout
of the subdivision.
RECORD DRAWING: A drawing which provides a schematic verification that the
intent of the accepted civil engineering improvement plans have been met,
thereby substantiating that the health, safety and welfare aspects of the
engineering design have been adequately provided by the construction of the
project. Also, the drawing serves as a reference tool for future location and
maintenance operations related to the improvements.
RESUBDIVISION: The formal process of change to an approved or recorded
subdivision plat if such change affects any roadway layout on such plat or area
reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any other
right or restriction set forth on any recorded plat.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a road,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, cable,
communication transmission line, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or
other public utility, shade trees, or for another special use. The usage of the
term "right of way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right of
way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and
distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way and not included
within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights of way intended
for roads, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees,
or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to
public use by the maker of the plat on which such right of way is established.
ROAD CONSTRUCTION PERMIT: A permit issued by the Kane County division of
transportation that allows the developer to begin construction or installation
of road and related drainage improvements.
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS: The characteristics, uses, access, and control of road
transportation facilities as described in section 19-88 of this chapter.
SALE OR LEASE: Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessory
interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, intestate
succession, or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof,
whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or other written instruments.
SETBACK, BUILDING: The minimum distance required between any lot line and
building or structure on the lot and between a road right of way and the
nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot.
SOIL CLASSIFIER: A certified member of the Illinois Soil Classifiers
Association (ISCA) who, by reason of his special knowledge of the physical,
chemical and biological sciences applicable to soils; and of the methods and
principles of soil classification as acquired by soils education and soil
classification experience in the formation, morphology, description and mapping
of soils is qualified to practice soil classifying.
STORMWATER PERMIT: A permit issued by Kane County authorizing construction of
activities in accordance with the provisions established in the Kane County
stormwater management ordinance.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires a location on or in the
ground, or attached to something having a location on or in the ground,
including advertising signs and billboards and supports and frames thereof.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parts, any
of which part is less than five (5) acres exclusive of all right of way, for
the purpose of transfer of ownership or possession, or building development; or
if an easement of access or a new road is involved, any division of land. The
term includes any division of land that attempts to avoid the requirements of
this chapter. Where appropriate to the content, the term shall relate to the
process of subdivision, or to the land subdivided, and shall include
resubdivisions. Subdivision platting is not required and the provisions of this
chapter, unless otherwise stated below, shall not apply in any of the following
instances:
   A.   A division of land which may be ordered or approved by a court or
affected by testamentary or intestate provisions;
   B.   A division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of
five (5) acres or more and not involving any new streets or easements of
access;
   C.   Conveyances of land for use as rights of way for highway, railroad or
other public utilities not involving any new roads or easements of access;
   D.   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
property if additional lots are not thereby created, and the lots resulting are
not reduced below the minimum size required by this chapter or other applicable
ordinances;
   E.   A division of land into lots or parcels of five (5) acres or more
provided:
        1.    All lots have a minimum width and frontage of not less than two
hundred fifty feet (250') on a public road right of way.
        2.    The dedication of school and park sites or payment of fees in
lieu thereof is made in accordance with article V of this chapter.
   F.   The sale is of a single lot of less than five (5) acres from a larger
tract, the dimensions and configurations of said larger tract having been
determined by the dimensions and configuration of said larger tract on October
1, 1973, and no sale prior to this sale, of any lot or lots from said larger
tract having taken place since October 1, 1973, and a survey of said single lot
having been made by a registered land surveyor.
Variations and exceptions to the above may be granted in accordance with
section 19-6 of this chapter. However, no such variations of exceptions may be
granted in violation of the plat act 1 .
SUBDIVISION, COUNTRY: Any subdivision not classified as an urban subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any subdivision containing not more than four (4) lots that
does not:
   A.   Involve the construction of any new public road or extension of
municipal facilities.
   B.   Adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property.
   C.   Conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan,
zoning ordinance and these subdivision regulations.
SUBDIVISION ROADS CONSTRUCTION PERMIT: A permit issued by the Kane County
division of transportation which allows the developer to begin construction of
roadway and related drainage improvements.
SUBDIVISION, URBAN: Any subdivision containing multi-family dwelling units; or
any subdivision within one thousand feet (1,000') of an existing sanitary sewer
or water main; or any subdivision requiring or proposing to rely on either
public or private sanitary sewer and water facilities.
WETLANDS: As defined by the United States army corps of engineers in the "1987
Corps Of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual", technical report Y-87-1, U.S.
army corps of engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi
(the "1987 manual"), or other federally recognized methodology.
WILD PLANTS AND NATURAL AREAS OF KANE COUNTY: A catalog of Kane County plants
by Dick Young, Kane County forest preserve district, third edition, 2007. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
19-6: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Variations and exceptions shall be granted in accordance with the following:
   A.   Where the plat officer finds that extraordinary hardships or particular
difficulties may result from the strict compliance with this chapter, he may,
after written application by the owner, recommend in writing to the county
board's development committee, "committee", variations or exceptions to the
regulations subject to specified conditions, so that substantial justice may be
done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variations or
exceptions shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
this chapter or the comprehensive plan.
   B.   The plat officer shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the
regulations of this chapter unless he shall make findings based upon the
evidence presented to him in each specific case, that:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographic conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship
to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of regulations was carried out.
      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are
unique to the property for which the variation is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property, and have not been created by any
person having an interest in the property.
      3.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in
the neighborhood in which the property is located.
   C.   In approving variances, the committee may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or
requirements of these regulations and achieve the realization of the goals of
the generalized land use plan. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-7: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved, or any review officer, department or commission of the
county, may appeal to the committee to review any requirement, action or
inaction involving the interpretation or implementation of these regulations.
Such appeal may be taken by filing with the plat officer a letter of appeal,
specifying the reasons thereof. Such letter shall be filed with the plat
officer no less than ten (10) days prior to the committee meeting at which the
appeal is to be heard. After hearing the appeal, the committee may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify any decision or requirement as in its
opinion ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the plat
officer. The committee shall take its action at its next scheduled meeting
following the filing of the appeal, unless such time is extended by mutual
consent of all parties. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-8: VIOLATIONS:
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of any officer of the county that any
of the provisions of this chapter has been violated, he shall either file a
complaint against the person or parties offending, and the state's attorney is
authorized to prosecute the same to final judgment, or in the alternative may
seek administrative adjudication as set forth in chapter 2, article IX of this
code or any other remedy at law or in equity. All such remedies shall be
cumulative. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-9 - 19-20: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND FEES
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
19-21: Committees And Departments
19-22: Plat Officer
19-23: Fees
19-24 - 19-30: Reserved
Division 2. Application Procedure And Approval Process
19-31: Generally
19-32: Preapplication Conference
19-33: Concept Plan
19-34: Preliminary Plan
19-35: Improvement Plans; Installation And Acceptance Of Required Improvements
19-36: Final Plat
19-37: Outside Consultants
19-38: Indemnity
19-39: Additional Rights Of The County
19-40: Forms
19-41: Notices
19-42 - 19-50: Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
19-21: COMMITTEES AND DEPARTMENTS:
   A.   The Kane County development committee, "committee", shall also be
designated as the plat committee. The committee shall exercise the authority
and have the responsibilities provided by this chapter.
   B.   The department is delegated specific duties, responsibilities and
activities by the committee relating to the subdivision and platting process
and this chapter. The department shall submit such reports and recommendations
to the committee on all maps, plats and subdivisions required by this chapter
or requested by the committee.
   C.   A duty and responsibility of the Kane County division of transportation
is to review all subdivision plats and proposed improvement plans and make
determinations in the area of design standards and engineering specifications
for road and related drainage construction as stipulated herein. (Ord. 12-268,
10-9-2012)
19-22: PLAT OFFICER:
There is hereby created the office of plat officer who shall exercise the
authority and have the responsibilities provided in this chapter. The county
board shall designate the plat officer. In the event of an absence of the plat
officer, the chairman of the county board shall appoint an official of the
department to serve as acting plat officer. The plat officer shall administer
the provisions of this chapter and in addition thereto and in furtherance of
said authority, he shall:
   A.   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including
amendments thereto;
   B.   Receive and file all concept plans, preliminary plans, improvement
plans and other submittals as required by this chapter and encourage and may
require where reasonable the use of digital media for required submittals;
   C.   Forward copies of all concept plans and preliminary plans to other
appropriate agencies for their recommendation and report;
   D.   Receive and file all final plats, and check their compliance with the
preliminary plan and this chapter;
   E.   Make all other determinations required of him by this chapter;
   F.   In the event that subdivisions which, by their locations, cannot be
efficiently served by public utilities, fire protection, roadways or other
community services; or which are located in areas subject to flooding or are
topographically unsuitable for development; or which for any other reason, are
being unwisely or prematurely subdivided, then it shall be the duty of the plat
officer to discourage the subdividing of such lands or those that are far in
advance of the needs of the development of the county. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-23: FEES:
Fees are hereby established as listed below to cover the costs of services
provided by the county of Kane. The fees herein established for each stage
shall be paid prior to proceeding to the next stage and prior to any review or
action taken by the plat officer or his designees. All fees shall be deposited
by the plat officer into the general fund of the county.
Stage Fee
Stage                                 Fee
Pre-application conference            $0.00
Concept Plan (per submittal)          $750.00
Preliminary Plan (2 or fewer lots)    $500.00
Preliminary Plan (per lot, 3-10 lots) $400.00
Preliminary Plan (per lot, >10 lots)  $300.00
Improvement Plan (per lot), 3-10 lots $350.00
Improvement Plan (per lot), >10 lots  $250.00
Final Plat 1-2 lots                   $750.00
Final Plat (per lot) 3-10 lots        $400.00
Final Plat (per lot) > 10 lots        $300.00
Variations and Exceptions             $750.00
Validity and Adjustments - minor      $750.00
Validity and Adjustments - major      $2,500.00
Other Vacation / Consolidation., etc. $750.00
 
Note:
    1.    Where lots have multiple dwelling units an additional fee of $100.00
per unit shall be required and paid during the final plat stage.
If during the review process it is determined that additional staff time is
required due to the depth and extensiveness, or revisions or resubmittals of
the proposed development the plat officer at his discretion may require
additional fees to cover county of Kane costs. Any subdivision previously
approved but not recorded prior to the adoption of the 2012 subdivision
regulations shall pay the required seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per
lot fee. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012; amd. Ord. 4-122-2022)
19-24 - 19-30: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
19-31: GENERALLY:
All subdivision plats, except for those classified by the plat officer as minor
subdivisions, shall be processed in five (5) stages leading to approval for
recording. The five (5) stages are:
   A.   Preapplication conference;
   B.   The concept plan;
   C.   The preliminary plan;
   D.   The improvement plans; and
   E.   The final plat.
The final plat and required submittals shall be reviewed by the plat officer
for conformance with these regulations. Developments proposed as minor
subdivisions shall be reviewed by the plat officer and technical staff at a
preapplication conference. Minor subdivision classification by the plat officer
shall permit the development to combine the concept/preliminary plan and
improvement plan stage. Upon approval of the minor subdivision plan by the
committee, the owner/applicant shall submit a final plat as provided in section
19-36 of this chapter, subject to submittal of information concerning existing
and proposed conditions as determined by the plat officer. If the final plat is
found to be satisfactory, it shall be signed by the plat officer. When the
final plat has been found not to conform, notice of the reasons for
nonconformity shall be given the applicant by the plat officer within fifteen
(15) days of filing for remedial action. The applicant shall have sixty (60)
days thereafter to address the defects with the final plat or to appeal the
determination of the plat officer to the committee for a final administrative
determination.
Prior to beginning the subdivision process, the applicant is encouraged to
secure from the department a subdivision review information packet. (Ord. 12-
268, 10-9-2012)
19-32: PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE:
Prior to filing a concept plan, the applicant shall meet with the plat officer
unless the preapplication conference has been waived by the plat officer. This
step does not require formal application, fee payment or filing of plans.
At the conference the applicant shall present a sketch plan and review with the
plat officer the following issues as they relate to the proposed subdivision:
   A.   General plan and development policies of the county;
   B.   Existing zoning and land use in the general area of the property in
question;
   C.   The county's procedures for subdivision of land;
   D.   Other pertinent factors. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-33: CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   Intent: The intent of the concept plan stage is to provide information
to help a prospective applicant appraise the feasibility of a subdivision
concept according to development plans and policies, existing and projected
development conditions and other development activities. The concept plan stage
encourages the discussion of basic problems and questions related to the
development proposal prior to the expenditure of funds for more detailed plans.
The concept plan stage also includes citizen opportunities in order to assist
the applicant and the county in defining the conditions under which permanent
changes in land use may occur with minimum intrusion on the natural and
economic resources of the county.
   B.   Filing: At least fourteen (14) days prior to the concept conference,
the applicant shall submit the following to the plat officer in the required
format including one digital copy:
      1.   Two (2) copies of the completed concept plan information form and
concept plan checklist.
      2.   A current aerial photograph at a scale of one inch equals four
hundred feet (1" = 400'), showing existing features within the proposed site's
area of influence within a mile and a half of the proposed site. The photograph
shall delineate and label school, park and fire protection district boundaries,
municipal boundaries and planning jurisdiction limits, property lines and sewer
and water lines.
      3.   Two (2) copies of a site analysis plan, one copy of which shall be a
colored rendering, drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch
which shall show the boundaries of the site and the existing natural and
manmade conditions and shall show the following:
         a.   Topography, with significant slopes designated;
         b.   Wooded and natural areas, vegetation and wildlife habitats;
         c.   Low areas subject to flooding, wetlands and bodies of water;
         d.   Drainage patterns with all high and low elevation sites
designated;
         e.   Existing interior and adjacent roadways, or other public ways,
access driveway, railroad and utility rights of way, parks or other public open
spaces within one hundred feet (100') adjacent to the proposed site;
         f.   Buildings, barns, bridges, historical, archaeological and
architectural sites;
         g.   Neighborhood land uses, political boundaries, known taxing
districts, municipal planning boundaries, present zoning and planned uses
according to local government plans;
         h.   Names of adjacent subdivisions and the owners of adjacent
subdivided and unsubdivided property as well as conditions of adjacent property
which may affect the proposed development.
      4.   Two (2) copies of a concept plan, one copy of which shall be a
colored rendering, drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch and
shall show the following:
         a.   Proposed Layouts: Proposed layout of roads, land uses and general
pedestrian circulation;
         b.   Proposed Dedication And Reservation: School sites, park sites,
open space and natural areas, preserved historic buildings or sites and
stormwater control facilities;
         c.   Existing Topography: Existing topography with reference to
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD);
         d.   Adjacent Subdivisions And Property: Names of adjacent
subdivisions and the owners of adjacent subdivided and unsubdivided property as
well as conditions of adjacent property which may affect the proposed
development.
      5.   Two (2) copies of a soils information plan, one copy of which shall
be a colored rendering, displaying soils with a severe limitation in red;
moderate limitation in yellow; and slight limitation in green, per table 13,
sanitary facilities - septic tank absorption fields category located within the
soil survey of Kane County, Illinois, USDA - natural resources conservation
service, drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch and
accompanying data showing the following:
         a.   Existing topography with reference to national geodetic vertical
datum (NGVD);
         b.   The boundaries of each soil type and identification of soil types
by their name and number according to the Kane County soil survey
classification system provided by the USDA - natural resources conservation
service;
         c.   A legend of each soil type listed according to their limitation
as set forth in the Kane County soil survey;
         d.   An initial determination of potential soil absorption, runoff,
flooding potentials, seasonal groundwater levels, the presence of unstable
soils (or soils which may constitute problems for conventional construction),
the presence of subsurface rock that would affect installation of underground
or aboveground improvements.
      6.   Identification and description information to be shown on plans
shall include:
         a.   Name Of Subdivision: A subdivision shall not be valid nor
entitled to record if the record name or part thereof said subdivision is the
same as, duplicates, closely approximates or is similar to or pronounced the
same as the name of any previously approved subdivision within the same
township, fire protection district or post office district. A subdivision name
or part thereof shall be considered as duplicating, closely approximating,
similar to or pronounced the same as the name of an existing subdivision name
if it contains a proper, historical, geographical, locational, mythological,
famous, fictitious or personal name, words, or combination thereof which is the
same as, similar to or pronounced the same as a word in the name of any other
previously approved subdivision within the same township, fire protection
district or post office district. The committee shall have final authority to
designate the name of the subdivision;
         b.   Date And Arrow: Date and north arrow;
         c.   Site Data Information Block: A site data information block which
shall include, but not limited to, the total number of acres, the acreage in
lots, acreage in rights of way, acreage in open space and the existing and
proposed zoning;
         d.   Location: Location by township, range, section and parcel number;
         e.   Map: A location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals
two thousand feet (1" = 2,000') showing the relationship of the subdivision to
its surroundings within one-half (1/2) mile including section lines, collector
and arterial roads;
         f.   Names And Addresses: Names, addresses, phone numbers and e-mail
addresses of applicant, developer and owner;
         g.   Site Planners, Designers, Etc.: Names, addresses, phone numbers
and e-mail addresses of the site planners, designer, engineer or surveyor who
prepared the subdivision layout.
      7.   A general statement of the proposed method of stabilization to
prevent soil erosion prior to and during construction.
      8.   Copy of the application for a land use opinion report filed by the
applicant with the Kane-DuPage soil and water conservation district.
      9.   Legal description of the land proposed to be subdivided.
      10.   Certification of ownership of the land proposed to be subdivided.
Where the applicant or developer does not own such land, written notarized
permission from the owner shall be provided authorizing the development of such
land under the provisions of this chapter.
      11.   A certified list of the names and addresses of all adjacent
property owners.
   C.   Concept Conference: After the plat officer examines the submittals in
order to determine their adequacy for presentation at a concept conference, the
applicant shall present the concept plan information form, aerial photograph,
site analysis plan, concept plan and soils information plan at a staff
conference in order to describe the existing conditions of the area and the
conceptual development thereof. The applicant may be requested to submit
additional data on existing conditions, the development concept, and the
expected impacts in order to provide information for adequate review.
Additional concept conferences (not to exceed 3 unless mutually agreed upon)
may be held to discuss basic questions prior to review by local agencies as
provided for in this section.
   D.   Concept Plan Distribution: Following the concept conference copies
(digital or paper) of the concept plan information form and the concept plan,
folded to approximately nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12"), and
incorporating any revisions made at the concept conference shall be submitted
to the plat officer for distribution by the county to the following, if
applicable:
County board member in district;
Kane County sheriff;
Township supervisor;
County engineer;
Township highway commissioner;
Municipalities having jurisdiction;
Kane-DuPage soil and water conservation district;
School district;
Kane County regional planning commission;
Park district;
Fire protection district;
Forest preserve district;
Sanitary/water reclamation districts;
Illinois department of natural resources;
All adjacent and adjoining property owners within two hundred fifty feet
(250');
Homeowners' association or known neighborhood association;
Any other person, agency or entity deemed appropriate by the plat officer.
With the exception of the regional planning commission, these agencies and
individuals shall be requested to forward any comments and recommendations to
the plat officer within forty five (45) days of receipt of the concept plan.
This time period may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the
agencies involved. The plat officer shall distribute any comments or
recommendations received from said agencies or individuals to the applicant,
the staff and the regional planning commission.
   E.   Staff Review: Forty five (45) days after the above mentioned agencies
and individuals have been sent the concept information, the concept plan shall
be reviewed by the staff at the next available staff meeting date. In reviewing
the subdivision concept, the staff shall review all comments and
recommendations made by the above mentioned agencies and individuals and may
meet with the applicant and/or local review agencies. The review process shall
include the following:
      1.   On site field investigations.
      2.   Analysis of the site in relation to the surrounding area.
      3.   Analysis of the existing conditions on and adjacent to the site.
      4.   Identification of potential problems of the proposed subdivision in
relation to existing conditions of the area, local government plans, policies
and ordinances and current planning and development activities.
      5.   Application of the land evaluation and site assessment system, if
applicable.
Staff comments and recommendations shall be prepared and forwarded to the
secretary of the regional planning commission for distribution to said
commission for its consideration.
   F.   Regional Planning Commission: When required, at its next scheduled
meeting following the receipt of the staff comments and recommendations, the
regional planning commission shall consider whether or not said plan is in
accordance with the county's plans and policies, local government plans and
policies, and all other applicable regulations and current planning and
development activities. Additional meetings for reviewing the subdivision
concept may be scheduled by mutual consent of the applicant and commission.
Generally, in conducting its review, the planning commission may consider how
the proposed development will:
      1.   Maintain or improve the quality of air, water and land resources;
      2.   Protect and enhance sensitive environmental areas from potentially
harmful uses;
      3.   Protect creek and floodplain areas for drainage and open space uses;
      4.   Strengthen the economic base and residential desirability of the
county's urban areas;
      5.   Coincide with the development plans of existing urban areas;
      6.   Provide for the timely location of development adjacent to existing
development and the availability of public facilities and services;
      7.   Impact upon traffic on the area's roads, neighboring agricultural
uses, landowners, open space and developing areas;
      8.   Assure safe pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
      9.   Protect significant architectural, historical or botanical features;
      10.   Coordinate development with other planning and development
activities in the immediate area;
      11.   Provide for improvements (such as roads, stormwater facilities,
septic installations) which will not be a burden to subsequent users of the
property.
The final comments and recommendations of the regional planning commission
shall be transmitted in writing by the commission's secretary to the plat
officer, the owner and the applicant within fifteen (15) days following their
determination.
   G.   Development Committee: Within thirty (30) days following the receipt of
the comments and recommendations of the staff and regional planning commission,
when required, the committee shall review the concept plan and may make
recommendations as to basic concepts of the plan, possible area impacts and the
general appropriateness of the plan. Comments and recommendations of local
review agencies, the regional planning commission and the committee shall
constitute neither approval nor disapproval of the proposed subdivision.
   H.   Plan Stage Purpose: The concept plan stage shall be only for the
purpose of providing applicants and review authorities with information which
will encourage development of land in accordance with publicly adopted plans,
goals and standards and in accordance with good planning principles. The
applicant is advised to use this information in determining whether or not to
proceed with alternative concept plans or expend funds for preparing more
detailed plans which are required at subsequent development review stages. When
submitting a revised concept plan a minimum of two (2) paper copies and one
digital version of the revised plan shall be submitted as determined by the
plat officer. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-34: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
   A.   Intent: The intent of the preliminary plan stage is to assure that the
subdivision is laid out in accordance with the land's suitability and
limitations for development. At this stage the applicant is required to provide
design information which will demonstrate how the subdivision will function
upon its development.
   B.   Filing: Within one year after presentation of the concept plan to the
committee, and not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the staff meeting, the
applicant shall submit the following information to the plat officer in the
required format including one digital copy:
      1.   Two (2) copies of the completed application and checklist forms for
preliminary plan approval.
      2.   Two (2) copies of a preliminary plan, one copy of which shall be a
colored rendering and, which shall include one or more drawings scaled at one
hundred feet (100') to the inch unless another scale is approved or required by
the plat officer, and shall show the following:
         a.   Arrow And Scale: North arrow, scale and date prepared;
         b.   Legal Description: Legal description of the land proposed to be
subdivided and a site data information block which shall include, but not
limited to, the total acreage of the site, the acreage in lots, the acreage in
rights of way, the acreage in open space and the proposed number of lots, the
minimum lot size and the maximum lot size in square feet and the average lot
size in square feet and the existing and proposed zoning;
         c.   Boundaries: Boundaries of the plat, as surveyed and certified by
an Illinois professional land surveyor;
         d.   Subdivision Name 1 : Name of the proposed subdivision;
         e.   Names Of Proposed Roads: Road names shall not be used which will
duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other road
or subdivision in the same township, fire protection district or post office
district. Roads that are extensions of, or in obvious alignment with, existing
roads shall bear the name of said existing roads. The name of the primary
collector road of a subdivision shall, if possible, be the same as or similar
to the name of said subdivision. A separate name shall be provided for each
segment of a road that changes direction forty five degrees (45°) or more (as
measured from the centerline of the right of way), except by approval of the
committee. The committee shall have final authority to designate the name of
the roads;
         f.   Names And Addresses: Names, addresses, phone numbers and e-mail
addresses of the owner, the applicant, the developer and the person(s)
preparing the plan;
         g.   Adjacent Subdivisions: Locations and names of adjacent
subdivisions and owners of adjoining parcels of land;
         h.   Location Map: A location map at a scale of not less than one inch
equals two thousand feet (1" = 2,000') showing the relationship of the
subdivision to its surroundings within one- half (1/2) mile including section
lines, collector and arterial roads;
         i.   Existing Conditions: Existing conditions on and within one
hundred feet (100') of the tract (unless a greater distance is required for
review):
            (1)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet (2') with reference to national geodetic vertical datum
(NGVD) at more frequent intervals if required by the plat officer for land with
unusual topography;
            (2)   Location, width and names of all existing platted roadways or
other public ways, access driveways, railroad and utility rights of way, parks
and other public open spaces, permanent buildings or structures and section and
municipal corporation lines;
            (3)   Location of all existing farm and storm drainage tiles which
shall be located by means of slit trenching and hand probing or electronic
radar tile location devices along with slit trenching and hand probing by
persons qualified to do such work. All existing drain tile lines encountered
during the investigation shall be repaired to their original condition. Four
(4) copies of a topographical boundary map locating these lines must be
submitted showing the following:
               (A)   Location of slit trench and each trench identified to
correspond with the tile investigation report;
               (B)   Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow
and tile size;
               (C)   A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench
identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of tile
filled with water, percentage of restricted siltation, depth of ground cover
and soil texture at grade;
               (D)   Name, address and phone number of person conducting title
location investigation;
            (4)   Existing zoning classifications and planned land uses
according to all official plans including the Kane County forest preserve
district or similar open space entity;
            (5)   The boundaries and limitations of each soil type. Refer to
appendix II for soil mapping and reporting requirements. Appendix II shall be
the method of obtaining soils data unless otherwise specified by the plat
officer;
            (6)   Watercourses including base flood elevations, natural and
manmade retention/detention areas;
            (7)   Wetlands, ponds and surface seeps;
            (8)   Sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts, wells, septic systems
or other underground facilities;
            (9)   Significant historical, architectural and archaeological
sites or structures;
            (10)   Scenic vistas, beaches, rock formations and outcropping;
            (11)   Wooded areas and isolated trees six inches (6") or more in
diameter at breast height.
         j.   Proposed Conditions:
            (1)   Proposed zoning;
            (2)   Alignment, width and typical cross sections of all roads and
rights of way, alleys, highways, easements, drainageways, sewer and water lines
and other public utilities;
            (3)   Lots, including layout, number, dimensions and area in square
feet;
            (4)   Setback lines, including front, rear and side building
setback lines and dimensions;
            (5)   Sites intended to be reserved for public use and/or for use
of property owners in the subdivision, including the purpose and conditions of
reservation or dedications;
            (6)   Proposed site grading plan including building pads; top of
foundation elevations, when required; proposed roadway grades and surface water
drainage patterns, including how drainage will be addressed prior to discharge
onto Kane County forest preserve district or similar open space entity
property;
            (7)   Proposed location of the on site sewage disposal systems and
expansion areas, areas to be filled, curtain drain locations and routing,
subsurface drainage systems for each lot and well, when required. Subsurface
drainage systems shall be constructed with access structures, and shall be
located in a drainage easement;
            (8)   Landscaping plan showing proposed plantings; location and
description of landscaped entryway signs, if applicable, including height,
size, setbacks and maintenance provisions; screening treatment on double
frontage lots; landscaping of stormwater detention facilities and areas
designated for restoration of disrupted site flora;
            (9)   Location of stormwater management facilities, including storm
sewers and stormwater storage facilities.
      3.   A copy of a USGS map with an outline of the watershed area in which
the subdivision is located.
      4.   Description of protective vegetative cover for soil erosion control
purposes and schedule for establishing said vegetative cover.
      5.   Species list of site flora and a description or plan of the method
proposed for reestablishing a vegetative system as diverse or of greater
diversity than the disrupted system.
      6.   Text of proposed protective covenants, deed restrictions,
homeowners' association agreements and contracts, easement provisions and other
documents whereby the owner and/or developer proposes to restrict improvements
on private lots in the subdivision, restrict the design, development and/or use
of the property and otherwise special areas within the proposed development.
      7.   Wetland delineation report.
      8.   Any other information that may be requested by the plat officer.
   C.   Official Filing: The applicant shall present the required information
at a staff meeting in order to describe the proposed development. The
preliminary plan shall be considered officially filed after it is found by the
plat officer to:
      1.   Be in substantial conformance with the concept plan which was
reviewed by the regional planning commission; and
      2.   Contain the information necessary for its proper review by staff,
applicable agencies and the committee.
   D.   Distribution: The applicant shall submit to the plat officer additional
copies of the application and preliminary plan in the required format including
one digital copy, folded to approximately nine inches by twelve inches (9" x
12"), for distribution by the county to the following (if applicable):
County board member in district;
Kane County sheriff;
Township supervisor;
County engineer;
Township highway commissioner;
Municipalities having jurisdiction;
Kane-DuPage soil and water conservation district;
Forest preserve district (if requested);
Kane County regional planning commission (if requested);
School district;
Park district;
Fire protection district;
Sanitary and water reclamation districts;
All adjacent and adjoining property owners within two hundred fifty feet
(250');
Homeowners' association or known neighborhood association;
Any other person, agency or entity deemed appropriate by the plat officer.
The applicant may be required to submit additional data to these local agencies
according to their review requirements. These agencies shall be requested to
forward any information, comments and recommendations to the plat officer
within forty five (45) days after distribution of the preliminary plan
information by the plat officer, or within forty five (45) days upon receipt of
the last item of information requested from the applicant, whichever date is
later. The time period may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
the agencies involved.
   E.   Review; Recommendation: All information, comments and recommendations
concerning the preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the plat officer and
staff. Within sixty (60) days after the information is forwarded to the local
agencies, or within sixty (60) days upon receipt of the last item of
information from the applicant, whichever date is later, the plat officer shall
recommend to the committee for its action, approval, approval with conditions,
or rejection of the preliminary plan.
   F.   Revised Plans: If during the review process changes are made to the
preliminary plan, which in the opinion of the plat officer, require the
submittal of a revised preliminary plan or other preliminary plan documents,
the applicant shall submit such revised information as required. When
submitting a revised preliminary plan, a minimum of ten (10) copies in the
required format including one digital copy, of the revised plan shall be
submitted.
   G.   Committee Approval: At its next regularly scheduled meeting following
the formulation of the recommendations by the plat officer and staff, the
committee shall approve, approve with conditions, or reject the preliminary
plan. Such time may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
committee. The applicant and owner shall be notified in writing of any
conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection. Approval by the committee
at this stage constitutes neither final approval of the subdivision nor the
acceptance of required improvements.
   H.   Final Approval: Approval of the preliminary plan by the committee shall
entitle the owner or developer to final approval of the layout shown on such
plat if the final plat:
      1.   Conforms substantially to the preliminary plat and improvement
plans;
      2.   Meets all conditions of approval;
      3.   Complies with all applicable county plans, ordinances and approved
variances or exemptions.
Validity of preliminary plan approval shall be for two (2) years from the date
of such approval. In the event the improvement plan has not been submitted
within the two (2) year period the preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the
plat officer and staff to determine continued conformity with county
ordinances, adopted policies and plans as may be revised. The plat officer
shall report the results of such review to the committee which may revoke or
extend the preliminary plan approval with such conditions as the committee
deems necessary. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 19-33B6a of this chapter.
19-35: IMPROVEMENT PLANS; INSTALLATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Intent: The improvement plan stage is for the purpose of accurately
showing how the improvements will be constructed in order to conform to the
layout and design objectives of the preliminary plan. As such, the improvement
plan process is an extension of the preliminary plan process. Where conditions
so warrant, the plat officer may require that portions of improvement plans be
submitted during the preliminary plan review process in order to determine the
land's suitability for the preliminary plan design. Any required off site
improvements and engineering studies shall be provided upon request. Where the
subdivision is to be developed in phases, and where soil and/or topographical
conditions so warrant, the plat officer may require that improvement plans for
the entire preliminary plan area be submitted prior to the construction of
improvements.
   B.   Filing: Prior to the submittal of the final plat, an applicant shall
submit in the required format including one digital copy a minimum of five (5)
complete sets of plans and specifications for the construction of the proposed
site improvements, before starting construction. Improvement plans shall not be
approved until after the site has been zoned according to the uses proposed in
the approved preliminary plan. Said plans shall be prepared by an Illinois
licensed professional engineer on twenty two inch by thirty four (22" x 34) or
twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") quality sheets and shall
contain at least the following information:
      1.   Title page, which shall include:
         a.   Subdivision name and unit number;
         b.   Location map;
         c.   Seals, signatures, addresses and phone numbers of the Illinois
licensed professional engineer who prepared the plan and the Illinois licensed
professional land surveyor who prepared the topography;
         d.   Owner and developer's name, address, phone number and e-mail
addresses;
         e.   Index of sheets;
         f.   A minimum of two (2) bench marks;
         g.   Dates and revision dates for each exhibit prepared;
         h.   Summary of quantities.
      2.   All topography shall be field verified and certified by an Illinois
licensed professional land surveyor or Illinois licensed professional engineer
to be in accordance with national map accuracy standards at one foot (1')
contour intervals and horizontal scale appropriate to the project, but not
smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
      3.   A copy of the topographic and profile study (drainage overlay) drawn
at the same scale and size as the final plat and containing the following
information:
         a.   All elevations shall be referenced to national geodetic vertical
datum;
         b.   Existing contours of at least one foot (1') intervals indicating
the locations and elevations of bench marks used to determine said contours;
         c.   Finished grade elevations or contours at one foot (1') intervals
of the proposed site;
         d.   Rim and invert elevations of all existing and proposed drainage
structures;
         e.   Size, slope and location of drainage channels and/or storm
sewers;
         f.   Size, shape, invert and location of downstream receiving drainage
structures including capacities of downstream channels;
         g.   Signature block required for topographic and profile study.
      4.   Layout of the proposed subdivision, at the same or larger scale as
the preliminary plan showing the following information:
         a.   Finished grade at one foot (1') contours;
         b.   Proposed road layout, including centerline elevations at one
hundred foot (100') intervals, rim and invert elevations of all drainage
structures, and drainageway flow line elevations;
         c.   Septic area designation, where required;
         d.   Building top of foundation elevations and building site pads,
where required;
         e.   Proposed easements for utilities, drainageways and facilities,
pedestrian and/or equestrian ways, landscape areas and other purposes; and the
floodplain boundary line at the base flood elevation;
         f.   Location and direction of the "overland flow path" as defined in
chapter 9 of this code and as derived from the drainage study;
         g.   The abandonment, incorporation or modification of all existing
drain field tile or storm sewers.
      5.   Stormwater drainage study, which shall be in accordance with chapter
9 of this code.
      6.   Erosion and sedimentation control plan, which shall be in accordance
with chapter 9 of this code.
      7.   Landscaping plan shall include trees to be preserved, screening
where required, the restoration of site flora and other areas to be stabilized
and enriched.
      8.   Road and drainage engineering plan and profiles which shall include:
         a.   Plan view of roadways, drainageways and structures; including
roadway horizontal curve data. Road entrances of adjacent subdivision shall be
shown;
         b.   Profiles of roadway centerlines, ditch flow lines including
location and elevations of all associated drainage structures. The grade line
profile shall be shown at a minimum scale of one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') horizontal and one inch equals ten feet (1" = 10') vertical.
Complete vertical curve data shall be shown.
      9.   Improvement detail sheet(s) shall be provided for, but not limited
to:
         a.   The Kane County typical road cross section;
         b.   Specifications, special provisions and general notes;
         c.   Drainage typical cross section;
         d.   Drainage structure details;
         e.   Erosion control devices;
         f.   Other details as required.
      10.   When required, plans for community waterworks system components,
consisting of supply, treatment, storage and/or distribution systems, and
community wastewater system components consisting of collection, transmission,
treatment and/or disposal systems shall be provided.
      11.   When required, plans for septic areas, top of foundation elevations
and building pad locations shall be provided. Such plans shall show the
location and size of septic fields and expansion areas, the type of fill
material to be used, method by which fill will be placed on site and leveled,
existing and finish grade contours, subsurface and curtain drain locations,
outfalls and elevations, and other information required by the plat officer.
Subsurface drainage systems for curtain drains shall be designed and
constructed with access structures and shall be located within a drainage
easement.
      12.   Where the approved preliminary plan is to be improved in phases,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the preliminary plan for the entire
subdivision with drainage easements delineated. The applicant shall show how
stormwater drainage will be controlled on the entire site during each phase of
construction. Temporary drainage improvements shall be clearly designated as
such on the improvement plans.
      13.   Construction and traffic control plan showing proposed routing of
construction traffic, signing, stockpile locations, refuse areas, the fencing
of rights of way and other areas where required in order to protect septic
fields, trees, flora and other site features during construction, and other
construction control measures. The traffic control plan shall be consistent
with the requirements of the current manual on uniform traffic control devices.
      14.   Completed application form and checklist.
      15.   Five (5) copies in the required format including one digital copy
of an itemized list of the engineers opinion of probable cost prepared in a
format specified by the county (refer to appendix VIII) and signed and sealed
by the design engineer on his letterhead stationery and approved by the plat
officer and the county engineer.
      16.   Five (5) copies in the required format including one digital copy
of the preliminary plan as approved by the county.
      17.   Five (5) copies in the required format including one digital copy
of the final plat.
      18.   Any other information that may be required by the plat officer.
   C.   Processing: The plat officer shall forward two (2) sets of the
improvement plans to the county engineer and one set to the department heads
who shall check them for conformity to the preliminary plan and the provisions
of this and other applicable ordinances. Within thirty (30) days after filing,
the appropriate officials shall notify the applicant as to the acceptability of
the improvement plans. Upon acceptability of the improvement plans and
conformance with the provisions of subsection E of this section, a
preconstruction meeting shall be scheduled.
   D.   Completion Of Land Improvements: Prior to the preconstruction meeting a
construction guarantee is posted in accordance with subsection G of this
section. Construction of all required improvements must be completed within two
(2) years from the date of final plat approval unless good cause can be shown
to the committee for granting an extension of time. A request for an extension
shall not halt the running of the two (2) year period. No extension shall be
granted unless adequate guarantee collateral has been received and approved by
the plat officer.
   E.   Preconstruction Meeting: Prior to beginning the installation of any
improvements, the developer, the project engineer and general contractor shall
attend a preconstruction meeting with county staff and the appropriate township
highway authority. The purpose of the meeting is to review acceptable site
development and construction practices in accordance with the construction
control plan and county ordinances and policies. At or following the
preconstruction meeting, a stormwater permit and subdivision road construction
permit shall be issued which enables the developer to begin construction of
land improvements.
   F.   Construction Observation Of Land Improvements: During the course of
construction, the project engineer shall provide construction observation of
the work in order to ensure compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and according to good engineering and construction practices. A
diary shall be kept and field reports as required shall be made and copied to
the plat officer and county engineer. Delegation to another engineer must be
acknowledged in writing by the plat officer and county engineer. The
construction obstruction of the work may also be done by the township highway
commissioner and the offices of the county engineer and the plat officer.
   G.   Guarantee For Completion Of Improvements: Prior to approval of the
final plat or prior to commencement of any development activity whichever shall
first occur, the owner or developer shall post and continuously maintain with
the plat officer a construction guarantee in the amount of one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the cost of the required improvements. The cost of each
improvement shall be itemized in a list prepared in a format specified by the
county (refer to appendix VIII) and signed and sealed by the design engineer on
his letterhead stationery and approved by the plat officer and the county
engineer. Such guarantee is to:
      1.   Assure the satisfactory installation of said improvements in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications and according to good
engineering and construction practices;
      2.   Assure the satisfactory completion of said improvements within the
prescribed time limits.
Such guarantee shall be in one of the following formats and the form, amount
and provider subject to approval by the plat officer:
         a.   Cash, certificate of deposit with or an escrow account at a
federally insured bank; or
         b.   An undertaking by owner and/or developer guaranteeing completion
of the land improvements remaining to be completed, as secured by an
irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond certifying that adequate funds are
and will be available at a sound and reputable banking or financial institution
authorized to do business in the state of Illinois. Such irrevocable letter of
credit or surety bond shall be in effect for a period of four (4) years from
the date of recording of the final plat, shall run in favor of the county and
shall indicate there are sufficient funds available for one hundred twenty
percent (120%) of the estimated cost of all the land improvements remaining to
be completed, and that such funds are held for such purposes only and for no
other purposes. Such undertaking and irrevocable letter of credit or surety
bond shall be in a form to allow the county to procure the funds to complete
the land improvements if construction of said improvements is not completed in
accordance with the provisions hereof, and shall otherwise be in a form
acceptable to the county.
         c.   Other good and sufficient security as approved by the appropriate
legal authority of the county to guarantee the proper installation of land
improvements.
   H.   Construction Guarantee Reduction: A construction guarantee shall be
reduced only by authorization of the plat officer upon:
      1.   Application for payout by the owner and/or developer in amounts of
such that funds remaining will always equal one hundred twenty percent (120%)
of the value of the uncompleted work, as determined by the plat officer after
consultation with the county engineer and other staff. No more than ninety
percent (90%) of the construction guarantee shall be released prior to one year
after the satisfactory completion of the required improvements; or
      2.   The unsatisfactory installation of the required improvements. Where
the required improvements have not been installed in accordance with subsection
G of this section, the county may then declare the construction guarantee to be
in default and may draw from the guarantee amount for use in matters related to
ensuring the satisfactory construction of said improvements, including attorney
fees and court costs encumbered in the enforcement of the provisions of this
section. In the event of failure to complete the required improvements in the
required period, or any extension thereof, or to maintain in force a
performance guarantee as stated above, the committee may direct that no further
building permits be issued to the owner and/or developer for property in such
subdivision until acceptance or acknowledgment of completion by the committee
of the required improvements.
   I.   Release Of Construction Guarantee: The plat officer shall not release a
construction guarantee prior to the satisfactory installation of all required
improvements, as determined:
      1.   One year after the completion of all improvements required for the
approved final plat;
      2.   After the submission of the project engineer's certification that
the project installation has been observed in the field and completed in
substantial compliance with the plans and specifications and with all
applicable ordinances;
      3.   After the submission of one reproducible print and five (5) copies
of record drawings, in the required format including one digital copy, two (2)
of which shall be forwarded to the county engineer. The drawings shall be
prepared by the project engineer who shall show and certify as to the actual
location of all improvements, and shall clearly designate any and all changes
from the approved plans and specifications. The record drawings shall make
reference to at least two (2) permanent bench mark monuments, and at least one
reference monument for each bench mark, all on NGVD datum. The bench mark shall
be newly established within the subdivision for the purposes of establishing
base flood elevations and/or building elevations and finished grades on
individual lots after the subdivision improvements have been completed. (Refer
to appendix XII for certificate and stamp to appear on plans.);
      4.   After notification from the county engineer as to the acceptance of
all road and related drainage improvements by the township highway
commissioner; and
      5.   After the acceptance of all improvements.
   J.   Maintenance: The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
improvements until the release of the construction guarantee. Where a
subdivision has been improved in phases, the applicant shall be responsible for
the proper functioning of drainage improvements for the entire subdivision
site. The applicant shall also be responsible for the following:
      1.   Snow Removal: The owner and/or developer shall be required to
provide for snow removal on all roads and sidewalks until the final acceptance
of said improvements.
      2.   Erosion Control: All exposed earth surfaces resulting from the
required improvements shall comply with the Kane County stormwater management
ordinance and be properly protected by riprap, sod or be seeded and mulched
with rapid growing grass or vegetation as soon as feasible to prevent erosion.
Erosion control structures shall be maintained until the exposed earth is
stabilized. At such time, the temporary structures shall be removed and the
area graded and stabilized prior to final acceptance.
      3.   Debris Removal: The owner and/or developer shall clean and maintain
or cause to be cleaned and maintained, all improvements until the final
acceptance of said improvements. The improvements shall be kept free from
debris, sediment deposits, trash and other extraneous material prior to
acceptance and at such other times during construction as the county may deem
necessary to prevent the creation of a public nuisance. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-
2012)
19-36: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Intent: The final plat is a record of the subdivision as surveyed in
the field. It shows shapes and dimensions of the tract being subdivided and the
parcels created thereby important to the public benefit to facilitate
relocation of roadway lines, easements, building setbacks, open space, etc.
   B.   Conditions To Be Satisfied: Upon satisfaction of the conditions of
preliminary plan approval, the acceptance of the improvement plans by the plat
officer and the county engineer, and the posting of a construction guarantee,
the owner or developer shall cause to be prepared a final plat of subdivision.
The final plat may constitute only a portion of the approved preliminary plan
if it is determined acceptable by the plat officer after consideration of the
effect on the efficient and orderly provision of roads, drainage facilities,
utilities and services.
   C.   Preparation Of Final Plat: The final plat shall be accurately and
legibly prepared by an Illinois licensed professional land surveyor, who shall
certify that he has surveyed, subdivided and platted the land shown and legally
described on such final plat. He shall further certify the number of acres
being subdivided, and whether or not the tract is within a special flood hazard
area designated by the federal emergency management agency, and whether or not
the tract is or is not within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate
limits of a municipality that has adopted an official plan. The final plat
shall be prepared in the following manner:
      1.   Drawn to a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100' = 1"), unless
a different scale is more practicable and is approved by the plat officer;
      2.   With waterproof, nonfading, black ink on mylar or other equal
material no more than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36") (24 inches
x 36 inches preferred);
      3.   When more than one sheet is used for any plat, each sheet shall be
numbered consecutively. A small scale drawing of the entire subdivision shall
be shown on the first sheet, identifying portions of the subdivision according
to its respective page number. Plats shall be drawn so as to be on a minimum
number of sheets.
   D.   Required Information: The final plat shall include the following
information:
      1.   Legal description of the land to be subdivided;
      2.   Positions of all lot corners, beginnings and ends of curves and all
angle points shall be marked in the field. The material of which all markers
are made shall be noted. The developer shall conform with the following
requirements concerning monuments:
         a.   All federal, state, county or official bench marks, monuments, or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the subdivision shall be preserved.
When a proposed improvement in a subdivision makes necessary the moving of
bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations, the authority having
jurisdiction shall be notified and given sufficient time to take appropriate
action;
         b.   Permanent monuments shall be set flush with the adjacent ground,
shall have a suitable mark in the center of the top, shall be set in such
manner that they will not be moved by frost; and shall be either:
            (1)   Iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter
and not less than twenty two inches (22") in length;
            (2)   Solid square or round iron bars, five-eighths inch (5/8")
thick and not less than twenty two inches (22") in length;
            (3)   Stone or reinforced concrete, not less than thirty inches
(30") long by four inches (4") square or five inches (5") in diameter.
         c.   Permanent monuments shall be erected at all corners or changes in
direction of the exterior boundary; at points of curvature or points of
tangency; at road intersections and block corners; at all lot corners and
angles in lot lines; and in all places and manner as otherwise prescribed by
law 1 .
      3.   The exact length and relative direction of all exterior boundary
lines, with reference to the boundary controlling system most prevalent in the
area of the land being subdivided. All distances shown on final plat shall be
expressed in one one- hundredth (1/100) of one foot (1') and angles and shall
be expressed in degrees, minutes, and seconds (if necessary). Sufficient
geometrical data shall be given for all lots to enable retracement and
restoration of all corner positions in the field. The plat officer may require
the surveyor to submit rectangular coordinates of all positions represented on
the final plat;
      4.   The exact width and extent of all easements, roads, alleys, and
building setbacks created by said subdivision;
      5.   The primary and expansion area on the on site waste disposal system
on each lot and building pad location, when required;
      6.   All lots consecutively numbered. In subdivisions that are improved
in units or phases, the lot numbering of the next unit or phase shall begin at
the next number where the previous unit or phase ended. In country
subdivisions, block designations may be omitted;
      7.   All portions of curvilinear roads shall be tangent to adjoining
elements of said roads unless so noted otherwise. Curve data shall consist of
at least two (2) of the following dimensions: radius, arc length, tangent
length, chord or central angles;
      8.   If the subdivision borders on a lake or stream, the distances and
directions of a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') back
from the average high water mark of the lake or stream, as determined from the
flood hazard maps or other data, with said distance noted;
      9.   The locations and widths of all existing and proposed roads shall be
indicated, showing the dedication of all rights of way required in accordance
with plans and specifications on file with the county engineer;
      10.   Names of proposed roads. Road names shall not be used which will
duplicate, or too closely approximately phonetically, the name of any other
road or subdivision in the same township, fire protection district and post
office district. Roads that are extensions of, or in obvious alignment with,
existing roads shall bear the name of said existing roads. The name of the
primary collector road of a subdivision shall, if possible, be the same as or
similar to the name of said subdivision. A separate name shall be provided for
each segment of a road that changes direction forty five degrees (45°) or more
(as measured from the centerline of the right of way), except by approval of
the committee. The committee shall have final authority to designate the name
of the roads;
      11.   Abutting highway and road right of way lines and adjacent
subdivisions shown in their proper location;
      12.   Grantees of all lands dedicated to public use shall be clearly
noted;
      13.   Where provisions are made for access from any subdivision to any
lake or stream, the plat shall show the area over which the access is provided
to the lake or stream, together with a small scale drawing clearly indicating
the location of the subdivision in relation to the lake or stream, and the
location of the area over which access is provided;
      14.   All covenants, or references to covenants, where declared
separately;
      15.   Certificates and easements as required;
      16.   Scale and north arrow;
      17.   Seal and signature of the Illinois licensed professional land
surveyor under whose direct supervision and control the subdivision survey was
prepared.
   E.   Filing: Within two (2) years after approval of the preliminary plan or
in the case of a PUD after adoption of PUD zoning by the county board, the
owner or developer shall submit seven (7) copies of the final plat in the
required format including one digital copy, to the plat officer. Where the
subdivision is to be improved in units or phases, the final plat for each phase
may be filed as provided in the preliminary plan at two (2) year intervals,
providing, however, that the final plats for the entire tract be filed within
six (6) years from the date of preliminary plan approval. Prior to the review
of the final plat, the owner or developer must have complied with the following
items:
      1.   Submit two (2) copies of the completed application and checklist
form for final plat approval (refer to appendix XIV);
      2.   The submittal and approval of the improvement plans;
      3.   The submittal and approval of cost estimates for all required
improvements;
      4.   The posting of a plat recording contract and a construction
guarantee (refer to appendix IX);
      5.   Payment of the land/cash ordinance contribution;
      6.   Payment of a review and approval fee as provided in section
19-23 of this chapter;
      7.   Rezoning to the appropriate classification, if necessary;
      8.   Topographic and profile study overlay with the name of the
subdivision clearly shown and drawn to a scale of one hundred feet to one inch
(100':1"), with waterproof, nonfading black ink on mylar or other equal
material no more than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36") (24 inches
x 36 inches preferred) including a properly signed certificate as required in
appendix V.
   F.   Final Plat Review: The plat officer shall forward the final plat to the
county engineer for his review. If found satisfactory, he will sign the plat
and return it to the plat officer. The plat officer shall review the final plat
in order to assure:
      1.   Conformance with the approved preliminary plan and improvement
plans;
      2.   Conformance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
applicable rules and regulations;
      3.   That all deed restrictions, protective covenants, homeowners'
association contracts and other agreements made by the owner or developer are
properly noted and described;
      4.   That there are no new development activities of traffic facilities
which materially effect a change of intent from the preliminary plan either
physically or practically.
If the final plat is found to be in substantial conformance with the approved
preliminary plan and all other applicable ordinances and regulations, the plat
officer shall sign the final plat. If the plat officer determines that the
proposed final plat does not conform to the above, notice of the reasons for
nonconformity shall be given the owner or developer by the plat officer within
fifteen (15) days of filing. If the owner or developer does not agree with the
determination of the plat officer, said owner or developer may submit written
appeal to the committee for a final administrative determination.
   G.   Recording: The owner or developer shall have the final plat recorded
with the county recorder of deeds within sixty (60) days after signature by the
plat officer, or approval shall be considered null and void.
   H.   Special Areas Within Development: After recording the final plat, the
approved text of protective covenants, deed restrictions, homeowners'
association agreements and contracts, easement provisions and any other
documents where the owner or developer proposes to restrict improvements on
private lots in the subdivision, restrict the design, development and/or use of
the property and otherwise protect special areas within the development, the
owner or developer shall submit a minimum of one copy of each of the above
recorded documents to the plat officer within fifteen (15) days of recording
said documents. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/1 § 1(a).
19-37: OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS:
During the plan review process and during installation and acceptance of the
required improvements, the plat officer may engage professional assistance
other than the staff, in order to properly review or observe the improvement
proposed by the developer. The developer shall be notified in writing that such
professional assistance will be engaged. Prior to such review or observation,
the developer may meet with the plat officer in order to discuss the activity.
In addition, the developer and the county shall enter into an agreement whereby
the developer shall reimburse the county for costs associated with such
professional review assistance. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-38: INDEMNITY:
The following language shall appear on all improvement plans:
   A.   Hold Harmless: The contractor, as a condition of the contract, hereby
agrees to assume the entire responsibility and liability for, and defense of,
and to pay and indemnify and hold the owner, the engineer, the county, their
engineers, agents and employees harmless from all claims for damages or injury
(or death resulting therefrom) to any and all persons, including employees or
agents or any person or firm engaged in work upon the project, arising out of
the conduct of the contractor, arising out of the performance of this agreement
or any work relevant thereto, or arising out of any federal, state or local
statute, rule, regulation or ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of the occupational safety and health standards act (OSHA).
   B.   Costs, Fees And Expenses: All costs, fees and expenses, including, by
way of example and without limitation, reasonable attorney fees, court costs,
court reporter fees, transcript costs, subpoena fees and costs, witness fees,
service costs, and document reproduction costs incurred by the county as a
result of any claims for damage or injury as enumerated above shall be paid by
the contractor.
   C.   Insurance: The contractor(s) shall name the county of Kane and
consultant doing construction observation for the county as additional named
insured on all liability insurance policies and shall provide the county with
certificates of insurance prior to commencement of any work. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
19-39: ADDITIONAL RIGHTS OF THE COUNTY:
In addition to any rights or remedies available to the county under this
chapter or other provision of law, the county shall be entitled to a lien on
any property subdivided pursuant to this chapter sufficient to reimburse the
county for all costs, expenses, advances, and reasonable attorney fees incurred
by reason of any failure of a developer and/or owner to install, complete or
maintain any improvements required by this chapter. Such lien shall attach only
to property owned or controlled by the owner/developer at the time of such
violation. Every final plat shall contain a legend which incorporates this
provision. Further, the building officer has the right to withhold the issuance
of a building permit on any lot or any such property unless the lien has been
discharged. Any such lien shall be promptly recorded by the plat officer and
sent to the most recent owner of record as ascertained by public records. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-40: FORMS:
All applications and submittals required or permitted pursuant to this chapter
shall utilize where practicable the forms set forth in the appendices to this
chapter. The department may from time to time revise or amend any forms and may
prescribe such additional forms as shall be necessary and convenient in the
administration of this chapter. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-41: NOTICES:
No action or recommendation pursuant to this chapter shall be invalid solely by
reason of an omission to give a notice provided for in these regulations. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-42 - 19-50: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
19-51: Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations
19-52: Municipal Jurisdiction
19-53: Plats Straddling Municipal Boundaries
19-54: Owner Imposed Restrictions
19-55: Character Of The Land
19-56: Minimum Standards And Specifications
19-57: Oversize Design
19-58: Off Site Improvements
19-59: Subdivision Classifications
19-60 - 19-65: Reserved
Division 2. Lots And Blocks
19-66: Lot Arrangement
19-67: Lot Lines And Dimensions
19-68: Lots Affected By Surface Waters
19-69: Lot Drainage
19-70: Lot Access And Double Frontage
19-71: Blocks
19-72: Easements And Land Dedications
19-73 - 19-83: Reserved
Division 3. Roads
19-84: Generally
19-85: Variations For Private Roads
19-86: Publicly Planned Roads
19-87: Alignment And Continuation
19-88: Roadway Classifications
19-89: Road Right Of Way Widths
19-90: Reserve Strips And Half Roads
19-91: Cul-De-Sac And "T" Turnarounds
19-92: Geometrics
19-93: Design And Construction Standards
19-94: Improvement Of Existing Adjacent Roads
19-95: Curb And Gutter
19-96: Road Lighting
19-97: Sidewalks And Pedestrianways
19-98: Other Roadway Improvements
19-99 - 19-110: Reserved
Division 4. Utilities
19-111: Wastewater Systems
19-112: Water Supply And Distribution
19-113: Drainage And Storm Sewer Facilities
19-114: Underground Wiring
19-115 - 19-125: Reserved
Division 5. Other Improvements
19-126: Fencing
19-127: Landscaping
19-128: Temporary Sales Facilities
19-129: Entryway Treatments
19-130: Bicycle And Equestrian Trails
19-131: Special Service Areas
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
19-51: CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The design of a subdivision shall conform to the generalized land use plan, the
planning and development policies, the zoning ordinance 1 , the requirements as
stated herein, all ordinances pertaining to the control of land development and
to all applicable rules, regulations, specifications, and standards of the
county and the state. No deviation from approved plans and specifications shall
be made without prior approval of the county. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-52: MUNICIPAL JURISDICTION:
In all cases where a subdivision lies within one and one-half (11/2) miles of
the corporate limits of an incorporated municipality, the subdivision shall
also conform to all applicable ordinances and plans of such municipality. In
all instances where a requirement of this chapter, or other applicable
ordinance of the county, is similar to, or in conflict with other provisions of
the ordinances of such municipality, the most restrictive shall apply and
prevail. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-53: PLATS STRADDLING MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES:
Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land within a municipality,
the committee may request assurance from the state's attorney that the access
is legally established. It may also request assurance from the county engineer
that the access road is adequately improved or that a construction guarantee
has been duly executed and is sufficient in the amount to assure the
construction of the access road. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-54: OWNER IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS:
If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance 1  or this
chapter, such restrictions or reference thereto may be required to be indicated
on the final plat, or the committee may require that restrictive covenants be
recorded with the county recorder in form to be approved by the state's
attorney. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-55: CHARACTER OF THE LAND:
The design of each subdivision shall take into consideration the preservation,
capabilities and limitation of topography, drainage, soils, vegetation and
other features and irreplaceable assets of the site. The use of lands unsuited
to development because of, but not limited to, flood, inundation and soil
characteristics shall not be approved unless the development of said lands
shall meet the requirements of the ordinances and regulations of the county.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-56: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All construction of improvements covered by this chapter shall be in accordance
with, and materials used shall be in compliance with, the methods and materials
required in the appropriate sections of the latest editions, amendments or
revisions of the following:
   A.   "Kane County Division Of Transportation Permit Regulations And Access
Control Regulations";
   B.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois
department of transportation;
   C.   "Supplemental specifications", "recurring special provisions", and
"interim special provisions", Illinois department of transportation;
   D.   "Bureau Of Design And Environment Manual", Illinois department of
transportation;
   E.   "Highway Standards", Illinois department of transportation;
   F.   "Culvert Manual", Illinois department of transportation;
   G.   "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", U.S. department of
transportation and Illinois department of transportation supplement;
   H.   "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois", Illinois Society Of Professional Engineers et al.;
   I.   "Illinois Design Standards For Sewage Works", IEPA, division of water
pollution control;
   J.   "Agency Rules For Public Water Supplies", IEPA, division of public
water supply;
   K.   "Recommended Standards For Water Works", Great Lakes Upper Mississippi
River board of state sanitary engineers ("10 States Standards");
   L.   "Illinois Urban Manual", latest version prepared by the Illinois urban
manual steering and technical committees, Association Of Illinois Soil And
Water Conservation Districts, Illinois environmental protection agency, and
USDA natural resources conservation service;
   M.   USDA natural resources conservation service "Field Engineering
Handbook";
   N.   Municipal standards and specifications as adopted.
Where standards are not specifically set forth, improvements shall comply with
standards established by resolution of the county board. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-
2012)
19-57: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
Where required in the overall utility planning, as evidenced by the master
plans for water distribution, sanitary sewers and stormwater management, any
subdivision improvement shall be larger than necessary to serve the immediate
subdivision adequately, an agreement may be made to repay the owner or
developer the construction cost resulting from the increased design. All
engineering, insurance and inspection costs shall be paid by the owner or
developer. This shall apply to, but not be limited to, collector sewers, lift
stations, disposal facilities, wells, pumping stations, water mains, storage
tanks, culverts, storm sewers, etc. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-58: OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
If it is determined that any existing infrastructure including, but not limited
to, water distribution systems, sanitary sewers or other wastewater treatment
facilities, storm sewers, subsurface drainage systems or other stormwater
management facilities, roads, and curbs and gutters, which may be situated
either in part or entirely off site, is inadequate to facilitate a proposed
subdivision when one hundred percent (100%) built out, then improvements to any
one or all of such facilities may be required. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-59: SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be two (2) classifications of
subdivisions: urban and country. The improvements which will be required will
be dependent on the type of subdivision as herein described. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
19-60 - 19-65: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. LOTS AND BLOCKS
19-66: LOT ARRANGEMENT 1 :
The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties, for reasons of topography, soils, flooding or other conditions,
in securing permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning
ordinance, chapter 18 of this code, and the sewage treatment and disposal
system rules and regulations. Subdivisions shall contain no leftover pieces,
corners, or remnants of lands. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-67: LOT LINES AND DIMENSIONS 1 :
   A.   All lots shall meet the minimum depth, width, and area requirements of
the applicable district in the zoning ordinance.
   B.   In single-family residence districts where lots are forty thousand
(40,000) square feet in area, or larger, individual water supply and septic
systems are permitted. Where a community water supply, but no community sewer
system, is available, the minimum lot area is thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet, and where community sewer, but no community water is available, the
minimum lot area is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Where both community
water supply and community sewer system is available, the minimum lot area is
ten thousand (10,000) square feet. In areas zoned multiple-family, business, or
other land uses which may require special water supply or sewage disposal, the
minimum lot areas must be sufficient to safely accommodate these special needs.
   C.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off road service and
parking facilities required by the applicable district of the zoning ordinance.
   D.   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of
two and one-half to one (21/2:1) shall normally be considered as a desirable
maximum for lot widths of one hundred feet (100') or more. Side lot lines shall
be substantially at right angles or radial to road lines. Lots at right angles
to each other should be avoided wherever possible.
   E.   Corner lot for residential use shall have ten feet (10') of extra width
to permit full building setbacks on both roads as required by applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
   F.   Lot widths shall be measured at the building setback line, and may be
reduced ten percent (10%) at the end of the cul-de-sac, providing the lot area
meets the requirements of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. See chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-68: LOTS AFFECTED BY SURFACE WATERS:
No more than ten percent (10%) of the minimum lot area as defined in section
19-67 of this chapter shall include land within a drainage easement along a
waterway, intermittent stream, or other water body, or a watercourse
constructed to accommodate observed, computed, or anticipated water drainage
through and from the lot. Provided, however, if any lot shall contain at least
forty thousand (40,000) square feet in buildable area exclusive of any drainage
easement, then this provision shall not apply. Where a watercourse separates
the buildable area of a lot from the road by which it has access, provisions
shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of design
approved by the county engineer. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-69: LOT DRAINAGE:
Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
building sites and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as
to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-70: LOT ACCESS AND DOUBLE FRONTAGE:
   A.   Every lot shall front or abut on a dedicated public road. Lots with an
access only to existing private drives or roads shall be permitted only in
unusual circumstances, with the approval of the committee. The fronting of
residential lots on major roads and county highways is not to be permitted.
   B.   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation and where limited access highway, railroad right of way, major
road, county highway, or similar situation exists, in which case double
frontage lots are to be preferred, provided suitable screen planting contained
in a no access reservation along the property line and right of way is
provided. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-71: BLOCKS:
The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the
locality and the type of development contemplated, but block length in
residential areas shall not exceed one thousand five hundred feet (1,500'), nor
have less than sufficient width to provide two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
depth between road lines, except for blocks with one tier of lots which meet
the double frontage requirements of section 19-70 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-
268, 10-9-2012)
19-72: EASEMENTS AND LAND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Utility Easements: Utility easements shall be provided at the rear of
all lots and along the side and front lot lines where required. On wooded
sites, utility easements shall be located so as to minimize environmental
damage. Utility easements shall be at least ten feet (10') wide, and normally
centered upon the rear or side lot lines. Evidence shall be furnished to the
plat officer that easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated on
the final plat or in the deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility
companies or organizations responsible for furnishing the services. The wording
of utility easements on the final plat shall be approved by the plat officer.
   B.   Drainage And Stormwater Management Facility Easements:
      1.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, or other body of water, appropriate dedications or
easements, with adequate width to accommodate observed, computed or anticipated
stormwater drainage through and from the subdivision, shall be made. The width
of the easement or dedication shall be dependent on the area of land drained by
the watercourse and shall allow access for construction and maintenance
equipment.
      2.   All permanent stormwater management facilities for a subdivision
shall be protected by easements or dedications for drainage and shall permit
ingress and egress for maintenance. All lot lines adjacent to unsubdivided
lands shall have a twenty foot (20') easement for drainage.
      3.   No construction of structures, dams, embankments or channels (except
as indicated on the improvement plans) and no planting of trees, shrubbery or
other vegetation, which hinder the flow of water or otherwise inhibit the
intended purposes, shall be allowed within any drainage or stormwater
management facility easement. In the event the area within such easements is
obstructed, reshaped, regraded or restricted for uses other than as intended or
as shown on the improvement plans, the county will cause to have any
alterations corrected at the expense of the party or parties causing said
obstruction, restriction, regrading or alteration.
      4.   Where possible drainage easements shall be separate and distinct
from utility easements.
      5.   Drainage and stormwater management facility easements shall be
adequately maintained so as to provide for removal of accumulation of
vegetation, silt, debris or other material which may interfere with the flow
characteristics of drainageways or the essential features of retention or
detention facilities. This long term maintenance shall be completed in
accordance with the Kane County stormwater management ordinance.
   C.   Landscaping And Conservation Easements:
      1.   Screen Planting Easement: A screen planting easement may be required
between residential and commercial or industrial lots, or along lot lines to
discourage the undesirable development of residential lots fronting on traffic
arteries. If such easement is to be used for public utilities, the easement
shall be of sufficient width to accommodate appropriate screen plantings
without interfering with utility service or maintenance.
      2.   Conservation Easement: A conservation easement shall be required to
protect unique areas such as wetlands, rivers, streams, creeks, and any other
unique areas. The designated easement area shall be protected from any land
disturbing activities such as the removal of vegetation, filling, grading and
excavating, and any other manmade activity that would reduce the quality of the
conservation area. The boundaries determined shall be by field investigation
and shall be delineated and identified as a conservation easement on the
preliminary plan and on the final plat. An additional fifty foot (50') buffer
zone may be required to allow a transitional zone between the area to be
protected and any land disturbing activity such as removal of vegetation,
filling, grading and excavating, and any other activity that would reduce the
quality of the conservation areas.
      3.   Restoration Of Site Flora Easement: Easements may be required to
protect areas designated for the restoration of site flora.
   D.   Temporary Turnaround Easements: Temporary turnaround easements shall be
reserved for road purposes until the extension of the road is publicly
dedicated. The temporary easement shall then be considered automatically
released for such use and purpose. The dimensions of such turnaround shall meet
the requirements for temporary "T" turnarounds as provided in division 3 of
this article.
   E.   Pedestrianway Easements: Easements or dedications shall be provided for
pedestrianways where deemed appropriate by the committee. Pedestrianway
easements shall be maintained to permit their continued use.
   F.   Land To Be Dedicated To A Governmental Body Or Open Space Organization:
The plat officer shall not execute or deliver any plat without satisfactory
provision for the dedications or conveyances of open space including, but not
limited to, an executed agreement for ownership and maintenance of such open
space. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-73 - 19-83: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. ROADS
19-84: GENERALLY:
All road and road right of way improvements shall be designed in substantial
relation to topographic conditions, drainage, public convenience, safety, and
the proposed uses of the land to be served by such roads. All road and road
right of way improvements shall conform to the applicable standards of the
Illinois department of transportation, the Kane County division of
transportation, and the local township highway commissioner. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
19-85: VARIATIONS FOR PRIVATE ROADS:
A public road shall be provided for convenient access to all property and lots
within a subdivision. Private roads and easements of access shall not be
permitted except when approved by the committee and after consultation with the
county engineer and the township highway commissioner. All private roads shall
be built to county approved specifications and standards with township highway
commissioner inspection approval provided during construction. (Ord. 12-268,
10-9-2012)
19-86: PUBLICLY PLANNED ROADS:
Roads shall be laid out in conformity to road or highway plans officially
adopted by the county board or the Illinois division of highways. If the
subdivision lies within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits
of a municipality, the roads shall also be in conformity with the road or
highway plan officially adopted by the corporate authority of that
municipality. Wherever such a planned road or highway runs through a proposed
subdivision, it shall be provided for in the place, and with the width
indicated, on said plan. However, no more than one hundred twenty foot (120')
right of way width dedication shall be required for any road. Any additional
right of way specified on said plan shall be reserved for circulation purposes
by easement provisions to be acquired at a later date by the public agency
involved. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-87: ALIGNMENT AND CONTINUATION:
Where roads are not a part of the official map or officially adopted road or
highway plans, the arrangement of the roads in a subdivision shall either
provide for the alignment and continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal roads in surrounding areas, or conform to an approved plan
for the neighborhood which meets a particular situation where topography or
other conditions make continuation of or conformance to existing roads
impracticable. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-88: ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS 1 :
All existing and planned roads shall be classified according to the following:
   A.   Major roads shall be those whose primary purpose is to carry high
volumes of traffic, with trip lengths generally over one mile. All marked state
and federal routes, and those county and township roads and other roads so
designated by the county board shall be considered major roads. These should
provide continuous service at moderate speeds through an urban area and
moderate to high speed travel in rural areas.
Freeways and expressways are major roads with fully or partially controlled
access, permitting moderate to high speed travel. Access or modifications of
access to county roads designated by the county board as freeways may be
permitted only by approval of the county board's transportation committee.
   B.   Collector roads shall be those whose purpose is to collect and
distribute medium to low traffic volumes between major and local roads.
Collector roads should be interneighborhood roads and particularly related to
serving specific traffic generating facilities such as schools, churches,
commercial or employment areas, and other areas of greater traffic generation.
All county highways and some township roads shall be considered collector
roads.
   C.   Local roads shall be those whose primary purpose is to provide access
to abutting property. They should be laid out so as to discourage use by
through traffic. All roads other than major and collectors shall be considered
local roads.
   D.   Frontage roads shall be special types of local roads running
approximately parallel and adjacent to the right of way of a railroad, limited
access road, or county, state, federal, or interstate route, so as to provide
access to abutting property only on the side of the road opposite said right of
way. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also I, section 17-3, "Freeways Designated", of this code.
19-89: ROAD RIGHT OF WAY WIDTHS:
Where not otherwise specified, road right of way widths shall be as follows:
   A.   Major roads shall have a minimum right of way width of one hundred
twenty feet (120');
   B.   Collector roads shall have a minimum right of way width of eighty feet
(80');
   C.   Local roads shall have a minimum right of way width of sixty six feet
(66'). (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-90: RESERVE STRIPS AND HALF ROADS:
Reserve or "spite" strips controlling access to roads shall not be permitted.
Half roads shall not be permitted, except to provide right of way for
officially adopted, planned roads. Whenever an existing half road is adjacent
to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the road shall be platted within
such tract to be subdivided or the existing half road shall be vacated prior to
final approval. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-91: CUL-DE-SAC AND "T" TURNAROUNDS:
   A.   Cul-De-Sac: A cul-de-sac designed to be permanent shall not be longer
than five hundred feet (500'), measured along the centerline from the road
right of way to the end of the cul-de- sac, and shall be provided with a
turnaround right of way not less than one hundred seventy feet (170') in
diameter, with a throat right of way radius of seventy feet (70'). The paved
circle shall be centered in the right of way and have a paved circle of one
hundred twenty feet (120') diameter and a throat pavement radius of fifty feet
(50'). Proposal of a cul-de-sac longer than five hundred feet (500') shall
require special review by the plat officer and county engineer. Options to not
pave the inner area to provide a "T" turnaround in lieu of a cul-de-sac are
subject to individual review and approval by the township highway commissioner
and county engineer.
   B.   "T" Turnarounds: A "T" turnaround shall be installed at all temporarily
ended roads. The final plat shall provide for a temporary easement to
accommodate the installation and use of said "T" turnaround until such time as
the road extension is completed and accepted by the appropriate highway
authority. At such time the temporary turnaround easement shall be released.
The additional right of way required for "T" turnarounds shall be forty feet
(40') in width measured perpendicular to the normal right of way, and shall be
fifty feet (50') in length measured parallel to the normal right of way. The
pavement for the "cross" of the "T" shall be at right angles to the road,
twenty feet (20') in width and paved for a distance of at least forty feet
(40') out on both sides of the road from the pavement edge. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-
2012)
19-92: GEOMETRICS:
The geometrics of all road improvements shall conform to the following unless
necessitated by exceptional topography or other conditions and approved by the
county engineer:
   A.   The grade of all roads shall not exceed six percent (6%). The grade of
all cul-de-sacs and "T" turnarounds termini shall not exceed two percent (2%).
A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. The minimum grade
shall be three-tenths (3/10) of one percent (1%) with ditches. Ditches shall
maintain a minimum grade of one percent (1%).
   B.   The minimum sight distance shall be in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Kane County access control regulations. The minimum centerline
radius shall be two hundred fifty feet (250').
   C.   The minimum vertical curve length required shall be calculated by
multiplying the algebraic difference in grades times the thirty (30) miles per
hour "K" factor, unless otherwise specified.
   D.   A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') in length shall be
introduced between reverse curves on local roads and at least three hundred
feet (300') on major and collector roads.
   E.   The intersection of local roads with major arterials and collector
roads shall be designed so that there is no jog in the centerline alignment.
The intersection of local roads within a subdivision shall also be designed
without a jog.
   F.   All road intersections shall be at right angles unless unusual
topographic or other sight conditions require a lesser angle. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
19-93: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Major and collector roads shall have pavement widths as established by
the county engineer.
   B.   Local roads shall have a minimum pavement width of thirty feet (30') as
per state of Illinois standard pavement class I-11, or equivalent, in urban
subdivisions. In country subdivisions, roads shall have as a minimum a twelve
inch (12") compacted gravel base, gradation CA-6, shall have a pavement width
of not less than twenty four feet (24'), as per state of Illinois standard
pavement class B, or equivalent. The pavement shall be a minimum of three
inches (3") in thickness with a two inch (2") binder course and a one inch (1")
surface course. A developer may exceed the minimum pavement standard subject to
approval by the individual township highway commissioner and the county
engineer.
   C.   In commercial and industrial areas and other areas where heavy traffic
is likely, roads shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24')
and shall meet a minimum pavement structural number of 3.0 for local roads. All
major and collector roads shall be as specified by the county engineer.
   D.   Cul-de-sacs shall meet all the requirements for a local road and, in
addition, shall provide a turnaround right of way one hundred seventy feet
(170') in diameter, of which one hundred twenty feet (120') in diameter shall
be paved. In country subdivisions, a "T" may be used, the "cross" of which
shall be at right angles to the road, twenty feet (20') in width and paved for
a distance of at least forty feet (40') out on both sides of the road from the
pavement edge.
   E.   The roads shall be graded to conform as near as practical to the
typical cross section approved by the county board and shall be approved by the
township highway commissioner or the county engineer before the gravel or
crushed stone base course can be applied. Drainage facilities shall be
completed prior to the installation of base course material.
   F.   The base course material shall conform to specifications as shown on
the typical cross section sheet and shall be deposited on the prepared subgrade
with an approved mechanical spreader or spreader box. The base course shall be
approved by the township highway commissioner or the county engineer before the
bituminous binder course is applied.
   G.   After spreading the material to required width, the base course shall
be rolled with a pneumatic tired roller to a compacted thickness after rolling
of not less than twelve inches (12").
   H.   A bituminous surface plant mix conforming to state specifications shall
then be constructed on the prepared surface.
   I.   Prior to the approval of the subgrade, road base and bituminous surface
by the township highway commissioner, the following shall be submitted to the
county engineer from a certified testing company:
      1.   A report showing satisfactory subgrade compaction;
      2.   A core report showing satisfactory thickness for the base course;
      3.   Material quantity tickets from the source showing the total amount
of base course material and bituminous surfacing placed on the road;
      4.   A core report for the bituminous surface showing the thickness and
quality. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-94: IMPROVEMENT OF EXISTING ADJACENT ROADS:
   A.   When land adjacent to an existing road is subdivided and the existing
road is not improved to a standard as high as that required for proposed
subdivision roads, the owner or developer shall be required to improve the
existing road if it is used for access to the proposed subdivision.
   B.   When warranted by a traffic study, or as determined by the Kane County
division of transportation, turning lanes (consisting of a taper and a full
width auxiliary lane) for either right or left turns into an abutting property
shall be provided at the developer's expense.
   C.   When it is determined that any other existing infrastructure is
inadequate then improvements to any one or all of such facilities shall be
required. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-95: CURB AND GUTTER:
Curb and gutter may be required along the outside edge of road pavements in
urban subdivisions and in country subdivisions where the degree of slope
exceeds seven percent (7%) and shall be as specified by the county engineer.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-96: ROAD LIGHTING:
Installation of road lights shall be required in accordance with design and
specification standards approved by the county engineer. Residential road
lighting facilities shall be provided in urban subdivisions at all road
intersections and at closer intervals if the subdivision density is three (3)
dwelling units per acre or more, and may be required at the entrance of country
subdivisions. Commercial and industrial road lighting facilities shall be of
the high intensity type, and shall be placed on alternative sides of the road.
The owner or developer shall arrange for and pay any installation costs
required by the public service company for the erection of the required road
lights. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-97: SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
Sidewalks shall be concrete material, and at least four inches (4") thick and
four feet (4') wide, with a four inch (4") aggregate base course. Sidewalks
shall be located one foot (1') off the property line and constructed in
accordance with the standard specifications. Pedestrianways may be located one
foot (1') off of the property line within the right of way or within a
pedestrianway easement adjacent to the right of way. The materials and surface
treatment of pedestrianways shall meet the approval of the county engineer and
the appropriate local authority. They shall be provided according to the
following:
   A.   Commercial And Industrial Property: Sidewalks are required on both
sides of all major and collector roads and those local roads leading to a park
or school. Sidewalks may also be required on one side of other local roads.
   B.   Urban Subdivisions: Sidewalks are required on both sides of all roads
in areas containing lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet and on one side
of all roads in areas containing lots of twenty thousand (20,000) to forty
thousand (40,000) square feet.
   C.   Country Subdivisions: Sidewalks or pedestrianways may be required in
subdivisions with lots of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or larger along
roads leading to parks or schools, in order to provide continuity between
systems of sidewalks already installed or provided for in adjacent
subdivisions, or when the committee finds that a pedestrian safety hazard
exists or will be created as a result of the development of the subdivision.
   D.   Middle Of Block: Pedestrianways or sidewalks may be required by the
plat officer through the center of blocks more than nine hundred feet (900')
long, where deemed essential to provide circulation of access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities.
Said pedestrianways or sidewalks shall be located within a right of way or
easement at least ten feet (10') in width. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-98: OTHER ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Road signs of the type approved by the township highway commissioner
shall be installed on the northeast corner of each intersection and shall
indicate the road names as shown on the final plat.
   B.   Guardrails shall be placed along the shoulder of any roadway as set
forth by the county engineer or the township highway commissioner.
   C.   All earth surfaces within the right of way disturbed by the
construction operations shall be graded, fertilized, seeded or sodded, and
mulched in accordance with the standard specifications subject to the approval
of the appropriate highway authority. Provision shall be made to assure the
growth of such landscaping. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-99 - 19-110: RESERVED:
DIVISION 4. UTILITIES
19-111: WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   All country and those urban subdivisions relying on individual on site
wastewater treatment and disposal systems (septic systems) shall comply with
the requirements of chapter 18 of this code and the Kane County individual
sewage treatment and disposal systems rules and regulations. Where applicable,
urban subdivisions relying on septic systems shall have private restrictions
filed with the final plat and incorporated in each deed which require that as
soon as public sewers are available, connections to the public sewers will be
made within one year at the owner's expense and that each lot owner shall bear
their fair, proportionate share of the cost of the public sewer as determined
by agreement, special assessment, or other means authorized to finance
construction of sewer systems.
   B.   In urban subdivisions not relying on septic systems, there shall be
provided a complete wastewater collection system, including a service
connection for each lot and a sewage treatment plant, land application
treatment system or such other disposal facilities. All municipal type sewerage
systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable state,
county and local plans, standards and regulations and in accordance with
accepted modern sanitary engineering practices.
   C.   No municipal type sewerage system shall be permitted in an area to be
serviced by the orderly extension of municipal sewerage facilities and no
community or individual sewerage system will be permitted which will interfere
with any municipal plans for the orderly extension of municipal sewerage
facilities.
   D.   Provision shall be made for the maintenance and operation of such
treatment plant or facility and shall be stated on the final plat and
covenants, if any, and incorporated in the deed of each lot if charges are to
be made to the property owners. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-112: WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION:
All community water supply systems shall provide all appurtenances and stubs to
each lot and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with plans and
standards for the state, county or municipality. In country subdivisions,
individual water supplies may be permitted providing they meet all applicable
state and county regulations. In urban subdivisions, individual water supplies
may be permitted. If a public water supply system is planned for the area, the
developer shall provide that private restrictions are filed with the final plat
and incorporated in each deed so that as soon as a public water supply system
is available, connections to the system will be made at the property owner's
expense within one year and that owners shall bear their fair, proportionate
share of the cost of the public water main as determined by agreement, special
assessment proceeding, or other means authorized by law to finance construction
of water systems. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-113: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWER FACILITIES:
There shall be provided a stormwater control system to serve adequately the
area being platted, considering, but not limited to, the following:
   A.   Chapter 9 of this code.
   B.   The design of the drainage system shall consider and show:
      1.   Watershed area of which the subdivision is a part;
      2.   Calculations as to volume and flow rates of water to be handled
after extreme rainstorms;
      3.   A schedule of culverts, field tiles, storm drains and stormwater
management facilities sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or uncontrolled
ponding of water either on site or off site;
      4.   The use of existing drainage channels whenever possible.
   C.   Ditches and swales shall meet the following standards:
      1.   With grades to four percent (4%), ditches shall be seeded and
covered with mulch or excelsior blanket. Ditches may be required to have sod
bottoms and banks and ditch checks may be required at critical points;
      2.   With grades from four (4) to eight percent (8%), ditches shall have
sod channels and ditch checks. Ditches may be required to be lined with rock or
paved with concrete gutters;
      3.   With grades greater than eight percent (8%), ditches shall be rock
lined or paved with concrete gutters;
      4.   Corrugated metal or equal culverts must be provided at all road
intersections, sized to eliminate flooding or ponding, but not less than
eighteen inches (18") in diameter, and with a minimum subgrade cover of six
inches (6"). Corrugated metal or equal culverts must be provided at all
driveway intersections, sized to eliminate flooding or ponding, but not less
than fifteen inches (15") in diameter, and with a minimum subgrade cover of six
inches (6"). The location, type and sizing of culverts is to be determined by
the county engineer or the township highway commissioner.
   D.   The following criteria shall be used in planning and designing the
groundwater drainage system. The underlying objective is to provide capacity
for groundwater or nuisance flows in a pipe or tile in order to keep yards and
ditches from becoming wet in dry weather.
      1.   Design Methodologies: Groundwater or nuisance flow systems shall be
designed by using the information found in the University Of Illinois
cooperative extension service circular #1226, Illinois drainage guide for
sizing of drain tiles. Drainage coefficients for subsurface drains of one-half
inch (1/2") per day or less shall be used when designing groundwater drainage
systems for wet or perched water table soils in order to not increase base
flows in receiving streams.
      2.   Groundwater Drainage Systems: All septic system curtain drains and
all sump pumps shall be connected to a new groundwater (also called nuisance or
subsurface) drainage system. The new groundwater drainage system shall be
routed around stormwater storage basins. The new groundwater drainage systems
shall not drain into old existing agricultural drain tiles. Rather, they shall
be connected to an existing or proposed wet pond, wetland or stream, or
extended off site to a stream. All new groundwater drainage system pipes, both
on site and off site, shall be placed within a minimum ten foot (10') wide
drainage easement. No footing tiles shall be connected by gravity to a
groundwater drainage system. Groundwater drainage systems shall be kept
separated, in general, from storm sewer systems to avoid hydraulic surcharging
of the groundwater drainage system. However, groundwater systems may drain into
storm sewer systems or utilize the same pipe as the storm sewer system provided
all essential design criteria of a separate groundwater system can be met, and:
         a.   The storm sewer system drains to an on site wet pond, wetland or
stream.
         b.   The groundwater drainage system will not be hydraulically
surcharged by stormwater flows, including the prevention of hydraulic
overloading of sump pump services and septic system curtain drains. (Ord. 12-
268, 10-9-2012)
19-114: UNDERGROUND WIRING:
The owner or developer shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone,
electricity, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable
to be placed underground entirely throughout the subdivided area. Such conduits
or cables shall be placed within easements or within public ways where
necessary, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted by the committee
where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to
the health, safety, general welfare, and character of the subdivision. All such
facilities placed in dedicated public ways or easements shall be planned so as
not to conflict with other underground utilities. Electrical transformers and
telephone junction boxes shall not be placed in any portion of a designated
drainage or stormwater control facility. All such facilities shall be
constructed in accordance with standards approved by the Illinois commerce
commission, and in conformance with the franchise of said utilities. (Ord. 12-
268, 10-9-2012)
19-115 - 19-125: RESERVED:
DIVISION 5. OTHER IMPROVEMENTS
19-126: FENCING 1 :
The developer shall be required to furnish and install fences at the boundaries
of the subdivision wherever the committee determines that a hazardous or
nuisance condition may or could exist. The fences shall be constructed
according to the standards established by the committee and in accordance with
the zoning ordinance. Fence improvements shall be made part of the improvement
plans and construction guarantee provisions of section 19-35 of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-127: LANDSCAPING:
Wherever possible, existing trees shall be preserved in the installation of
subdivision improvements. In order to maintain the existing ecological
diversity of stable plant material, the owner or developer shall be required to
restore the diversity and numerical quality of site flora within designated
areas of the subdivision as shown in the improvement plans. Numerical quality
shall be determined by the scoring system defined in "Wild Plants And Natural
Areas Of Kane County" by Young or "Plants Of The Chicago Region" by Swink and
Wilhelm. All required landscaping shall be environmentally sound with plant
selection appropriate to sunlight exposure and existing climatic, edaphic, and
hydrological conditions. Where no existing native vegetation exists, the
developer shall be required to plant a minimum of two (2) native tree species
on each lot created appropriate to the aforegoing physical conditions
encountered. All plant material shall be of a size sufficient to withstand
external stresses likely to be encountered and shall be planted in a manner
consistent with standard horticultural practices. Disease prone species,
sterile clones and any plant with a negative rating in "Wild Plants And Natural
Areas Of Kane County" are not acceptable. Provision shall be made to assure the
growth of all landscaping. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-128: TEMPORARY SALES FACILITIES:
A mobile sales office shall be permitted on an approved subdivision of twenty
(20) or more lots for a period of twelve (12) months which may be extended for
twelve (12) month periods, but not to exceed a total of thirty six (36) months,
provided the following criteria are met:
   A.   A site plan submitted showing parking area, lighting, signage, access
and location;
   B.   A mobile office shall be placed no closer than thirty five feet (35')
from any road right of way;
   C.   One 6-square foot mobile sales office identification sign shall be
permitted no closer than thirty five feet (35') from any road right of way;
   D.   A minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided on the site;
   E.   A building permit shall be obtained prior to placing the mobile home
office on the site. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-129: ENTRYWAY TREATMENTS:
Permanent landscaped entryway signs shall be permitted at the intersections of
approved subdivision entrances, but not within the public right of way,
provided that the signs meet the following criteria:
   A.   Only one single faced sign with a maximum display area of thirty two
(32) square feet shall be permitted on each approved corner;
   B.   Sign display area shall be placed no higher than five feet (5') above
grade;
   C.   Sign display areas shall be placed upon fencing, masonry, timbers or
other approved material;
   D.   The placement of the sign shall be designated on the preliminary plan
and landscape plan and shall be landscaped;
   E.   A diagram shall be submitted showing sign dimensions, landscaped area
with species name and distance from right of way;
   F.   No entrance sign shall be constructed or erected which identifies the
subdivision by any name other than the name displayed on the final plat. This
section shall not be construed to require the inclusion of alphabetical,
numerical or alphanumerical identification on a portion of a subdivision
platted in phases or units;
   G.   A building permit shall be obtained prior to placing of a sign on site.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-130: BICYCLE AND EQUESTRIAN TRAILS:
Bicycle and equestrian trails shall be constructed within easements or
dedicated rights of way when required as part of the subdivision improvements.
Such trails will be separate and distinct from sidewalks, pedestrianways and
dedicated roads and shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   A.   Bicycle Trails:
      1.   The trail shall not be closer than seventy five feet (75') to any
house, barn or garage;
      2.   The trail shall not be closer than five feet (5') to any property
line or fence;
      3.   The trail shall have a minimum of ten inches (10") of gravel base;
      4.   The surface may be four inches (4") of limestone screenings or two
inches (2") of asphalt, class I-11 or I-11 modified;
      5.   The trail shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide.
   B.   Equestrian Trails: The design and specifications for equestrian trails
will be determined on a case by case basis according to use and site
conditions. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-131: SPECIAL SERVICE AREAS:
The county may require a special service area or a backup special service area
to be established that may provide any or all of the following public
improvements and services: maintenance of curbs, alleys, and parking areas,
including, but not limited to, snow removal, salt/sand spreading, street
sweeping, striping, and traffic controls; sidewalks and trails; street
lighting; street and community identification signs; landscaping and fencing
along rights of way and common areas; security; residential waste collection,
recycling, and yard waste; common area benches, waste and recycling receptacles
and other furniture; pest control; pond aerators; parkway tree removal and
replacement; SSA administrative office and staff, and other services as it
relates to subdivision maintenance. The county may require that these
responsibilities be carried out by a homeowners' association. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
ARTICLE IV. SPECIAL SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
19-132: Compliance
19-133 - 19-135: Reserved
Division 2. Planned Unit Developments
19-136: Definitions
19-137: Intent
19-138: Compliance
19-139: General Principles
19-140: Design Talents
19-141: Site
19-142: Procedures And Approval Process
19-143: Validity And Adjustments
19-144: Development Standards
19-145: Conveyance And Maintenance Of Common Open Space
19-146: Nonresidential Land
19-147 - 19-160: Reserved
Division 3. Light Industrial Subdivisions
19-161: Procedures
19-162: Plan Specifications
19-163: General Design Standards
19-164: Road Standards
19-165: Landscaping And Paving
19-166 - 19-220: Reserved
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
19-132: COMPLIANCE:
All planned unit developments and light industrial subdivisions shall be
subject to this chapter.
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare,
the county board may, from time to time, amend the regulations imposed by this
chapter. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-133 - 19-135: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 1
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, article XII, "Planned Unit District", of this code.
19-136: DEFINITIONS:
A "planned unit development" is a tract or tracts of land which may include two
(2) or more principal uses that would otherwise require classification of the
tract into two (2) or more standard zoning districts and which is developed as
a unit. A planned unit development may also be a tract or tracts of land which
include varying residential lot sizes as a result of providing adequate soil
and other physical requirements for on site wastewater disposal systems
ensuring adequate protection of environmental and natural amenities; and
providing for the reservation of public or private open space areas. (Ord. 12-
268, 10-9-2012)
19-137: INTENT:
The planned unit development is a concept which encourages improved design in
the development of land. It is the intent of this division to provide flexible
land use and design regulations and performance criteria. This division
specifically encourages innovations in residential development so that the
growing demands for housing at economically reasonable prices can be met by
greater variety in type, design, and siting of dwellings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments. (Ord. 12-268,
10-9-2012)
19-138: COMPLIANCE 1 :
A planned unit development shall conform to the comprehensive plan, the zoning
ordinance, the requirements as stated herein, all regulations pertaining to the
control of land development and to all other applicable rules, regulations,
specifications and standards. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. See chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-139: GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
A planned unit development (PUD) shall consist of such combination and
arrangement of elements as will:
   A.   Form a compatible and harmonious group or groups;
   B.   Be consistent with the policies and recommendations of the
comprehensive plan of the county;
   C.   Be suited to the capacity of existing and proposed community
facilities;
   D.   Be capable of a unitary design consistent with the protection of public
health, safety, and welfare in general; and
   E.   Not adversely affect the permissible uses of adjacent properties. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-140: DESIGN TALENTS:
Professional talents of qualified land planners, licensed landscape architects,
Illinois licensed professional engineers, Illinois licensed professional land
surveyors, and other specialists deemed necessary shall be utilized in
different stages of the preparation necessary to effect a planned unit
development to assure developments of the quality desired by the county. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-141: SITE:
The site for a planned unit development shall consist of a single parcel of
land or an integrated group of parcels. The site may include areas of land
which are topographically unsuitable for the erection of structures but which
may be incorporated into the development plan as an element of the open space
system. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-142: PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL PROCESS:
The detailed review procedures, submittal requirements and approval process for
a planned unit development shall be the same as those required in article II of
this chapter except where otherwise stated herein. The following items are for
clarifying the process or providing more detailed requirements:
   A.   Subsequent to completion of the concept plan stage, the applicant shall
prepare a detailed development plan. The submittal requirements and review
process for a development plan shall be the same as required for preliminary
plans in article II of this chapter. In addition, the development plan shall
convey by map, table or text the following:
      1.   Land development pattern showing relationships among physical
features, including:
         a.   Typical arrangements of buildings; community facilities,
landscape features and topography;
         b.   Density of land use to be allocated to parts of the development
site;
         c.   Circulation plan showing major, collector, and local roads;
         d.   Location and function of all common open space.
Except in the case of very large sites, the above information may usually be
included on one or two (2) map sheets.
      2.   Acreage allocated for open space, major types of housing and
nonresidential features. (May be conveyed in tabular form on the map sheet.)
      3.   Relation between the development and adjacent land in terms of uses,
physical features on the land, the areawide system facilities. (A separate map
at area scale is desirable for this information.)
      4.   Written provisions for the permanent maintenance of common or
privately owned community facilities shall be included in the development plan.
The development plan shall be submitted for review by the plat officer and the
committee. Action shall be contingent upon the following criteria:
         a.   Consistency with the general requirements for planned unit
development;
         b.   Fulfillment of the specific quantitative and qualitative
requirements for density, land use, and administrative features;
         c.   The satisfactory arrangement of features on the site as shown on
the development plans in terms of:
            (1)   Free flowing circulation pattern;
            (2)   Functional compatibility among land uses as arranged;
            (3)   Locational convenience of facilities and services for
residents.
   B.   Planned unit development zoning shall be required and considered
subsequent to the committee's action on the development plan. Consideration and
action by the county board on the planned unit development zoning petition
shall be necessary before the matter shall proceed further before the
committee. Granting of planned unit development zoning constitutes official
approval of the development plan and authorizes construction to begin, pending
approval of improvement plans and issuance of the necessary permits. Expiration
of the development plan shall be warranted in the event of failure to commence
construction as approved with an extension of time granted after the passing of
one year from the date of rezoning the site to a planned unit development
district. No authority for construction within the site shall be granted until
the plan is reapproved.
   C.   Subsequent to the approval of the planned unit development zoning
petition, the applicant shall file detailed plans for the construction of
proposed site improvements and obtain necessary permits in accordance with the
requirements for improvement plans in article II of this chapter; however,
detailed improvement plans for entire large scale projects need not be
submitted at one time. The project may be divided into sections, with
improvement plans and construction guarantee necessary only for each section
prior to its construction. Where sectioning is desired, the applicant shall be
required to identify sections for the entire site before any improvement plans
may be approved. At no time shall the overall density of completed sections
exceed the overall density limits for the entire project.
   D.   Final platting and recording of all lots shall be required prior to
transfer of ownership of any parcel in accordance with the requirements for
final plats in article II of this chapter. Written guarantees for the
maintenance of private roads or open space when permitted by the committee must
be accepted by the plat officer prior to the approval of a final plat. (Ord.
12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-143: VALIDITY AND ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Approval of a planned unit development plan shall be valid for a period
of not more than ten (10) years from the date of such approval. After the ten
(10) year period, the plan shall be subject to review by the committee for
possible adjustments in light of current conditions before granting extended
approval. Any adjustments as to time or requirements by the committee, after
review and recommendation by the plat officer, may be granted by the committee
provided that if the development contains five hundred (500) or more residents,
the developer shall notify property owners in accordance with subsection B1 or
B2 of this section, prior to the adjustment being acted upon by the committee.
   B.   At any time during the course of construction and operation of the
development, any request by an owner for adjustments regarding the approved
development plan shall be referred to the committee and will be considered as
follows:
      1.   "Minor adjustments" are proposed changes regarding setback
distances, the location of easements and the physical layout and design of lots
and parcels which do not increase the density of area or decrease the open
space of the area and do not affect more than ten percent (10%) of lots in the
phase or unit affected as indicated on the approved development plan. Adjacent
and adjoining property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') to any area
proposed for a minor adjustment shall be given fifteen (15) days' written
notice of the proposed adjustment and the date, time and place of the committee
meeting at which they may comment on the proposed minor adjustment.
      2.   "Major adjustments" are all adjustments not contained in subsection
B1 of this section or not involving an extension of time. Major adjustments
must proceed in accordance with section 25-4-7 of this code. In addition to the
required distribution associated with the zoning code, a major adjustment shall
be distributed to those listed on the distribution list under subsection 19-34D
of this chapter, preliminary plan distribution. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-144: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The general design standards of article III of this chapter shall govern
planned unit developments. Variation from the standards or criteria imposed by
article III of this chapter may be granted by the committee at the development
plan stage if there is a finding that the needs of traffic, drainage,
pedestrian circulation, lot layout and other usage are adequately accommodated
by facilities or improvements of dimensions other than those required, but not
necessarily under the minimum. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-145: CONVEYANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE 1 :
   A.   All land shown on the development plan as common open space must be
conveyed under one of the following options:
      1.   It may be conveyed to a public agency (pending acceptance) which
will agree to maintain the common open space and any buildings, structures, or
improvements which have been placed on it;
      2.   It may be conveyed to trustees provided in an indenture establishing
an association or similar organization for the maintenance of the planned unit
development;
      3.   It may be retained and maintained by the developer.
   B.   If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, conveyance
or retention must be made subject to covenants to be approved by the committee
which restrict the common open space to the uses specified on the approved
development plan, and which provide for the maintenance of the common open
space in a manner which assures its continuing maintenance and use for its
intended purposes.
   C.   No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the
approved development plan submittals unless the approved development plan
submittals have been amended to permit that use under the Kane County zoning
ordinance. However, no change of the use authorized under the zoning ordinance
may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants, limiting the use of
common open space areas, are expressly reserved.
   D.   If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, either one
of the following methods of enforcement must be provided:
      1.   The legal right to develop the common open space for the uses not
specified in the approved development plan must be conveyed to a public agency;
      2.   The restrictions governing the use, improvement, and maintenance of
the common open space must be stated as conditions to the conveyance or
retention of the common open space, the fee title to the common open space to
vest in a public agency in the event of substantial default in the stated
conditions.
   E.   If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, the
covenants governing the use, improvements, and maintenance of the common open
space may authorize a public agency to enforce their provisions.
   F.   Provisions shall be executed for conveyance and maintenance of open
space designated for each section on the land plan at the time of construction
within said section. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-146: NONRESIDENTIAL LAND 1 :
Lots used for nonresidential purposes shall be of sufficient area to hold
structural and nonstructural portions of each establishment and associated off
road parking area. Off road parking shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the Kane County zoning ordinance. Industrial sites shall be
developed in accordance with the improvements required in division 3 of this
article and shall be utilized for those industrial uses which meet the
performance standards for light industry set forth in the zoning ordinance.
Land determined by the county and school authorities to be needed for public
elementary and intermediate school purposes shall be reserved and set aside.
School recreation areas shall be included within the site but shall be
considered open space. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-147 - 19-160: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. LIGHT INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS
19-161: PROCEDURES 1 :
Plans for light industrial subdivisions shall be submitted in accordance with
the procedures indicated in article II of this chapter. In addition, a zoning
change to an LI district under the zoning ordinance shall be required and
considered subsequent to the committee's approval of the preliminary plan and
prior to the approval of the final plat. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. See also chapter 25, "Zoning", of this code.
19-162: PLAN SPECIFICATIONS:
Plans for light industrial subdivisions shall show information as required in
article II of this chapter except that the preliminary plan need not indicate
lot width, area, or interior lot lines. Lot widths and area need not be
determined until time of sale or lease of a tract in order that it may meet the
requirements of a client; however, subdividing shall occur in such a way that
any tract will meet the normal building requirements for minimum lot size.
(Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-163: GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
Light industrial development shall comply with all applicable urban subdivision
standards set forth in article III of this chapter, including those applying
specifically to nonresidential development. (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-164: ROAD STANDARDS:
Roads constructed and intended to serve light industry shall have a minimum
pavement width of twenty four feet (24') and shall meet a minimum pavement
structural number of 3.0. All major and collector roads shall be as specified
by the county engineer. Roads shall not exceed a gradient of five percent (5%).
All roads, alleys, and driveways at their intersections within an industrial
district shall possess a curb radius of at least fifty feet (50'), and some
major intersections may be required to have a minimum curb radius of seventy
five feet (75'). (Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
19-165: LANDSCAPING AND PAVING:
Each industrial site shall be developed with at least twenty five percent (25%)
of its area set aside for the planting and growing of trees, shrubs, lawn and
other permanent natural ground cover, exclusive of drives and parking areas.
All such landscaping must be completed within two (2) years of occupancy. All
parking areas, driveways and loading spaces shall be paved with asphalt or its
equivalent, or otherwise sealed against the release of dust. (Ord. 12-268, 10-
9-2012)
19-166 - 19-220: RESERVED:
CHAPTER 19.5
LAND CASH
SECTION:
19.5-1: General Requirements
19.5-2: Determination Of Fees Will Be Based On One Of The Following
19.5-3: Criteria For Determining Land Vs Cash Donation
19.5-4: Criteria For Calculating Fee And/Or Land Donation
19.5-5: Criteria For Donation Of School Sites
19.5-6: Criteria For Donation Of Park Sites
19.5-7: Criteria For Objection To This Chapter
19.5-8: Criteria For Re-Subdivision And/Or Re-Development
19.5-9: Criteria For Expenditure Of Monies
19.5-10: Definitions
19.5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   As a condition of approval for residential construction, all
Residential Development will be required to meet their fee/donation obligation
for Schools and Parks in accordance with this Chapter.
   B.   This Chapter shall be effective on May 1, 2020.
   C.   The County shall have the right to delegate the authority for
determining/collecting monies for Schools or Parks to other public bodies
designated by the Plat Officer. The County will retain final authority over
application of this Chapter.
   D.   If any part of the Residential Development is within an
Intergovernmental Boundary Agreement (IGA) or a mile and a half from the
Corporate Limits of a Municipality, donations for the entire site will be based
on the Ordinance of that Municipality.
   E.   Residential Development within a platted subdivision, that was recorded
with the County Recorder after January 1, 1973, and the Land/Cash obligation
was previously met, this Chapter will not apply. This does not apply to
resubdivision or redevelopment as described in Section 8.
   F.   In the event any portion of this Chapter is in conflict with another
Ordinance from Kane County or any community within the County, the more
restrictive of the two shall take precedence. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-2: DETERMINATION OF FEES WILL BE BASED ON ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
   A.   Residential Development within a platted subdivision, recorded with the
County Recorder before January 1, 1973, and the Land/Cash obligation was not
met, this Chapter will apply. If the platted lot is located within the IGA or a
mile and a half from the Corporate Limits of a Municipality, Land/Cash fees
will be calculated per that Municipality Ordinance. If the platted lot is
located outside of an IGA or a mile and a half from the Corporate Limits of a
Municipality, Land/Cash fees will be per this Chapter.
   B.   Residential Development (metes & bound/unplatted parcel) is located
within the IGA or a mile and a half from the Corporate Limits of a
Municipality, Land/Cash fees will be calculated per that Municipality
Ordinance.
   C.   Residential Development (metes & bound/unplatted parcel) is outside of
an IGA or a mile and a half from the Corporate Limits of a Municipality, Land/
Cash fees will be per this Chapter.
   D.   Residential Development to be created by a proposed subdivision in
unincorporated Kane County and is located within the IGA or a mile and a half
from the Corporate Limits of a Municipality, Land/Cash fees will be calculated
per that Municipality Ordinance.
   E.   Residential Development to be created by a proposed subdivision in
unincorporated Kane County and is outside of an IGA or more than a mile and a
half from the Corporate Limits of a Municipality, Land/Cash fees will be per
this Chapter. If the number of bedrooms is unknown, donations will be
calculated using 4 bedrooms. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-3: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING LAND VS CASH DONATION:
   A.    All metes and bound/unplatted lots will be required to pay cash fees
to meet their obligation for and/Cash. Donation will be by certified checks,
payable to the School and Park Districts serving he parcel. These checks must
be submitted to the Development Department prior to, or at the time of,
Building Permit issuance. These checks will be forwarded to the appropriate
School and Park Districts upon receipt by Kane County.
   B.   Minor Subdivisions will be required to pay cash fees to meet their
obligation for Land/Cash. Donation will be by certified checks, payable to the
School and Park Districts serving the parcel. These checks must be submitted to
the Plat Officer prior to, or at the time of, the Plat Officer signing the
plat. Upon recording of the plat, the checks will be forwarded to the
appropriate School and Park Districts.
   C.   Major Subdivisions:
      1.   During the Concept Phase, the Plat Officer shall determine if Kane
County or another public body designated by the County, will have jurisdiction.
      2.   In the event jurisdiction is granted to another public body, the
subdivision shall conform to the Land/Cash Ordinance of the governing agency.
      3.   In the event jurisdiction is retained by Kane County, the Schools
and Park Districts will make the determination if they want cash donation, land
donation or a combination thereof. A Developer may reach an agreement with the
Schools and Parks outside of this chapter, or they may use the following steps:
         a.   During the Concept phase of the Development, the Schools and
Parks will advise the Plat Officer of their desire for land, cash or
combination thereof.
         b.   The Plat Officer will convey the desires of the Schools and Parks
to the Developer of the subdivision.
         c.   Should the Schools and/or Parks not convey their desire for land
or cash or a combination thereof, the Plat Officer will move forward using a
cash donation.
         d.   The subdivision plat will identify the land for Schools or Park
Districts by Lot or Parcel number. The Developer shall convey the respective
land to the School or Park within thirty (30) days after the subdivision is
recorded in the Kane County Recorder’s Office.
         e.   If Cash donation is to be used, fees will be by certified check,
payable to the School and Park Districts serving the parcel. These checks must
be submitted to the Plat Officer prior to the Plat Officer signing the final
plat. Upon recording of the plat, the checks will be forwarded to the
appropriate School and Park Districts.
         f.   In the event an agreement is reached outside of this Ordinance
with the Schools and/or Parks, verification of the agreement shall be provided
to the Plat Officer.
         g.   Building permits and/or permits for construction may not be
granted until the Land/Cash requirement has been met and the subdivision plat
is recorded. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-4: CRITERIA FOR CALCULATING FEE AND/OR LAND DONATION:
   A.   Development sites that have been delegated to another jurisdiction,
will conform to that Municipality Land/Cash Ordinance for calculating fees and/
or land dedication.
   B.   Development sites outside the limits of an Intergovernmental Boundary
Agreement or a mile and a half from the Corporate Limits of a Municipality will
use the following constants:
      1.   The Population Per Dwelling Unit Table shall be as follows:
      2.   School Classification by Grades shall be as follows:
      3.   Park Dedication Ratio is ten (10) acres of land per every one
thousand (1,000) population, and based on the following:
                  Elemen-   Junior               High
        Pre-      tary      Grades 7- Total of   school    Adults
Type of School    Grades K- 8         Grades K-8 Grades 9-            Total per
Unit              6                              12                   Dwelling
                  5-11      12-13                14-17                Units
        0-4 Years Years     Years     5-13 Years Years     18 Years +
                     Elemen-   Junior    Total of  High
           Pre-      tary      Grades 7- Grades K- school    Adults
Type of    School    Grades K- 8         8         Grades 9-          Total per
Unit                 6                             12                 Dwelling
                     5-11      12-13     5-13      14-17     18 Years Units
           0-4 Years Years     Years     Years     Years     +

Detached Single Family
2 Bedroom  0.113     0.143     0.041     0.184     0.020     1.700    2.017
3 Bedroom  0.292     0.422     0.120     0.542     0.184     1.881    2.899
4 Bedroom  0.418     0.644     0.184     0.828     0.360     2.158    3.764
5 Bedroom  0.283     0.461     0.132     0.593     0.300     2.594    3.770
Attached Single Family
2 Bedroom  0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     1.193    1.193
3 Bedroom  0.064     0.106     0.030     0.136     0.038     1.751    1.990
4 Bedroom  0.212     0.227     0.065     0.292     0.059     1.829    2.392
5 Bedroom  0.323     0.370     0.106     0.476     0.173     2.173    3.145
Apartments
Efficiency 0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     1.294    1.294
1 Bedroom  0.000     0.002     0.001     0.003     0.001     1.754    1.758
2 Bedroom  0.047     0.100     0.028     0.128     0.046     1.693    1.914
3 Bedroom  0.052     0.278     0.079     0.357     0.118     2.526    3.053
 
      2.   School Classification by Grades shall be as follows:
 
Classification By School Maximum Number Of Students Minimum Number Of Acres Per
                         Per School                 School
Elementary School        600 Students               15 Acres
Junior School            900 Students               35 Acres
High School              1,500 Students             80 Acres
 
      3.   Park Dedication Ratio is 10 Acres of land per every 1,000
population, and based on the following table:
 
Maximum Park Donation                                    Acres Per 1,000 People
1 School Park (play lot or neighborhood playground),     1.25
  with a minimum size of 1.0 to 5.0 acres
2 Neighborhood Park, with minimum size of 3.5 acres      1.00
3 District wide park or play field, with a minimum size  1.25
  of 4.0 acres of up to 30.0 acres
4 Community wide recreation park with a minimum size of  2.00
  12.0 acres up to 30.0 acres
5 County wide forest preserve or subregional open space, 4.50
  with minimum size of 100 acres to 500 acres
                                                         10.0 Acres
 
      4.   The present "Fair Market Value" for an Acre of land in Kane County
shall be eighty thousand dollars ($80,000).
      5.   Calculation of the fees shall be per the following formulas:
For Cash Donation to the School District
 
Population
Per          Number of     Students Per     Acres of Land            Fair
Dwelling     Lots/Units    Classification   Per              Ratio   Market   Cash
Per          in            Table            Classification           Value    Donation
Bedroom      Development                    Table                    (FMV)
Constant
Elementary x No.         / 600            x 15             = Ratio x (FMV)  = $
Junior     x No.         / 900            x 35             = Ratio x (FMV)  = $
High       x No.         / 1500           x 80             = Ratio x (FMV)  = $
   Total Due to School District                                          = $
 
For Land Donation to the School District
 
Population Per   Number Of       Students Per     Acres Of Land
Dwelling Per     Lots/Units In   Classification   Per              Acres to be
Bedroom          Development     Table            Classification   Dedicated
Constant                                          Table
Elementary     x No.           / 600            x 15             = Acreage
Junior         x No.           / 900            x 35             = Acreage
High           x No.           / 1500           x 80             = Acreage
   Total Acreage Due to School Districts                      = Acreage
 
For Cash Donation to the Park District
 
Population
Per          Number of                  Constant     Constant   Fair
Dwelling     Lots/Units    Population   of 1,000     of 10      Market   Cash
Per          in            Expected     Population   Acres      Value    Donation
Bedroom      Development                                        (FMV)
Constant
Total per                  No. of
Dwelling   x No.         = Population / 1000       x 10       x (FMV)  = $
Unit
 
For Land Donation to the Park District
 
Population Per   Number Of Lots/   Constant of
Dwelling Per     Units In          1,000         Constant of 10   Acreage to be
Bedroom          Development       Population    Acres            Donated
Constant
Total per      x No.             / 1000        x 10             = Acreage
Dwelling Unit
 
(Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-5: CRITERIA FOR DONATION OF SCHOOL SITES:
   A.   If Kane County has delegated the authority of Land/Cash to a
Municipality, the “improved” site will be in accordance with the Land/Cash
Ordinance of that Municipality.
   B.   Where possible, Park and School lands should be contiguous to accrue
benefits to both districts, such as maintenance and year round use of the
facilities.
   C.   In the event a School District desires land within a subdivision beyond
the Developer’s required donation, the Developer shall hold the additional land
in reserve for one year from the date of the recorded plat. The School District
will have one year to purchase the reserved land, using the same calculation
from the original donation. After one year, if the School District has not
acquired the reserved land, the Developer is released from their obligation to
reserve the land.
   D.   The topography, geology and soils of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose. Grading and drainage of
sites dedicated shall be consistent with those purposes and comply with the
Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance. Sites which will rely on an on-
site waste water disposal system must be in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 18 of the Kane County Code prior to acceptance and dedication.
   E.   Prior to dedication, the Developer shall improve the site with full
service of electrical, communications, natural gas, water, sewer and roads
where these services are within three hundred feet (300') of the site and as
applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision must be made
therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included in the definition of
“improved” sites may be deleted due to the delay between dedication of any such
school site and construction of school facilities thereon. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-
2020)
19.5-6: CRITERIA FOR DONATION OF PARK SITES:
   A.   If Kane County has delegated the authority of Land/Cash to a
Municipality, the “improved” site will be in accordance with the Land/Cash
Ordinance of that Municipality.
   B.   Where possible, Park and School lands should be contiguous to accrue
benefits to both districts, such as maintenance and year round use of the
facilities.
   C.   In the event a Park District desires land within a subdivision beyond
the Developer’s required donation, the Developer shall hold the additional land
in reserve for one year from the date of the recorded plat. The Park District
will have one year to purchase the reserved land, using the same calculation
constants from the original donation. After one year, if the Park District has
not acquired the reserved land, the Developer shall reclaim ownership of the
reserve land.
   D.   The topography, geology and soils of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose. Grading and drainage of
sites dedicated shall be consistent with those purposes and comply with the
Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance. Sites which will rely on an on-
site waste water disposal system must be in compliance with the requirements of
Chapter 18 of the Kane County Code prior to acceptance and dedication.
   E.   Prior to dedication, the Developer shall improve the site with full
service of electrical, communications, natural gas, water, sewer and roads
where these services are within three hundred feet (300') of the site or where
these services are required for the desired recreational uses, or acceptable
provision be made therefor. The degree of improvements shall be determined
according to the nature of and the projected uses of such Park land. (Ord. 20-
133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-7: CRITERIA FOR OBJECTION TO THIS CHAPTER:
   A.   All objections to this Chapter must be in writing, initiated by the
Developer, and addressed to the Plat Officer.
   B.   In the event the Developer files a written objection to any items
within this Chapter, they may submit their own demographic study, land
appraisal, or other study information for consideration. It is recognized that
population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years
and the specific formula for the dedication to Schools and Parks as stated
herein is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary. Final
determination of the formulas and constants to be used shall be approved by the
Kane County Development Committee.
   C.   The County may adjust the amount of the School and/or Park fees if one
of the following circumstances exist;
      1.   The Developer can demonstrate to the County’s satisfaction that the
fee assessment was incorrectly calculated.
      2.   Unusual and unique circumstances identified by the Developer
demonstrate that if the standard impact fee amount were applied to the
Development, it would be unfair, unjust or unlawful.
   D.   If the objection is denied by the Plat Officer, the Developer has the
right to present their objection to the Kane County Development Committee for
final determination.
   E.   Impact fees may be paid under protest in order to obtain a permit or
other Development approval. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-8: CRITERIA FOR RE-SUBDIVISION AND/OR RE-DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Where an existing Development is rezoned or repurposed to contain
Residential Development, it will be subject to the regulations of this Chapter.
   B.   Where a parcel(s), which is part of a platted subdivision that has
already provided their land/cash obligation, seeks to alter the parcel(s), the
following shall be followed:
      1.   In the event of a parcel or Development being resubdivided which
yields an increase in the number of residential lots, the Developer will be
responsible for Land/Cash donations for the additional lots only, based on the
jurisdiction granted by this Chapter.
      2.   In the event of a parcel being resubdivided, which yields a decrease
in the number of residential lots, the Developer agrees to forfeit the
overpayment. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-9: CRITERIA FOR EXPENDITURE OF MONIES:
   A.   Monies collected pursuant to this chapter are intended for School and/
or Park land acquisition costs or School and/or Park facility costs.
   B.   Land acquisition cost may include:
      1.   All costs of acquiring the land.
      2.   All costs of leasing land/property for the purpose of temporarily
providing services.
      3.   Fees, including but not limited to, planning, design, title and
survey, brokerage fees, attorney fees, architectural/engineering, environmental
investigation, any other fees that are directly related to the acquisition of
land.
   C.   Facility costs may include:
      1.   All costs of constructing a facility.
      2.   All costs, including but not limited to, renovations, improvements/
upgrade, life-safety mandates, additions, special assessments for capital
improvements.
   D.   In no event shall monies collected by this Chapter be used for
Operating Expenses or routine maintenance expenses.
   E.   Criteria for expenditure of monies;
   F.   By their acceptance of land or cash, or both, pursuant to the
provisions hereof, the School or Park Districts as the case may be, shall
defend and indemnify the County against any loss, cost or expense, including
reasonable attorney’s fees, arising out of, or on account of, any land or
payments designated for said School or Park Districts under the provisions of
this chapter.
   G.   The County shall obtain and keep on file an Intergovernmental Agreement
for each community in which this Chapter is in effect.
   H.   In the event a School District or Park Districts elects to not
participate in this Chapter, they will provide a letter to the Plat Officer
notifying the Officer of their non-participation. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
19.5-10: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Terms used in this Chapter may be further clarified with definitions.
Words with definitions are noted in a bold font.
   B.   Definitions shown within this Chapter are specific to this Chapter.
   C.   Additional definitions, not noted below, may be found in the
Subdivision Regulations and/or the Zoning Code.
                         Any room which may be used for bedroom purposes, such
                         as a den, study, loft, or extra room located on any
                         floor in a dwelling unit, which contains a bedroom
BEDROOM:                 style closet, is a minimum of seventy (70) square
                         feet, and not clearly identified for some other
                         specific purpose such as a kitchen, bathroom, living
                         room, dining room or family room.
DEVELOPER(S):            Any person who undertakes Development or certifies
                         Development on such persons behalf.
                         Any manmade change to the land undertaken by private
DEVELOPMENT:             or public entities, including division or redivision
                         of a parcel of land.
                         House(s), building(s) or other structure(s) that is
DWELLING(S):             (are) suitable or capable of being used for
                         residential purposes.
MUNICIPALITY:            A general term used to represent a town, village or
                         city.
PARK(S):                 General term used to represent a Park District or the
                         Kane County Forest Preserve.
REPURPOSED:              To alter the use or restrictions of a development, on
                         a long term basis.
                         A type of subdivision or development that once
                         constructed, will contain Dwelling(s). This includes
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: all dwelling types defined in the Kane County Zoning
                         Ordinance: attached, detached, multiple-family,
                         single-family or two-family. (Ord. 20-133, 5-12-2020)
 
CHAPTER 20
TAXATION
SECTION:
20-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
20-1-1: Supplementary Retailers' Occupation Tax
20-2: Service Occupation Tax
20-2-1: Supplementary Service Occupation Tax
20-3: Use Tax
20-3-1: Supplementary Use Tax
20-4: Disputes As To Formation Of Multi-Township Assessment Districts
20-5: Real Estate Transfer Tax
20-6: Replacement Vehicle
20-7: Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
20-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged, in the unincorporated area of the
county, in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail, at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business, in accordance with the county retailers' occupation
tax act. (Ord. 69-88, § 1, 9-9-1969)
20-1-1: SUPPLEMENTARY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   That a county supplementary retailers' occupation tax at a rate of one-
fourth of one percent is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail within the county.
   B.   That such person in administering and accounting for the tax are
subject to the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and
duties, and the same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and
definitions of terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the
"retailers' occupation tax act" as are now or hereafter amended, unless
otherwise noted or excepted in PA 84-163. (Ord. 86-7, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-1986)
20-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged, in the unincorporated area of the
county, in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said
servicemen, either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to the sale of service in accordance with the county
service occupation tax act. (Ord. 69-87, § 1, 9-9-1969)
20-2-1: SUPPLEMENTARY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   That a county supplementary service occupation tax is hereby imposed
upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of service within the
county of Kane, at a rate of one-fourth of one percent of the cost price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service.
   B.   That such persons in administering and accounting for the tax are
subject to the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and
duties, and the same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and
definitions of terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the "service
occupation tax act" and "retailers' occupation tax act", respectively, as are
now or hereafter amended, unless otherwise noted or excepted in PA 84-163.
(Ord. 86-5, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-1986)
20-3: USE TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the county any item of
tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a
retailer, and which is titled or registered with any agency of this state's
government, at the rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such
tangible personal property, as "selling price" is defined in the Illinois "use
tax act", approved July 14, 1955, as amended. Such tax shall be collected from
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the unincorporated areas of the county. (Ord. 1, § 1, 3-11-1975)
20-3-1: SUPPLEMENTARY USE TAX:
   A.   That a county supplementary use tax is hereby imposed upon the
privilege of using in the county of Kane, any item of tangible personal
property which is purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at a
rate of one-fourth of one percent of the selling price of such tangible
personal property, as "selling price" is defined in the "use tax act", approved
July 14, 1955, as amended. The tax shall be collected from persons whose
Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being within
the county of Kane.
   B.   That such persons in administering and accounting for the tax are
subject to the same rights, remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and
duties, and the same conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties, and
definitions of terms, and the same mode of procedures as found in the "use tax
act", as are now or hereafter amended, unless otherwise noted or excepted in PA
84-163. (Ord. 86-6, §§ 1, 2, 1-14-1986)
20-4: DISPUTES AS TO FORMATION OF MULTI-TOWNSHIP ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS:
The county board's executive committee will be responsible for the county
board's duties under hearings conducted pursuant to cases of dispute between
two (2) or more townships as to inclusion or exclusion of a township in any one
multi-township assessment district. Such committee may conduct said hearings in
any manner it sees fit in accordance with public act 81-838 as amended and
other applicable laws. (Res. 80-142, 9-9-1980)
20-5: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX:
   A.   Imposed: A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to
real estate, as represented by the deed that is filed for recordation, and upon
the privilege of transferring a beneficial interest in a land trust holding
legal title to real estate located in such county as represented by the trust
document that is filed for recordation, at the rate of twenty five cents
($0.25) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) of value or fraction thereof
stated in the declaration provided for in this section. If, however, the real
estate is transferred subject to a mortgage, the amount of the mortgage
remaining outstanding at the time of transfer shall not be included in the
basis of computing the tax.
   B.   Prerequisite To Filing Deed: Except as provided in subsection E of this
section, no deed or trust document shall be accepted for filing by the recorder
unless the tax imposed by subsection A of this section has been paid.
   C.   Indication Of Payment: The recorder may affix stamps whose design,
denominations and form shall be prescribed by the recorder (to every deed or
trust document which represents a transfer subject to the tax imposed by
subsection A of this section). In lieu of the stamps described above, the
recorder may use and affix any other writing or other indication that the tax
imposed by subsection A of this section has been paid.
   D.   Real Estate Transfer Declaration: At such time as the tax levied by
this section is aid, there shall be filed with the recorder a fully executed
and completed copy of the "real estate transfer declaration" required by
provisions of 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 305/3, as amended.
   E.   Certain Deeds Exempt: The following deeds or trust documents shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section except as hereinafter provided:
      1.   Deeds or trust documents representing real estate transfers made
before January 1, 1968, but recorded after that date.
      2.   Deeds or trust documents to property acquired by any governmental
body or from any governmental body or deeds to property between governmental
bodies, or by or from any corporation, society, association, foundation or
institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes.
      3.   Deeds or trust documents which secure debt or other obligation.
      4.   Deeds or trust documents which, without additional consideration,
confirm, correct, modify, or supplement a deed previously recorded.
      5.   Deeds or trust documents where the actual consideration is less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      6.   Deeds or trust documents of release of property which is security
for a debt or other obligation.
      7.   Tax deeds.
      8.   Deeds or trust documents of partition.
      9.   Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or
transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of corporations pursuant
to plans of reorganization.
      10.   Deeds or trust documents made by a subsidiary corporation to its
parent corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or
surrender of the subsidiary's stock.
      11.   Deeds or trust documents wherein there is an actual exchange of
real estate except that money difference or money's worth paid from one to the
other shall not be exempt from the tax.
      12.   Deeds or trust documents representing transfers subject to the
imposition of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United
States, except that such deeds shall not be exempt from filing the declaration.
      13.   A deed or trust document issued to a holder of a mortgage, as
defined in section 15-103 of the code of civil procedure, pursuant to a
mortgage foreclosure proceeding or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of
foreclosure.
      14.   Any future exemption enacted by the state of Illinois.
   F.   Proceeds: All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed
by this section shall be paid to the county treasury on a semimonthly basis.
   G.   Tax Additional To Others: The tax herein imposed shall be in addition
to all other occupation or privilege taxes imposed by the state or by any
municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 79-94, §§ 1-7, 5-
29-1979; Ord. 85-190, § 1, 12-10-1985)
20-6: REPLACEMENT VEHICLE TAX:
A replacement vehicle tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby imposed on any
motor vehicle, as defined in sections 1 through 146 of the Illinois vehicle
code and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, purchased by or on behalf of an
insurance company to replace a vehicle of an insured person in settlement of a
total loss claim. (Ord. 84-9, § 1, 1-10-1984)
20-7: CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.
   A.   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the compassionate use of
medical cannabis program act, at retail in the county on the gross receipts
from these sales at the following rates:
         a.   3.75% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course
of that business in unincorporated areas of Kane County.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
the county cannabis retailers’ occupation tax law (55 ILCS 5/5-1006.8).
   B.   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailers
to the Illinois department of revenue (the “department”). Any tax required to
be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
department. The department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 21-162, 3-9-2021; Ord. 21-163, 3-9-2021)
CHAPTER 21
TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
21-1: Signs, Signals, Etc., Ratified
21-1-1: Additional Court Fees
21-1-2: Intended Use Of Highway And Roadway System
21-2: Speed Limits
21-2-1: Absolute Maximum Speed Limits
21-2-2: Speed Limits For Construction Zones
21-3: Through Streets
21-4: Restrictions On Travel In Winter
21-5: No Parking
21-6: Red Lights On Certain Vehicles
21-7: Amber Lights On Certain Vehicles
21-8: Assessment Of Court Costs For DUI Violations
21-9: Size And Weight Limitation On Certain County Roads
21-9-1: Fees For Overweight And Overdimension Vehicles
21-1: SIGNS, SIGNALS, ETC., RATIFIED:
The location of all signs, signals, markings and devices which guide, regulate
or warn traffic on County maintained highways, in conformance with current
requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code and the State Manual on Traffic
Control Devices is hereby ratified and confirmed. (Res. 82-15, §§ 1, 3, 1-12-
1982; Ord. 90-280, 12-11-1990)
21-1-1: ADDITIONAL COURT FEES:
The Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County shall charge and collect a fee of
five dollars ($5.00) for all traffic violations where there is an admission of
guilt as well as fees per the following schedule:
 
Felony          $50.00
Misdemeanor:     
Class A         25.00
Class B or C    15.00
Petty offense   10.00
All civil cases 5.00
 
Said fees shall be used for the purpose of supporting the court system in Kane
County. A "traffic violation" for the purpose of this section shall not include
parking tickets or parking violations. Such fees shall be in addition to all
other fines and charges assessed by the Circuit Court and shall be remitted
monthly by the Clerk of the Circuit Court to the County Treasurer for deposit
in the General Fund.
The Clerk of the Circuit Court of the County shall charge and collect a one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fee for the second and subsequent violations of
section 5/11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 1  or violations of similar
provisions, contained in County or municipal ordinances, committed in the
County. The proceeds of this fee shall be placed in the County General Fund and
used to finance education programs related to driving under the influence of
alcohol or drugs. (Ord. 93-170, 6-8-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
21-1-2: INTENDED USE OF HIGHWAY AND ROADWAY SYSTEM:
The Kane County Board hereby finds, determines and declares that the County
highway and roadway system is primarily designed and intended for use by
vehicles and that motor vehicles as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code are
the intended users of the highways and roadways within the County highway and
roadway system. (Ord. 99-243, 8-10-1999)
21-2:   SPEED LIMITS 1 :
Speed limits on the portions of the roads shall be as shown below:
Roadway Township Subdivision Ordinance Limits From Limits To Speed Limit
                             Number                          (mph)
Roadway      Township   Subdivision  Ordinance Limits From     Limits To       Speed Limit
                                     Number                                    (mph)
4th Street   Aurora                 13-09     Montgomery Road Wabansia Avenue 25
5th Street   Aurora                 13-09     Sherman Avenue  300 ft. south   25
                                                               of Melrose
6th Avenue   Aurora                 13-09     Hill Avenue     Loucks Street   25
7th Avenue   Aurora                 13-09     Loucks Street   Farnsworth      25
                                                               Avenue
Acres Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Adeline      Aurora                 13-09     Marywood Avenue Diehl Road      25
Court
Alexander    Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Alexander    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Alexander    Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Allen Drive            Allendale    19-286                                  25
                        Unit #2
Allen Road                         80-145    Harmony Road    0.56 mi. East   45
(CH 3)                                                         Harmony Road
Amberwood    Elgin                  98-234    Brindlewood     End             30
Anderson     Campton                98-333    Campton Hills   IL Rt. 64       50
Road                                           Road
Anderson                           15-387    Keslinger Road  IL Rt. 38       45
Road (CH 85)
             St.        Silver Glen            400 ft. south
Andrea Court Charles    Estates      04-263    of Lancaster    Lancaster Road  25
                                               Road
Arbor Creek  Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246    IL Rt. 64       Baert Lane      30
Road                    Subdivision
Arbor Creek  Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246    Baert Lane      Woodgate        30
Road                    Subdivision
Arlene Drive Aurora                 13-09     Woodlyn Drive   Sherwood Drive  25
Armstrong    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
                                               Blackberry/     Blackberry/
Armstrong               Mill Creek             Geneva Twp.     Geneva Twp.
Lane         Geneva     Subdivision  03-263    Line (75 ft.    Line (75 ft.    25
                                               east of Boyd    east of Boyd
                                               Drive)          Drive)
Arrow Maker  Elgin      Catatoga 2   13-12                                   30
Pass                    Subdivision
Atchison     Rutland                03-205    Maplehurst Lane Damisch Road    30
Drive
Audrey       Aurora                 13-09     Kenmore Drive   Margaret Lane   25
Avenue
Avenue       Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Duschene Drive  Dead end        30
Chapelle
Baert Drive  Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246                                  30
                        Subdivision
Bahr Road    Burlington             08-288    Romke Road      Burlington/     45
                                                               Plato Twp. Line
Bahr Road    Plato                  08-289    Plank Road      Burlington/     45
                                                               Plato Twp. Line
Baker Drive  Blackberry             03-262    Ford Drive      Brundige Drive  25
Bangs Street Aurora                 13-09     Melrose Avenue  Parker Lane     25
                        Cranston
Barb Hill    St.        Meadows Unit
Drive        Charles    1, Three     04-174    Falcons Trail   Stevens Road    30
                        Lakes Units
                        2 and 4
             Sugar                                             0.5 mi. north
Barnes Road  Grove                  07-318    Prairie Street  of Prairie      40
                                                               Street
Barnes Road  Sugar                  80-217    Prairie Street  Jericho Road    45
             Grove
Bartelt      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Place                   Subdivision
Bartelt Road Blackberry Mill Creek   07-110                                  25
                        Subdivision
             St.        River Grange
Barton Drive Charles    Lakes, Add   16-89                                   25
                        #1 and #2
Bartson Lane Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Bealer       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Circle                  Subdivision
Becker Lane  Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Beith Road   Campton                98-167    IL Rt. 38       Dillonfield     30
Beith Road   Campton                87-143    Town Hall Road  IL Rt. 38       45
             Hills
Beith Road   Campton                87-225    Town Hall Road  Springwood      45
             Hills                                             Drive
Benton Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Bergquist    Geneva     Mill Creek   10-352    Prairie Clover  Morrill Drive   25
Drive                   Subdivision            Drive
Berkshire    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Big Timber   Elgin                  87-143    Randall Road    Lyle Avenue     45
Road
Big Timber                                     1,000 ft. west  1,000 ft. east
Road (CH 21)                       08-120    of Widmayer     of Ridgecrest   50
                                               Road            Drive
                        School zone
Big Timber             between 7:00 08-121    500 ft. west of 500 ft. east of 40
Road (CH 21)            A.M - 4:00             Gast Road       Ketchum Road
                        P.M.
Big Timber                                                     1,000 ft. west
Road (CH 21)                       02-398    IL Rt. 72       of McCornack    50
                                                               Road
Big Timber                                     1,000 ft. west
Road (CH 21)                       02-398    of McCornack    Randall Road    45
                                               Road
Binder       Aurora                 13-09     Loucks Street   Farnsworth      25
Street                                                         Avenue
Binnie Road  Dundee                 83-95     Randall Road    0.46 mi. west   40
                                                               of Randall Road
Binnie Road  Dundee                 83-156    Randall Road    Huntley Road    40
                                               V. of Gilberts  V. of
Binnie Road  Rutland                17-60     (425 ft. west   Carpentersville 40
                                               of Hidden Hills (150 ft. east
                                               Trail)          of Adams Drive)
Birchwood    Aurora                 13-09     Sheffer Road    Forest Avenue   25
Drive
Bittersweet  Elgin      Mitawa       05-95                                   30
Lane
Bittersweet  St.                    97-78     Dean Street     Dead end        25
Road         Charles
Blackberry   Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Way                     Subdivision
Bliss Road                         02-114    500 ft. north   Main Street     50
(CH 78)                                        of I-88
Bliss Road                                     1.3 mi.         500 ft. north
(CH 78)                            01-315    northeast of IL of bridge over  45
                                               Rt. 47          I-88
Bliss Road                         03-87     IL Rt. 47       1,000 ft. north 40
(CH 78)                                                        of Merrill Road
Bliss Road                         23-470    500 ft. north   Main Street (CH 50
(CH 78)                                        of I-88         10)
Bluestem     St.        Three Lakes                            450 ft. north
Court        Charles    Unit 3-A     04-174    Barb Hill Drive of Barb Hill    30
                                                               Drive
                                                               Campton/St.
Bolcum Road  Campton                01-421    Burlington Road Charles Twp.    50
                                                               Line
             St.                               Campton/St.
Bolcum Road  Charles                01-423    Charles Twp.    Randall Road    45
                                               Line
Bolcum Road  St.                    09-307    Burr Road       1,100 ft. east  35
             Charles                                           of Burr Road
Bolz Road    Dundee                 02-399    Williams/       Algonquin       35
                                               Sandbloom Road  Village limits
Boncosky     Dundee                 98-233    Sleepy Hollow   West Dundee     45
Road                                           Road            City limits
                        Timber
Bonnie Lane  Rutland    Ridge/Big    13-13                                   30
                        Timber Acres
                        Subdivision
Bowdish      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Bowes Road                         99-355    Randall Road    McLean          45
(CH 17)                                                        Boulevard
Bowes Road                         02-231    Muirhead Road   Randall Road    50
(CH 17)
Bowes Road                                     1,000 ft. west
(CH 17)                            11-10     of Del Webb     Randall Road    45
                                               Boulevard
Bowes Road                         19-355    Muirhead Road   Corron Road     45
Boyd Drive   Blackberry             03-262    Armstrong Lane  Herrington      25
                                                               Boulevard
                                                               Dundee Twp./
Boyer Road   Dundee                 05-96     Huntley Road    Algonquin       40
                                                               Village
                                                               boundary
Bradley      Aurora                 13-09     Countryside     Brentwood       25
Drive                                          Drive           Avenue
Branford     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Brannon Lane Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Brentwood    Aurora                 13-09     Orchard Road    Kevin Drive     25
Avenue
Brier Hill   Hampshire              99-321    Berner Road     IL Rt. 72       50
Road
Brindlewood  Elgin                  98-234    Coombs Road     End             30
Bristol      St.        Silver Glen  04-263    Bristol Road    400 ft. north   25
Court        Charles    Estates                                of Bristol Road
                                               300 ft. west of 1,000 ft. east
             St.        Silver Glen            Bristol Court   of Bristol
Bristol Road Charles    Estates      04-263    (Whispering     Court           30
                                               Trail Road)     (Whispering
                                                               Trail Road)
Brown Road   Campton                05-298    Old LaFox Road  IL Rt. 64       35
Brown Road   Campton                01-421    IL Rt. 64       LaFox Road      45
Brundige     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Brundige                                                       Blackberry/
Road         Blackberry             02-112    Keslinger Road  Campton Twp.    40
                                                               line
Brundige                Mill Creek             Campton/
Road         Campton    Subdivision  02-115    Blackberry Twp. IL Rt. 38       40
                                               line
Bryant       Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Bryn Mawr    Aurora                 13-09     Monticello      Lindenwood      25
Drive                                          Drive           Drive
Bunker Road                        02-114    Main Street     Keslinger Road  50
(CH 16)
Burgess      Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Drive                   Subdivision
Burlington                         87-50     Empire Road     0.03 mi. south  45
Road (CH 2)                                                    of LaFox Road
Burlington                         01-420    500 ft. west of Empire Road     45
Road (CH 2)                                    Dittman Road
Burlington                         01-420    0.3 mi. east of IL Rt. 64       45
Road (CH 2)                                    Empire Road
Burnside     St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Lane         Charles    Woods Unit 5
Burr Oak     St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Lane         Charles    Woods Unit 2
Burr Road    St.                    01-469    Dean Street     500 ft. north   40
             Charles                                           of Bolcum Road
Calhoun      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Callighan    Geneva     Mill Creek   10-352    Prairie Clover  Morrill Drive   25
Place                   Subdivision            Drive
Calumet      Aurora                 13-09     White Avenue    Sundown Drive   25
Avenue
Camel Road   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Camp Dean    Big Rock               98-231    Granart Road    End             35
Road
Campton                                        500 ft. east of
Hills Road   Campton                85-76     Happy Hills     0.59 mi. west   45
                                               Road
                                                               Campton Hills
Campton                                                        municipal
Hills Road   Campton                17-58     Anderson Road   limits (700 ft. 50
                                                               west of High
                                                               Pt. Court)
Campton      Campton    Campton      97-204    LaFox Road      Campton Hills   30
Woods Drive             Woods                                  Road
Carney Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Carolyn      Aurora                 13-09     Woodlyn Drive   Konen Avenue    25
Drive
Carolynn     Aurora                 13-09     Parkview Drive  Nan Street      25
Street
Catherine    Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Catlin       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Chapman      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Charles Lane Aurora                 13-09     Elizabeth Lane  Molitor Road    25
Charlotte    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Chateau      Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Frontenac Drive Dead end        30
Drive
Chateau West Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Frontenac Drive Dead end        30
Drive
Chickasaw    St.        Three Lakes  04-174    500 ft. west of Barb Hill Drive 30
Court        Charles    Unit 2                 Barb Hill Drive
Cloverfield  St.        Cranston               St. Charles/
Circle       Charles    Meadows      04-174    Campton Twp.    Falcons Trail   30
                        North Unit 1           line
                        Cranston
Cloverfield  St.        Meadows                St. Charles/    Stevens Glen
Drive        Charles    North Unit 4 04-174    Campton Twp.    Road            30
                        and Three              line
                        Lakes Unit 7
Cloverfield  St.        Three Lakes            Stevens Glen
Road         Charles    Units 6 and  04-174    Road            Columbine East  30
                        7
Clubhouse    St.        Burr Hill
Drive        Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
Clyde Court  St.        Skyline      01-314    120 ft. west of Clyde Parkway   30
             Charles    Estates                Clyde Parkway
Clyde        St.        Skyline      01-314    Seminary Drive  James Drive     30
Parkway      Charles    Estates
             St.        Hawthorne
Colley Drive Charles    Ridge        03-287                                  25
                        Subdivision
Colt Drive   Campton    Appaloosa    98-167    Mare Lane       Dead end        30
                        West
Columbine    St.        Three Lakes  04-174    Cloverfield     St. Charles/    30
East         Charles    Unit 7                 Drive           Elgin Twp. line
Columbine                                      Elgin/St.
West         Elgin                  04-172    Charles Twp.    Vaupon Court    30
                                               line
Columbine    St.        Three Lakes  04-174    Cloverfield     St. Charles/    30
West         Charles    Unit 8                 Drive           Elgin Twp. line
Connie Court Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Considine              Allendale    19-286                                   
Road                    Unit #2
                                               500 ft. east of
Coolidge     Aurora                 13-09     Beckwith Street Eastern Avenue  25
Avenue                                         (Aurora City
                                               limits)
Coombs Road  Elgin                  15-204    Rutland/Elgin   Highland        40
                                               Twp. line
Coombs Road  Rutland                02-400    Rutland/Elgin   Big Timber Road 40
                                               Twp. line
Corron Road                                                    500 ft. north
(CH 80)                            01-420    Burlington Road of Silver Glen  45
                                                               Road
Corron Road                                    Silver Glen     500 ft. south
(CH 80)                            01-420    Road            of McDonald     50
                                                               Road
Corron Road                                    500 ft. south
(CH 80)                            01-420    of McDonald     Bowes Road      45
                                               Road
Country      Dundee                 98-101    Ridge Road      IL Rt. 31       30
School Road
Couriers     St.                    92-159    IL Rt. 25       Illinois Avenue 35
Avenue       Charles
Cox Lane     Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
Crane Road   St.                    98-235    Silver Glen     Old Farm Road   35
             Charles                           Road
                        Meadowview
Cranston                Farm and                               Campton/St.
Road         Campton    Cranston     04-171    Ridge Line Road Charles Twp.    30
                        Meadows Unit                           line
                        7
                        Cranston               St. Charles/
Cranston     St.        Meadows      04-174    Campton Twp.    Falcons Trail   30
Road         Charles    Units 1 and            line
                        7
Creek Avenue Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Creekside    St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Drive        Charles    Woods Unit 5
Crego Place  Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
Crispen      Elgin      Elgin        03-397                                  25
Drive                   Estates #1
Dauberman                          79-237    Main Street     0.13 mi. south  45
Road (CH 64)                                                   of Elm Street
David Drive  Elgin      Elgin        03-397                                  25
                        Estates #1
Dawes Street Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Dearborn     Aurora                 13-09     Farnsworth      Crane Avenue    25
Avenue                                         Avenue
Decatur      St.                               390 ft. south
Avenue       Charles    Fox Crest    03-287    of Courier      Courier Avenue  25
                                               Avenue
Decatur      St.        Fox River              610 ft. south
Avenue       Charles    Heights No.  03-287    of Illinois     Illinois Street 25
                        2                      Street
Deer Pond    St.        Deer Pond
Drive        Charles    Woods, Deer  13-135    Leola Lane      Deer Pond Court 25
                        Pond Estates
Deerpath     Aurora                 98-229    Oak Street      0.4 mi. south   45
Road                                                           of Oak Street
Deerpath     Batavia                06-302    North Aurora    Nelson Lake     40
Road                                           Village limits  Road
Deerpath     Batavia                06-302    Nelson Lake     Batavia City    35
Road                                           Road            limits
Deerpath     Sugar                  98-236    Aurora/Sugar    Indian Trail    45
Road         Grove                             Grove Twp. line
Deerpath     Sugar                             1,600 ft. north 1,600 ft. south
Road         Grove                  06-119    of W. Indian    of N. Indian    30
                                               Trail           Trail
Deerpath                           02-114    Tanner Road     Oak Street      45
Road (CH 15)
Denali Court Blackberry Native       97-76     Dead end        Denali Drive    30
                        Prairie
Denali Road  Blackberry Native       97-76     Keslinger Road  Northway        30
                        Prairie
                                               0.8 mi. south   Silver Glen
Denker Road  Campton                01-95     of Silver Glen  Road            40
                                               Road
Denker Road  Campton                90-15     Silver Glen     Bolcum Road     45
             Hills                             Road
Densmore     Sugar                  80-43     Hankes Road     Galena          45
Road         Grove                                             Boulevard
Diehl Road   Aurora                 13-09     Mettel Road     Adeline Court   25
Dietrich     Hampshire              06-44     U.S. Rt. 20     Brier Hill Road 40
Road
Dillonfield  Campton    Dillonfield  98-167    LaFox Road      Dead end        30
Drive
Dobson Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Dobson Lane  Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
             St.        Otter Creek                            Elgin/St.
Dogwood Lane Charles    and Margate  05-261    Oak Drive       Charles Twp.    25
                                                               line
Dooley Drive Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
             St.        Crane Road
Dorchester   Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
Dorsey Court Campton    Dillonfield  98-167    Dillonfield     Cul-de-sac      30
                                               Drive
Douglas      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
             St.        Crane Road
Dover Hill   Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
             Big Rock
Dugan Road   and Sugar              81-160    Raymond Road    Jericho Road    45
             Grove
Dugan Road   Big Rock               90-257    0.05 mi. south  0.45 mi. south  45
                                               of Fays Lane    of Fays Lane
Duncan       Dundee                 02-399    Elgin City      East Dundee     45
Avenue                                         limits          Village limits
Dunham Road                        93-180    Army Trail Road Kirk Road       45
(CH 19)
Dunham Road                        99-322    Army Trail Road IL Rt. 25       45
(CH 19)
Duschene     Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Frontenac Drive Dead end        30
Drive
Eagles Nest  St.        Falcons Glen 04-174    350 ft. west of Falcons Trail   30
Court        Charles                           Falcons Trail
East Burnham Blackberry Mill Creek   17-57     South Mill      South Mill      25
Street                  Subdivision            Creek Drive     Creek Drive
East Curtis  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
East Eagle   St.        Burr Hill
Court        Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
East Galena  Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Boulevard
East         St.        Burr Hill
Lakeview     Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
East Mill    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Creek Circle            Subdivision
East         St.        Red Gate
Ridgewood    Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
Drive                   #2
East Weaver  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Circle                  Subdivision
Eastern      Aurora                 13-09     Liberty Street  East New York   25
Avenue                                                         Street
Eastwood     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Eldon Drive  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
North                   Subdivision
Elizabeth    Aurora                 13-09     Molitor Road    Charles Lane    25
Lane
Ellithorpe   Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Emily Lane   St.        Skyline      01-314    Skyline Drive   Clyde Parkway   30
             Charles    Estates
Empire Road                        99-242    Burlington Road 1 mi. west      50
(CH 69)                                                        Burlington Road
Empire Road                        02-202    1 mi. west of   0.2 mi. east of 50
(CH 69)                                        Burlington Road IL Rt. 47
Empire Road                                    1,000 ft. east  500 ft. east of
(CH 69)                            05-413    of IL Rt. 47    Sunset Views/   40
                                                               Trail Ridge
Exposition   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Avenue
Fabyan                                                         0.85 mi. west
Parkway (CH                        01-420    Main Street     of Randall Road 45
8)
Fabyan                                                         500 ft. east of
Parkway (CH                        01-165    Western Avenue  IL Rt. 31       40
8)
Fabyan                                                         0.85 mi. west
Parkway (CH                        96-249    Randall Road    of Randall Road 45
8)
Fabyan
Parkway (CH                        90-143    Randall Road    DuPage Co. line 45
8)
Fairway      St.        Burr Hill
Drive        Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
Falcon Trail St.                    88-15     Silver Glen     Falcon Trail    30
             Charles                           Road            West
Falcons                                        Elgin/St.
Trail        Elgin                  04-172    Charles Twp.    McDonald Road   30
                                               line
                        Cranston
Falcons      St.        Meadows                Silver Glen     St. Charles/
Trail        Charles    Units 1, 3,  04-174    Road            Elgin Twp. line 30
                        4 and
                        Falcons Glen
Feece Court  Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
Felten Road  Aurora                 13-09     Sheffer Road    Forest Avenue   25
                        Thornly
Ferson Creek St.        Addition
Road         Charles    Unit 2 and   17-239                                  25
                        Crane Road
                        Addition 3
Ferson Woods St.        Ferson Creek
Drive        Charles    Woods Units  07-114                                  25
                        2 and 3
Fieldcrest   St.        Fieldcrest   05-17     St. Charles     IL Rt. 31       25
Drive        Charles    by the Fox             City limit
Fieldstone   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Finley Road  Blackberry             90-257    IL Rt. 47       0.4 mi. west    30
Fitchome     Aurora                 13-09     Whitlock Avenue McClaran Avenue 25
Street
Flora Drive  Elgin      Elgin        03-397                                  25
                        Estates #1
Foal Lane    Campton    Appaloosa    98-167    Beith Road      Dead end        30
                        West
                        River Grange
Foley Lane   St.        Lakes Add    16-89                                   25
             Charles    #2, Silver
                        Ridge
Ford Drive   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Forest       Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Avenue
Forest Glen  St.        Pheasant
Court        Charles    Run/Forest   03-316                                  25
                        Glen
Fox Bluff    St.        Fieldcrest   05-17                                   25
Court        Charles    by the Fox
Fox Bluff    St.        Fieldcrest   05-17                                   25
Drive        Charles    by the Fox
Fox River    St.        Fox River    03-287    Iowa Street     Lincoln Street  25
Avenue       Charles    Heights
Fox River    St.        Fox River
Avenue       Charles    Heights No.  03-287    Colley Drive    Courier Avenue  25
                        2
Foxborough   St.        Foxborough   16-89                                   25
             Charles    Grove
Foxglove     St.        Three Lakes            Stevens Glen    600 ft. north
Court        Charles    Unit 3-A     04-174    Road            of Stevens Glen 30
                                                               Road
Foxwood      St.        Meadow Ridge 07-114                                  25
Court        Charles
                        Meadow
                        Ridge,
                        Mallard
Foxwood Lane St.        Lake, Unit   07-114                                  25
             Charles    3, Ferson
                        Creek Woods
                        Units 1, 2,
                        and 3
Freedom      Burlington             02-113    Highland Trail  End             30
Court
Freeman Road Rutland                02-400    Hunley Village  Galligan Road   40
                                               limits
Freeman      Aurora                 13-09     Dearborn Avenue Solfisburg      25
Street                                                         Avenue
Friar Drive  Aurora                 13-09     Mitchell Road   Carolyn Drive   25
Friendship   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Frontenac    Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Boncosky Road   Dead end        30
Fryendall    Blackberry             13-290                                  25
Court
Gale Street  Elgin                  00-247    South Street    Weld Road       30
Galligan                           02-398    0.5 mi. south   Huntley Road    50
Road (CH 6)                                    of Binnie Road
Galligan                           07-319    0.5 mi. south   0.5 mi. north   45
Road (CH 6)                                    of Binnie Road  of Freeman Road
Galligan                           10-386    Binnie          Freeman Road    35
Road (CH 6)
Garden Road  Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Gary Avenue  Aurora                 13-09     Molitor Road    1,200 ft. south 25
                                                               of Molitor Road
Gary Avenue  Aurora                 13-09     Garden Road     Middlefield     25
                                                               Road
Gates Street Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Geneva       St.        Fox Crest    03-287                                  25
Avenue       Charles
Gerten       Aurora                 13-09     Kenmore Avenue  Margaret Lane   25
Avenue
Gilbert      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Terrace
Gilmore      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Gingerwood   Elgin      Mitawa       05-95                                   30
Lane
Gladstone    Aurora                 13-09     Prairie Street  Golfview Street 25
Avenue
Glenview     St.        Cranston               1,000 ft. west
Drive        Charles    Meadows Unit 04-174    of Falcons      Falcons Trail   30
                        2                      Trail
Glenwood     St.        Red Gate
Drive        Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #3
Golfview     St.        Burr Hill
Court        Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
Golfview     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Gordon Road  Sugar                  03-88     Prairie Street  Galena          50
             Grove                                             Boulevard
Grady Court  Campton    Dillonfield  98-167    Dillonfield     Cul-de-sac      30
                                               Drive
                        Timber
Grand Avenue Rutland    Ridge/Big    13-13                                   30
                        Timber Acres
                        Subdivision
Green Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Green Road   Blackberry             11-366    Main Street     Hughes Road     40
Green Road   Blackberry             02-112    IL Rt. 47       Hughes Road     50
Greenview    St.        Burr Hill
Court        Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
Grengs Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Grengs Lane  Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
Grey Barn    St.        Maples       97-78     Crane Road      Crane Road      30
Road         Charles    Subdivision
Grovehill    Batavia                94-194    Main Street     Tanglewood      30
Drive                                                          Drive
Guthrie      Rutland                03-205    Harper Drive    500 ft. east of 30
Court                                                          Harper Drive
Haladay Lane Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Hampton      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Hampton      St.        Silver Glen            450 ft. north   Whispering
Drive        Charles    Estates      04-263    of Whispering   Trail Road      25
                                               Trail Road
Hankes Road  Sugar                  93-155    Bliss Road      0.8 mi. east of 35
             Grove                                             Bliss Road
Hankes Road  Sugar                  02-76     IL Rt. 56       Densmore Road   45
             Grove
Hankes Road  Sugar                  02-76     500 ft. east of Deerpath Road   40
             Grove                             Densmore Road
                                                               Blackberry/
Harley Road  Blackberry             02-112                   Campton Twp.    50
                                                               line
                                               Campton/
Harley Road  Campton                02-115    Blackberry Twp. IL Rt. 38       50
                                               line
Harmon Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Harper Drive Rutland                03-205    0.38 mi. west   Damisch Road    30
                                               of Damisch Road
Harter Road                                    600 ft. west of 600 ft. east of
(CH 4)                             09-306    Kaneland School Kaneland School 40
                                               entrance        entrance
Hartford     Aurora                 13-09     White Avenue    Rathbone Avenue 25
Avenue
Harvey       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Hawkeye                                        0.1 mi. west of
Drive        Campton    Oak Openings 85-76     Pathfinder      Anderson Road   30
                                               Drive
Heather Road           Allendale    18-286                                   
                        Unit #2
                        Heritage
Henrickson   St.        Oaks,
Drive        Charles    Heritage on  07-114                                  25
                        Burr Road
                        Unit 2
Heritage     St.        Heritage     07-114                                  25
Court        Charles    Oaks
Heritage     Batavia                98-99     Randall Road    Turn around     30
Drive
                        Heritage
Heritage     St.        Oaks,
Oaks Drive   Charles    Heritage on  07-114                                  25
                        Burr Road
                        Unit 1
Herrington   Blackberry             03-262    Armstrong Lane  Boyd Drive      25
Boulevard
Herrington   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Hickory      Burlington Walden IV    07-111                                  30
Court                   Estates
Hickory      St.        Silver Glen  04-263    500 ft. west of Windsor Drive   25
Drive        Charles    Estates                Windsor Drive
Hickory      Dundee                 09-267                                  25
Hollow Drive
                                                               450 ft. south
Hickory Lane Batavia                14-221    Deerpath Road   of Rosewood     35
                                                               Lane
Highland                                                       0.34 mi. east
Avenue (CH                         81-47     Randall Road    of Randall Road 45
47)
Highland                                                       0.70 mi. west
Avenue (CH                         89-151    Randall Road    of Randall Road 45
47)
Highland     Burlington             02-113    Plato Road      Hillview Lane   30
Trail
Hillside     St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
Drive        Charles
Hilltop      Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246    Arbor Creek     Dead end        30
Drive                   Subdivision
Hilltop      St.        Rainbow      04-478    200 ft. west of Oakwood Drive   25
Drive        Charles    Hills                  Ridge Drive
Hillview     Burlington             02-113    Highland Trail  Shepard Lane    30
Lane
Hilts Drive  Blackberry             03-262    Armstrong Lane  Herrington      25
                                                               Boulevard
                                                               0.80 mi. west
Hinkley Road Big Rock               98-307    Jericho Road    of Rhodes       45
                                                               Street
Hinman       Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Hobart Drive Elgin      Elgin        03-397                                  25
                        Estates #1
Hogan Hill   Elgin                  13-12     Elgin/Plato     Koshare Trail   30
                                               Twp. line
Holland Lane Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Homestead    Rutland                03-205    Atchison Drive  Damisch Road    30
Drive
Hopi Lane    Elgin      Catatoga 2   13-12                                   30
                        Subdivision
Hopps Road   Elgin                  16-36     Nolan Road      800 ft. east of 40
                                                               Stevens Road
Hopps Road   Elgin      Mitawa       05-95     Nolan Road      2,640 ft. west  30
                                                               of Nolan Road
Hopps Road   Elgin                  02-233    Nolan Road      0.8 mi. east of 45
                                                               Stevens Road
Hopps Road   Elgin                  02-233    0.3 mi. west of Randall Road    45
                                               Randall
Howard       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Hubbard      Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Place                   Subdivision
Hughes Road                        02-114    IL Rt. 47       Fabyan Parkway  50
(CH 26)
Hunter's     St.        Crane Road
Gate Road    Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
Hunters Hill Campton                00-246    Brown Road      End             30
Drive
Huntley Road                       02-398    Kane/McHenry    1,000 ft. west  50
(CH 30)                                        Co. line        of Randall Road
Huntley Road                       10-88     Kruetzer Road   Galligan Road   50
(CH 30)
Huntley Road                       02-398    1,000 ft. west  Sleepy Hollow   40
(CH 30)                                        of Randall Road Road
Huntley Road                       02-348    Randall Road    Sleepy Hollow   40
(CH 30)                                                        Road
Illinois     St.        Fox Crest    03-287    Villa Maria     Courier Avenue  30
Street       Charles                           Road
                        Fox Crest,
Illinois     St.        Fox River
Street       Charles    Hgts,        03-287    Courier Avenue  Wabash Avenue   25
                        Miller's
                        Sub. No. 2
Indian       Aurora                 13-09     Farnsworth      Crane Avenue    25
Avenue                                         Avenue
Indiana      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Iowa Street  St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
             Charles    Heights
Irwin Drive  Elgin      Elgin        03-397                                  25
                        Estates #1
Jackson      Aurora                 13-09     Virgil L.       Montgomery Road 25
Street                                         Gilman Trail
Jaguar Court Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
                        Subdivision
James Drive  St.        Skyline      01-314    Weber Drive     South James     30
             Charles    Estates                                Drive
Jenny Lane   Aurora                 13-09     Middlefield     Garden Road     25
                                               Avenue
Jericho Road                       03-87     500 ft. west of Orchard Road    45
(CH 24)                                        Barnes Road
Jeter Road   Big Rock               03-315    Jericho Road    Kane/Kendall    30
                                                               County line
Johnston     Aurora                 13-09     Jericho Road    Ashland Avenue  25
Drive
Johnstown    Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Road                    Subdivision
                        Arlington
                        Est. and                               Cloverfield
Johnsway     Campton    Cranston     04-171    Phar Lap Drive  Drive           30
                        Meadows Unit
                        1
Kaneville    Geneva                 96-248    Peck            Geneva City     45
                                                               limits
Kaneville                          02-114    Fabyan Parkway  Peck Road       45
Road (CH 84)
Ke-De-Ka     Sugar                  97-205    IL Rt. 47       0.45 mi. east   35
Road         Grove                                             of IL Rt. 47
Ke-De-Ka     Sugar                  97-205    0.53 mi. east   0.75 mi. east   35
Road         Grove                             of IL Rt. 47    of IL Rt. 47
Keenan Drive Geneva     Mill Creek   10-352    Bergquist Drive Callighan Place 25
                        Subdivision
Kellar Court Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Kellar       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Kelley Road  Hampshire              98-334    Harmony Road    Widmayer Road   50
                                                                               45Kendall
                                                                               StreetAurora13-
                                                                               0 9100 ft. south
Kendall Road Plato                  08-289    Plato Road      McDonald Road   of North Avenue
                                                                               (Aurora City
                                                                               limits)400 ft.
                                                                               south of Binder
                                                                               Street25
Kendall                                                        175 ft. north
Street       Aurora                 13-09     2nd Street      of Summit       25
                                                               Avenue
Kenmar Court Blackberry             99-241    Kenmar Drive    End             30
Kenmar Drive Blackberry             99-241    IL Rt. 47       End             30
Kenmar Lane  Blackberry             99-241    Kenmar Drive    End             30
Kenmore      Aurora                 13-09     Konen Avenue    Audrey Avenue   25
Avenue
Kenyon Road  Elgin                  04-172    South Elgin     Barry Road      40
                                               Village limits
Kenyon Road  Elgin                  04-172    Barry Road      IL Rt. 25       45
Keslinger                          15-362    500 ft. east of 500 ft. west of 45
Road (CH 41)                                   Dauberman Road  Meredith Road
             During
             school
Keslinger    days                                              200 ft. east of
Road (CH 41) between 7:             18-91     Meredith Road   Dauberman Road  35
             00 A.M.
             and 10:00
             P.M.
Keslinger                          17-355    IL Rt. 47       0.6 mi. west of 45
Road (CH 41)                                                   IL Rt. 47
Keslinger                          02-114    IL Rt. 47       1,500 ft. west  50
Road (CH 41)                                                   of Peck Road
Keslinger                          01-50     1,500 ft. west  1,056 ft. west  45
Road (CH 41)                                   of Peck Road    of Randall Road
Keslinger                          02-114    0.6 mi. west of Randall Road    40
Road (CH 41)                                   Randall Road
                                                               2,000 ft. south
Ketchum Road Hampshire              08-122    Allen Road      of Big Timber   45
                                                               Road
Kevin Drive  Aurora                 13-09     Countryside     Brentwood       25
                                               Drive           Avenue
King Drive   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Kingsway     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Court
Kingsway     Aurora                 13-09     Meyer Court     Edgelawn Drive  25
Drive
Kirk Road                          93-181    Dunham Road     0.93 mi. south  45
(CH 77)                                                        Dunham Road
Kirk Road                          88-15     Division Street Fabyan Parkway  45
(CH 77)
Kirk Road                          87-225    Fabyan Parkway  Wilson Street   45
(CH 77)
Kirk Road                          87-143    Wilson Street   IL Rt. 56       45
(CH 77)
Kirk Road                          84-62     IL Rt. 56       Division Street 45
(CH 77)
Knoll Creek,            Knoll Creek,
Crane Lane,             Knoll Creek
and Mills              Woods, and   21-412                                  25
Court                   Allens Crane
                        Woods Unit 2
Konen Avenue Aurora                 13-09     Mitchell Road   Margaret Lane   25
Koshare      Elgin      Catatoga 2   13-12                                   30
Circle                  Subdivision
                                                                               30Kristin
Koshare                 Catatoga 2                                             DriveElginMitawa
Trail        Elgin      Subdivision  13-12                                   05-95Stevens
                                                                               RoadGingerwoo d
                                                                               Lane30
LaFox Road                                                     0.85 mi. south
(CH 81)                            88-130    Burlington Road of Burlington   45
                                                               Road
LaFox Road                                                     500 ft. south
(CH 81)                            01-420    IL Rt. 64       of Campton      45
                                                               Hills
                                               800 ft. north   500 ft. south
LaFox Road                         02-114    of Union        of Campton      50
(CH 81)                                        Pacific RR      Hills Road
                                               tracks
Lake Shore   Dundee                 96-247    Skyline Drive   Sunset Drive    25
Drive
Lamont Court Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
                        Subdivision
                                               750 ft. north   750 ft. east of
Lancaster    St.        Silver Glen  04-263    of Andrea Court Michael Court   25
Road         Charles    Estates                (Whispering     (Whispering
                                               Trail Road)     Trail Road)
Landrose     Virgil                 10-28                                   25
Lane
Lathrop Road Dundee                 98-101    IL Rt. 31       Dead end        30
Lawrence     Burlington             05-297    Plan Road       McGough Road    45
Road
Leigh Street Aurora                 13-09     Garden Road     Middlefield     25
                                                               Avenue
Lenwood      Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Court
             St.        Baker Acres
Leola Lane   Charles    Units 3 and  13-135    Red Gate Road   Ronsu Lane      25
                        4
Liberty      Aurora                 17-56     Sartor Lane     Kane/DuPage     30
Street                                                         County line
Lilac Lane   St.        Otter Creek  05-261                                  25
             Charles    and Margate
Lincoln      St.        Rainbow      04-478    Sunset Drive    Hilltop Drive   25
Drive        Charles    Hills
Lincoln      St.        Fox Crest,
Street       Charles    Fox River    03-287                                  25
                        Heights
Lindenwood   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Court
Lindenwood   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Drive
Littlehip    St.        Three Lakes            500 ft. south
Court        Charles    Unit 4       04-174    of Barb Hill    Barb Hill Drive 30
                                               Drive
Loc De       Dundee     Frontenac    97-79     Duschene Drive  Dead end        30
Beatrice
Longmeadow                                     Boiz Connector  Illinois Route
Parkway (CH                        22-61     Road            62              45
86)
Longmeadow                                     Huntley/Boyer   Randall Road
Parkway (CH                        17-216    Road            (CH 34)         45
86)
Longmeadow                                     Illinois Route  Boiz Road
Parkway (CH                        22-61     31 Connector    Connector Road  45
86)                                            Road
Longmeadow                                     Randall Road    500 ft. east of
Parkway (CH                        17-216    (CH 34)         White Chapel    35
86)                                                            Lane
Longmeadow                                     500 feet east   Illinois Route
Parkway                            20-325    of White Chapel 31 Connector    45
                                               Lane            Road
             St.        Burr Hill
Lookout Lane Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
Lorang Road  Kaneville              06-411    Main Street     Bateman Road    40
Loucks       Aurora                 13-09     Summit Avenue   2nd Avenue      25
Street
Loucks       Aurora                 13-09     5th Avenue      Binder Street   25
Street
Lowry Street Aurora                 13-09     Whitlock Avenue McClaran Avenue 25
Main Street                        13-274    500 ft. west of 500 ft. east of 50
(CH 10)                                        Lorang Road     Green Road
Main Street                                    500 ft. west of 1,000 ft. west
(CH 10)                            02-114    Bunker Road     of Nelson Lake  50
                                                               Road
Main Street                                    1,000 ft. west
(CH 10)                            02-114    of Nelson Lake  Deerpath Road   45
                                               Road
Main Street                        04-170    Deerpath Road   Randall Road    35
(CH 10)
Mallard Lake St.        Owners of
Road         Charles    Mallard Lake 07-114                                  25
                        North
Mallory      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Manchester   Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Lane                    Subdivision
Maple Court  St.        Maples       97-78     Grey Barn Road  Grey Barn Road  30
             Charles    Subdivision
Maple Street Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Mare Lane    Campton    Appaloosa    98-167    Dead end        Dead end        30
                        West
Margaret                                                       180 ft. south
Lane         Aurora                 13-09     Konen Avenue    of Audrey       25
                                                               Avenue
Marilyn Lane Aurora                 13-09     Schomer Road    Gerten Avenue   25
Marks Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Maryhill     Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Lane                    Subdivision
Marywood     Aurora                 13-09     Molitor Road    Mettel Road     25
Avenue
Mathewson    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
McClaran     Aurora                 13-09     Garden Road     Lowry Street    25
Avenue
McClaran     Aurora                 13-09     Lowry Street    600 ft. south   25
Avenue                                                         of Jericho Road
McClure      Aurora                 13-09     Dearborn Avenue Plain Avenue    25
Street
                                               160 ft. south
McClure      Aurora                 13-09     of Bartson Lane Sheffer Road    25
Street                                         (Aurora City
                                               limits)
McCornack    Rutland                06-47     Big Timber Road IL Rt. 72       35
Road
McDonald     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Avenue
McDonald     Campton                92-138    Elgin Twp. line 0.7 mi. west of 50
Road         Hills                                             Elgin Twp. line
McDonald                                       South Elgin     500 ft. west of
Road         Elgin                  13-11     Village limits  S. Elgin        35
                                                               Village limits
McDonald     Elgin                  99-320    Oak Drive       Township line   45
Road
McDonald     Elgin                  77-94     0.36 mi. east   0.27 mi. west   45
Road                                           of Stevens      of Stevens
McDonald     Plato                  02-234    IL Rt. 47       Corron Road     45
Road
McGough Road                       83-122    Peplow Road     Ellithorpe Road 45
(CH 28)
McKay Drive  St.        Silver Ridge 16-89                                   25
             Charles
                                                               Geneva Twp./
McKee Street Geneva                 02-116    Wenmoth Road    City of Batavia 45
                                                               boundary
McLean
Boulevard                          91-58     Bowes Road      Hopps Road      45
(CH 18)
McMillen     Aurora                 13-09     Terry Avenue    Hartford Avenue 25
Avenue
McNair Drive Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
                        Subdivision
McQuire      Geneva     Mill Creek   10-352    Prairie Clover  Keenan Drive    25
Place                   Subdivision            Drive
Meadowbright Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246                                  30
Court                   Subdivision
Melrose      Aurora                 13-09     Bangs Street    Howell Place    25
Avenue
Melrose      Aurora                 13-09     Hinckley Street Hinman Street   25
Avenue
Meredith                           02-232    Keslinger Road  0.5 mi. north   45
Road (CH 14)                                                   of Keslinger
             During
             school
Meredith     days                                              0.4 mi. north
Road (CH 14) between 7:             10-248    Keslinger Road  on Meredith     35
             00 A.M.                                           Road
             and 10:00
             P.M.
Merrill Road Sugar                  03-88     IL Rt. 47       Sugar Grove     45
             Grove                                             Village limits
Mettel Road  Aurora                 13-09     Nottingham      Mitchell Road   25
                                               Drive
Mettel Road  Aurora                 13-09     175 ft. west of Diehl Road      25
                                               Marywood Avenue
Meyer Court  Aurora                 13-09     Prairie Street  Kingsway Drive  25
Michael      St.        Silver Glen            425 ft. south
Court        Charles    Estates      04-263    of Lancaster    Lancaster Road  25
                                               Road
                                               S. Elgin        S. Elgin
Middle       Elgin                  04-172    Village limits  Village limits  45
Street                                         at Eastview     at Barry Road
                                               Street
Middlefield  Aurora                 13-09     Lowry Street    Lindenwood      25
Avenue                                                         Drive
Miller Lane  St.        Mallard Lake 07-114                                  25
             Charles    Unit #2
Miller Road  Dundee                 98-101    0.33 mi. west   IL Rt. 31       35
                                               of IL Rt. 31
Mitchell     Aurora                 85-208    Saddle Lane     0.23 mi. south  30
Road
Montgomery                         76-153    IL Rt. 25       0.5 mi. west of 30
Road (CH 29)                                                   Douglas
Montgomery                         03-87     0.5 mi. west of Douglas Road    30
Road (CH 29)                                   Douglas Road
Montgomery                         98-331    Crown Street    Hill Avenue     35
Road (CH 29)                                                   (Rt. 30)
Monticello                                     160 ft. south
Drive        Aurora                 13-09     of Bryn Mawr    Rosemont Avenue 25
                                               Drive
Mooseheart                         02-114    Randall Road    IL Rt. 31       40
Road (CH 71)
Morrill      Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Muirhead                           02-231    Bowes Road      Plato Road      45
Road (CH 32)
Mulhern      Campton    Dillonfield  98-167    Dillonfield     Dillonfield     30
Drive                                          Drive
             St.        Owners of
Murray Court Charles    Mallard Lake 07-114                                  25
                        North
             St.        Owners of
Murray Road  Charles    Mallard Lake 07-114                                  25
                        North
Nan Street   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Napleton     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Nelson Lake  Batavia                06-302    Deerpath Road   Main Street     40
Road
Nesler Road  Plato                  00-288    800 ft. south   1,700 ft. north 45
                                               of Water Road   of Water Road
Nesler Road  Plato                  02-234    Bowes Road      800 ft. south   45
                                                               of Water Road
Newport      Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Court                   Subdivision
Newton Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Newton       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Nokomis Lane Elgin      Catatoga 2   13-12                                   30
                        Subdivision
Nolan Road   Elgin                  02-233    Hopps Road      Bowes Road      45
Norris Road  Blackberry             02-112    Tanner Road     Bliss Road      45
                                                               600 ft. east of
North Avenue Aurora                 13-09     Kendall Street  Farnsworth      25
                                                               Avenue
North        St.        Burr Hill
Fairway      Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
Drive                   Subdivision
North                   Mill Creek
Hathaway     Blackberry Subdivision  13-290                                  25
Lane
North Hyde   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Park                    Subdivision
North James  St.        Skyline                                1,360 ft. west
Drive        Charles    Estates      01-314    Seminary Road   of Seminary     30
                                                               Road
North        St.        Burr Hill
Lakeview     Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
North Lorang Blackberry             17-95     Main Street     0.25 mi. south  30
Road                                                           of Main Street
North        Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Mathewson               Subdivision
North Mill   Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Creek                   Subdivision
North Mill   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Creek Drive             Subdivision
Northern     St.        Cranston               450 ft. west of
Court        Charles    Meadows Unit 04-174    Falcons Trail   Falcons Trail   30
                        3
Northfield   St.        Maples       97-78     Grey Barn Road  Dead end        30
Drive        Charles    Subdivision
Northway     Blackberry Native       97-76     Denali Road     Dead end        30
Drive                   Prairie
                                               Elgin/St.
Oak Drive    Elgin                  05-262    Charles Twp.    McDonald Road   25
                                               line
             St.        Otter Creek                            Elgin/St.
Oak Drive    Charles    and Margate  05-261    Stevens Road    Charles Twp.    25
                                                               line
Oak Hill                                       (okay because
Drive        Dundee                 09-267    Hickory Hollow                 25
                                               is signed 25)
Oak Manor    Aurora                 13-09     Victor Road     Marywood Avenue 25
Road
Oak Point    St.        Woods of                               350 ft. north
Court        Charles    Silver Glen  04-263    Oak Point Drive of Oak Point    25
                                                               Drive
Oak Point    St.        Woods of               Whispering      2,050 ft. east
Drive        Charles    Silver Glen  04-263    Trail Road      of Whispering   25
                                                               Trail Road
Oak Run      St.        Red Gate
Court        Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #2
Oak Street                         02-114    Deerpath Road   Randall Road    45
(CH 15)
                                               175 ft. west of
Oakland      Aurora                 13-09     Watson Street   Spencer Street  25
Avenue                                         (Montgomery
                                               Village limits)
Oakridge     St.        Wild Rose
Lane         Charles    Subdivision, 17-239                                  25
                        Unit 2
                                               240 ft. north
Oakview                                        of East New
Avenue       Aurora                 13-09     York Street     Liberty Street  25
                                               (Aurora City
                                               limits)
Oakwood      Aurora                 13-09     400 ft. west of Church Road     25
Avenue                                         Assell Avenue
Ohio Street  St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
             Charles    Heights
Old Church   Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Road
Old Farm     St.        Crane Road
Road         Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
Old          St.        Mallard
Homestead    Charles    Lakes Units  07-114                                  25
Road                    1, 2, and 3
Old          St.        Owners of
Homestead    Charles    Mallard Lake 07-114                                  25
Road                    North
Olinger Lane Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
                        Timber
Oliver Drive Rutland    Ridge/Big    13-13                                   30
                        Timber Acres
                        Subdivision
Orchard Road                       17-152    0.5 mi. south   Kane/Kendall    45
(CH 83)                                        of Jericho Road Co. line
Orchard Road                       02-114    Indian Trail    Randall Road    50
(CH 83)
Orchard Road                       05-329    Prairie Street  Indian Trail    45
(CH 83)
Orchard Road                       88-161    Jericho Road    Prairie Street  45
(CH 83)
Orchard Road                       76-136    Jericho Road    0.5 mi. south   45
(CH 83)                                                        of Jericho Road
Oxford Lane  Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
                        Subdivision
Palmer       Aurora                 13-09     Middlefield     Jericho Road    25
Avenue                                         Avenue
Palmer       Aurora                 13-09     Rockwell Road   Prairie Street  25
Avenue
Palmer Road  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Park Lane    St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
             Charles
Park Place   St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
             Charles    Heights
Parkside     Aurora                 13-09     Liberty Street  East New York   25
Avenue                                                         Street
Pasadena     Aurora                 13-09     Baseline Road   Baseline Road   25
Drive
Pasec Place  Elgin      Mitawa       05-95                                   30
Patricia     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Patricia     Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Pauley       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Pearl Street Aurora                 13-09     Montgomery Road Wabansia Avenue 25
Peck Road    St.                    02-349    950 ft. south   Dean Street     35
             Charles                           of Dean Street
Peck Road                          01-165    Kaneville Road  IL Rt. 38       45
(CH 84)
Peplow Road                                    South line of   0.27 mi. south
(CH 11)                            81-113    the Jay Dee     of said south   45
                                               Subdivision     line
Pershing     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Street
Pheasant Run St.        Pheasant
Drive        Charles    Run/Forest   03-316                                  25
                        Glen
Pine Road    St.        Otter Creek  05-261                                  25
             Charles    and Margate
Pine Road    St.        Three Lakes  04-174    Cloverfield     Stevens Road    30
             Charles    Units 5, 6             Drive
Pioneer      Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246    Arbor Creek                    30
Court                   Subdivision            Subdivision
Pioneer Lane Burlington             02-113    Shepard Lane    End             30
Plank Road                         02-231    500 ft. west of U.S. Rt. 20     45
(CH 22)                                        Russell Road
Plank Road                                     0.3 mi. west of 0.73 mi. east
(CH 38 and                         16-381    Main Street/    of Main Street/ 45
22)                                            Burlington Road Burlington Road
                                               0.19 miles west 0.50 miles east
Plank Road                         19-250    of Romke Road   of the Romke    50
                                                               Road
Plato Road                         08-56     2,200 ft. west  800 ft. east of 40
(CH 32)                                        of Tower Road   Pease Road
Platt Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
                        Timber
Pleasant     Rutland    Ridge/Big    13-13                                   30
Drive                   Timber Acres
                        Subdivision
Pleasant     Aurora                 13-09     Parker Avenue   Montgomery Road 25
Place
Pleasure     Aurora                 13-09     Palmer Avenue   Rockwell Road   25
View Road
Plymouth     St.        Silver Glen            Whispering      500 ft. north
Court        Charles    Estates      04-263    Trail Road      of Whispering   25
                                                               Trail Road
Pouley Road  Blackberry             17-57     UP Railroad     Keslinger Road  40
Powers Road  Rutland                02-400    Big Timber Road IL Rt. 47       40
Prairie      Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Clover Drive            Subdivision
Prairie      St.        Rainbow      04-478    Sunset Drive    Hilltop Drive   25
Drive        Charles    Hills
Prairie      Campton    Prairie      00-246    Empire Road     0.82 mi. north  30
Valley Drive            Creek                                  of Empire Road
Preston      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Circle                  Subdivision
Preston      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Price Road   Aurora                 13-09     Palmer Avenue   Prairie Street  25
Price Road   Big Rock               03-203    Jericho Road    Big Rock        45
                                                               Village limits
Promontory   St.        Heritage on
Court        Charles    Burr Road    07-114                                  25
                        Unit 1
Radcliffe    Aurora                 13-09     Monticello      Lindenwood      25
Drive                                          Drive           Drive
Raleigh      Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Court                   Subdivision
Ramona Lane  St.        Skyline      01-314    Skyline Drive   Clyde Parkway   30
             Charles    Estates
Randall Road                       07-346    I-90            Kane/McHenry    50
(CH 34)                                                        Co. line
Randall Road                       93-179    I-90            South Street    50
(CH 34)
Randall Road                       97-75     Big Timber Road I-90            45
(CH 34)
Randall Road                       05-55     South Street    Win Haven Drive 45
(CH 34)
Randall Road                       16-92     1,500 ft. south 1,000 ft. north 45
(CH 34)                                        of Stearns Road of Hopps Road
Randall Road                                   1,000 ft. south
(CH 34)                            02-231    of Silver Glen  South Street    50
                                               Road
Randall Road                       04-350    0.4 mi. north   500 ft. north   45
(CH 34)                                        of Dean Street  of Clesen Drive
Randall Road                                   2,800 ft. south 1,000 ft. south
(CH 34)                            04-124    of Crane Road   of Silver Glen  50
                                                               Road
Randall Road                       89-17     Dean Street     0.4 mi. north   45
(CH 34)                                                        of Dean Street
Randall Road                       02-292    Kelinger/       Dean Street     45
(CH 34)                                        Kaneville Road
Randall Road                                   0.2 mi. south   0.2 mi. north
(CH 34)                            99-242    of Main Street  of Keslinger    45
                                               (Batavia)       Road
Randall Road                       02-114    1,000 ft. north 0.2 mi. south   50
(CH 34)                                        of Oak Street   of Main Street
Randall Road                       02-114    I-88            1,000 ft. north 45
(CH 34)                                                        of Oak Street
Rathbone     Aurora                 13-09     Terry Avenue    Hartford Avenue 25
Avenue
Red Bay      St.        Three Lakes  04-174    350 ft. west of Columbine West  30
Court        Charles    Unit 8                 Columbine West
Red Gate     St.        Red Gate
Court        Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #3
Red Gate     St.                    98-192    Randall Road    0.54 mi. east   35
Road         Charles                                           of Randall Road
Red Gate     St.                    03-316    Crane Road      Randall Road    35
Road         Charles
Red Leaf     Rutland                03-205    850 ft. west of Atchison Drive  30
Road                                           Atchison Drive
Revere House Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Revere House Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Rhodes Road  Big Rock               11-309    Granart Road    1,000 ft. south 50
                                                               of Price Road
                                               1,000 ft. south Village
Rhodes Road  Big Rock               11-309    of Price Road   corporate       40
                                                               limits
                                                               600 ft. south
Richard      Aurora                 13-09     Molitor Road    of Molitor Road 25
Avenue                                                         (Aurora City
                                                               limits)
Ridge Drive  St.        Rainbow      04-478    Sunset Drive    Hilltop Drive   25
             Charles    Hills
                        Meadowview
Ridge Line              Farm &                 Silver Glen     Campton/St.
Road         Campton    Cranston     04-171    Road            Charles Twp.    30
                        Meadows Unit                           line
                        5
                        Cranston               St. Charles/
Ridge Line   St.        Meadows      04-174    Campton Twp.    Falcons Trail   30
Road         Charles    Units 1 and            line
                        5
Ridge Road   Dundee                 98-101    Westhill Road   Dead end        30
Ridgeview    Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246                                  30
Court                   Subdivision
Ridgeway     Aurora                 13-09     South Randall   Hartford Avenue 25
Avenue                                         Road
Ridgewood    Elgin                  98-234    Brindlewood     End             30
Ridgewood    St.        Red Gate
Drive        Charles    Ridge Units  16-89                                   25
                        #1, 2 and 3
Rippburger   Plato                  02-234    Russell Road    Rohrsen Road    30
Road
Rippburger                         02-231    Plato Road      Russell Road    30
Road (CH 33)
River Drive  St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
             Charles
                        Red Gate
                        Ridge Unit
River Grange St.        #3, River    16-89                                   25
Road         Charles    Grange
                        Lakes, Add
                        #1 and #2
River View   St.        Silver Glen            Whispering      800 ft. east of
Court        Charles    Estates      04-263    Trail Road      Whispering      25
                                                               Trail Road
Roberts Road St.                    08-123    Seminary Road   IL Rt. 25       25
             Charles
Rockwell     Aurora                 13-09     Palmer Avenue   Prairie Street  25
Road
Romke Road   Burlington             09-304    Lenschow Road   Plank Road      45
Romke Road   Burlington             09-391    Burlington Road Plank Road      45
                        Baker Acres
Ronsu Lane   St.        Units 1 and  13-135    Crane Road      Deer Pond Drive 25
             Charles    2, Deer Pond
                        Woods
Roosevelt    St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
Avenue       Charles    Heights
Rosemont     Aurora                 13-09     200 ft. west of Lindenwood      25
Avenue                                         Johnson Drive   Drive
Rowe Road    Blackberry             99-241    IL Rt. 47       End             30
                                               500 ft. east of
Rural Street Aurora                 13-09     Ohio Street     Austin Avenue   25
                                               (Aurora City
                                               limits)
Russell Road                       17-176    0.3 mi. east of 0.4 mi. east of 40
                                               Rippburger Road Muirhead Road
Russell Road                       02-231    0.75 mi. east/  0.4 mi. east/   40
(CH 33)                                        Rippburger      Muirhead Road
Russell Road                       02-231    0.4 mi. east of Plank Road      45
(CH 33)                                        Muirhead Road
S. Airlite   Elgin                  00-247    South Street    Weld Road       30
Street
S. Belmont   Elgin                  00-247    South Street    Weld Road       30
Street
S. Hawthorne Elgin                  00-247    South Street    Weld Road       30
Street
S. Maple     Elgin                  00-247    South Street    Weld Road       30
Street
Saddlewood   Virgil                 06-120                                  25
Drive
Sandbloom/                                     0.31 mi. north  0.15 mi. south
Williams     Algonquin              95-139    of Bolz Road    of Bolz Road    35
Road
Sandwald     Rutland,               13-270    I-90            1,320 ft. south 45
Road         Huntley                                           of I-90
Sartor Lane  Aurora                 13-09     Liberty Street  Plain Avenue    25
Schomer Road Aurora                 13-09     Mitchell Road   Church Road     25
Schoolhouse  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
Scott Road   Big Rock               99-319    West County     Swan Road       45
                                               Line
                                               Batavia/
Seavey Road  Batavia                02-111    Blackberry Twp. Deerpath Road   40
                                               line
Seavey Road  Blackberry             02-112    Bliss Road      0.8 mi. east of 50
                                                               Bliss Road
                                               0.8 mi. east of Blackberry/
Seavey Road  Blackberry             02-112    Bliss Road      Batavia Twp.    40
                                                               line
Seavey Road  Blackberry             02-112    IL Rt. 47       1.8 mi. east of 50
                                                               IL Rt. 47
Seavey Road  Blackberry             02-112    1.8 mi. east of Bliss Road      30
                                               IL Rt. 47
Shady Lane   Elgin                  76-74     Hopps Road      Shady Lane      30
                                                               (south end)
Shannon      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Boulevard               Subdivision
Shannon      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Sheffer Road Aurora                 75-02-02  Farnsworth      Sarah           30
eastbound
Sheffer Road Aurora                 75-02-02  Felten          Farnsworth      30
westbound
Sheldon      Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Sheldon Lane Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Shepard Lane Burlington             02-113    Hillview Lane   Sumac Lane      30
                                               200 ft. west of
Sherman      Aurora                 13-09     Talma Street    Jackson Street  25
Avenue                                         (Montgomery
                                               Village limits)
                                               270 ft. east of
Sherwood     Aurora                 13-09     Nottingham      Arlene Drive    25
Drive                                          Drive (Aurora
                                               City limits)
Silver Glen                        01-315    1,000 ft. west  IL Rt. 31       45
Road (CH 5)                                    of Randall Road
Silver Glen                        01-420    500 ft. west of 1,000 ft. west  45
Road (CH 5)                                    Burlington Road of Randall Road
Silver Ridge St.        Foxborough
Drive        Charles    Grove &      16-89                                   25
                        Silver Ridge
Simms Street Aurora                 13-09     Loucks Street   Farnsworth      25
                                                               Avenue
Skyline      Geneva                 96-248    McKee           Cul-de-sac      30
Drive
Skyline      St.        Skyline      01-314    Ramona Lane     Clyde Parkway   30
Drive        Charles    Estates
Sleepy                                         320 ft. south   920 ft. north
Hollow Road  Dundee                 85-208    of I-90         of Hickory      35
                                                               Hollow
                                               V. of
Sleepy       Dundee                 17-94     Carpentersville Huntley Road    35
Hollow Road                                    (0.34 mi. north
                                               of Huntley Rd)
Sleepy       Dundee                 17-94     0.27 mi. south  0.36 mi. south  35
Hollow Road                                    of Huntley Road of Huntley Road
Smith Road   Blackberry             10-87                                   40
Solfisburg   Aurora                 13-09     Farnsworth      Crane Avenue    25
Avenue                                         Avenue
             St.        Three Lakes            550 ft. south
Sorrel Court Charles    Unit 4       04-174    of Barb Hill    Barb Hill Drive 30
                                               Drive
Sounders     Geneva     Mill Creek   10-352    Bergquist Drive Callighan Place 25
Drive                   Subdivision
South                   Mill Creek
Hathaway     Blackberry Subdivision  13-290                                  25
Lane
South Hyde   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Park                    Subdivision
South Hyde   Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Park                    Subdivision
South James  St.        Skyline      01-314    Seminary Road   James Drive     30
Drive        Charles    Estates
South Lane   St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
             Charles
South        Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Mathewson               Subdivision
South Mill   Geneva     Mill Creek   13-291                                  25
Creek                   Subdivision
South Mill   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Creek Drive             Subdivision
Spencer      Aurora                 13-09     Melrose Avenue  Parker Avenue   25
Street
Spencer                                                        300 ft. north
Street       Aurora                 13-09     Oakland Avenue  of Oakland      25
                                                               Avenue
Spring Green Geneva                 96-248    McKee           Cul-de-sac      30
Way
Springfield  St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
Street       Charles    Heights
Square Barn  Rutland                02-400    Huntley Road    Kane/McHenry    40
Road                                                           Co. line
St.
Christopher  Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Court
Stanton      St.        Skyline      01-314    Florence Lane   James Drive     30
Drive        Charles    Estates
Star Lane    Sugar                  18-193                                  25
             Grove
State Street                       80-133    Keyes Avenue    0.108 mi. north 30
                                                               Keyes Avenue
State Street                       80-133    0.108 mi. north Allen Road      40
                                               of Keyes Avenue
State Street Aurora                 13-09     Montgomery Road Parker Avenue   25
Stearns Road                       10-388    Randall Road    DuPage County   45
(CH 37)                                                        line
Stephen      Aurora                 13-09     Countryside     Brentwood       25
Drive                                          Drive           Avenue
Stephen      Aurora                 13-09     250 ft. west of Sarah Lane      25
Street                                         Felton Road
Stevens Glen St.        Three Lakes            Cloverfield
Road         Charles    units 3-A,   04-174    Road            Stevens Road    30
                        3-B, 7, 8
                                               Elgin/St.
Stevens Road Elgin                  02-233    Charles Twp.    Hopps Road      40
                                               line
Stevens Road St.                    00-369    Silver Glen     McDonald Road   45
             Charles                           Road
             St.        Crane Road
Stoneleat    Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
Stratford    Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Lane                    Subdivision
Strawberry   Burlington             02-113    Highland Trail  End             30
Lane
Sulley Drive Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Sulley Place Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Sulley       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
Sumac Lane   Burlington             02-113    Pioneer Lane    Highland Trail  30
                                               270 ft. west of
Summit       Aurora                 13-09     Loucks Street   Farnsworth      25
Avenue                                         (Aurora City    Avenue
                                               limits)
Summit                                         Farnsworth      650 ft. east of
Avenue       Aurora                 13-09     Avenue          Farnsworth      25
                                                               Avenue
Sumner                                         400 ft. south
Avenue       Aurora                 13-09     of Binder       5th Avenue      25
                                               Street
Sundown      Aurora                 13-09     South Randall   Terry Avenue    25
Drive                                          Road
Sunset Drive St.        Rainbow      04-478    200 ft. west of Oakwood Drive   25
             Charles    Hills                  Ridge Drive
Surrey Drive Blackberry             99-241    Kenmar Drive    Rowe Road       30
Swarthmore   Aurora                 13-09     Monticello      Lindenwood      25
Drive                                          Drive           Drive
Sycamore     St.        Fox River
Avenue       Charles    Heights No.  03-287                                  25
                        2
Sycamore     St.        Otter Creek  05-261    Pine Road       Oak Drive       25
Road         Charles    and Margate
Sylvia Lane  St.        Skyline      01-314    Skyline Drive   Clyde Parkway   30
             Charles    Estates
                                                               300 ft. north
Talma Street Aurora                 13-09     Montgomery Road of Sherman      25
                                                               Avenue
Tanglewood   Batavia                94-193    Deerpath Road   Cul-de-sac      30
Drive
Tanner Road                        02-114    Norris Road     Deerpath Road   50
                                                               (1 spot 55)
Taos Place   Elgin      Mitawa       05-95                                   30
Taylor Drive Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Terney Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Terney       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
                                                               1,320 ft. north
Thomas Road  Burlington             04-351    Ramm Road       of McDonald     40
                                                               Road
Thornapple   St.        Wild Rose
Road         Charles    Subdivision, 17-239                                  25
                        Unit 2
             St.        Wild Rose
Thornly Road Charles    Subdivision, 17-239                                  25
                        Unit 2
Thunder Gap  Elgin      Catatoga 2   13-12                                   30
                        Subdivision
Timber Ridge St.        Red Gate
Court        Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #1
                        Timber
Timber Ridge Rutland    Ridge/Big    13-13                                   30
Drive                   Timber Acres
                        Subdivision
Titus Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Tower Road   Plato                  04-352    Plato Road      Bahr Road       45
Town Hall    Campton                98-232    IL Rt. 64       End             40
Road
                                               200 ft. south
Trask Road   Aurora                 13-09     of Reckinger    Reckinger Road  25
                                               (Aurora City
                                               limits)
Turner Road  Aurora                 13-09                                   25
                        Fox Crest,
                        Fox River
Tuscola      St.        Heights, Fox 03-287    Courier Avenue  Lincoln Street  30
Avenue       Charles    River
                        Heights No.
                        2
Tuscola      St.        Fox River    03-287    Lincoln Street  Pakan Drive     25
Avenue       Charles    Heights
Tuscola      St.        Fox River              2,260 ft. south
Avenue       Charles    Heights No.  03-287    of Courier      Courier Avenue  25
                        2                      Avenue
Twin Silos   St.                    98-103    Crane Road      Dead end        30
Drive        Charles
Tyrrell Road                       07-319    IL Rt. 72       Galligan Road   45
(CH 59)
Tyrrell Road                                   IL Rt. 72 of IL
(CH 59)                            97-288    Rt. 72 I-90     1.0 mi. south   45
                                               bridge
Tyrrell Road                       02-398    Big Timber Road IL Rt. 72       45
(CH 59)
Underwood    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
                                               170 ft. north
                                               of Montgomery
Union Street Aurora                 13-09     Road            Parker Avenue   25
                                               (Montgomery
                                               City limits)
                                               450 ft. north
                                               of Montgomery
Union Street Aurora                 13-09     Road            Montgomery Road 25
                                               (Montgomery
                                               Village limits)
Vaupon Court Elgin                  04-172    Columbine West  Elgin/Campton   30
                                                               Twp. line
Verity       Aurora                 13-09     Garden Road     Middlefield     25
Street                                                         Avenue
Victor Road  Aurora                 13-09     Camel Road      Woodland Drive  25
Virginia     St.        Fox River
Court        Charles    Heights No.  03-287                                  25
                        2
Volentine    Batavia                98-99     Turn around     Turn around     30
Drive
Voupon Court St.        Three Lakes  04-174    Columbine West  St. Charles/    30
             Charles    Unit 7                                 Elgin Twp. line
Wabansia     Aurora                 13-09     4th Street      Pearl Street    25
Avenue
Wabash       St.        Fox River    03-287                                  25
Avenue       Charles    Heights
Wagontire    St.        Three Lakes  04-174    Stevens Glen    Pine Road       30
Road         Charles    Unit 3-B, 5            Road
                                               (okay because
Walnut Lane  Dundee                 09-267    Hickory Hollow                 25
                                               is signed 25)
Ware Woods   St.        Crane Road
Road         Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
Warner Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Washburn     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
Washburn     Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Place                   Subdivision
Watseka      St.        Fox River    03-287    Courier Avenue  Springfield     25
             Charles                                           Street
Watseka      St.        Fox River    03-287    Illinois Street Lincoln Street  25
             Charles    Heights
Watson       Aurora                 13-09     Montgomery Road Wabansia Avenue 25
Street
Watson                                         440 ft. south
Street       Aurora                 13-09     of Melrose      Parker Avenue   25
                                               Avenue
                                                               V. of
                                                               Burlington
Waughon Road Burlington             06-43     McGough Road    limits (approx. 45
                                                               600 ft. s. of
                                                               Plank Road)
Weaver Lane  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Weber Drive  St.                    17-151    Fox River Drive Pearson Drive   35
             Charles
Weber Drive  St.                    04-174    Fox River Drive Villa Maria     35
             Charles                                           Drive
Webster      Aurora                 13-09     5th Avenue      6th Avenue      25
Street
Wedgewood    Elgin                  98-234    Brindlewood     End             30
Wellington   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Court                   Subdivision
Wellington   Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Way                     Subdivision
                                                                               45Wenmoth
                                                                               RoadGeneva02-
Wenmoth Road Batavia                02-111    Main Street     Batavia/Geneva  116Batavia/Gen
                                                               Twp. line       eva Twp.
                                                                               lineFabyan
                                                                               Parkway45
West                                                           Kane/Cook Co.
Bartlett                           04-170    IL Rt. 25       line            45
Road (CH 61)
West Burnham Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Lane                    Subdivision
West Curtis  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Square                  Subdivision
West         St.        Burr Hill
Lakeview     Charles    Club         02-235                                  30
                        Subdivision
West Mallory Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Drive                   Subdivision
West
Marywood     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Avenue
West Mill    Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Creek Circle            Subdivision
West         St.        Red Gate
Ridgewood    Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #2
West Weaver  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Circle                  Subdivision
Westhill     Dundee                 98-101    Ridge Road      Dead end        30
Road
Westwood     St.        Red Gate
Lane         Charles    Ridge Units  16-89                                   25
                        #1 and #4
Whirlaway               Chevalle De            550 ft. south
Drive        Campton    Salle        04-171    of Phar Lap     Phar Lap Drive  30
                                               Drive
Whispering   St.        Silver Glen            450 ft. south   Whispering
Trail Court  Charles    Estates      04-263    of Whispering   Trail Road      25
                                               Trail Road
Whispering   St.        Silver Glen            Silver Glen     Silver Glen
Trail Road   Charles    Estates      04-263    Road at         Road at Foley   30
                                               Foxborough Road Lane
Whispering
Trail/       Hampshire              92-181    Brier Hill Road Berner Road     30
Littlewoods
Trail
White Avenue Aurora                 13-09     South Randall   South Calumet   25
                                               Road            Avenue
White Avenue Aurora                 13-09     Terry Avenue    Hartford Avenue 25
Whitlock     Aurora                 13-09     Jericho Road    350 ft. north   25
Avenue                                                         of Garden Road
                        Thornly
Wild Rose    St.        Addition
Road         Charles    Unit 2 and   17-239                                  25
                        Crane Road
                        Addition 3
Wildmere     Elgin                  13-193    Randall Road    Highland Avenue 25
Drive
Wildwood     Sugar      All
Drive        Grove      subdivision  18-95                                   25
                        roads
Williamsburg Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
Drive                   Subdivision
Willis       Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
Circle                  Subdivision
Willow Lane  St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
             Charles
Wilton Croft St.        Crane Road
Road         Charles    Estates/Ware 03-316                                  30
                        Woods
                                               500 ft. north   1,000 ft. south
Windsor      St.        Silver Glen            of Hickory      of Hickory
Drive        Charles    Estates      04-263    Drive           Drive           25
                                               (Whispering     (Whispering
                                               Trail Road)     Trail Road)
Winterset    Burlington Walden IV    07-111                                  30
Road                    Estates
Wood Lane    St.        Novak Park   03-316                                  25
             Charles
Woodcrest    Dundee                 98-101    Ridge Road      Country School  30
Road                                                           Road
Woodgate     St.        Maples       97-78     Grey Barn Road  Dead end        30
Drive        Charles    Subdivision
Woodgate     Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246                                  30
Road                    Subdivision
Woodhill     St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Lane         Charles    Woods Unit 2
Woodland     Aurora                 13-09                                   25
Drive
Woodlyn                                        300 ft. east of
Drive        Aurora                 13-09     Nottingham      Carolyn Drive   25
                                               Drive
Woodside     St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Drive        Charles    Woods Unit 2
Woodview     St.        Red Gate
Court        Charles    Ridge Unit   16-89                                   25
                        #2
Woodview     St.        Ferson Creek 07-114                                  25
Lane         Charles    Woods Unit 1
Wyatt Drive  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
Wyngate      Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246                                  30
Court                   Subdivision
Wyngate Road Campton    Arbor Creek  96-246    Arbor Creek     Baert Lane      30
                        Subdivision
Wyoming      St.        Fox River
Avenue       Charles    Heights No.  03-287                                  25
                        2
Yates Place  Blackberry Mill Creek   13-290                                  25
                        Subdivision
York Lane    Elgin      Williamsburg 17-59                                   25
                        Subdivision
Ziegler      Aurora                 13-09     Loucks Street   Calhoun Street  25
Avenue
 
The County Superintendent of Highways shall erect and maintain such signs as
are necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 79-177)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-604.
21-2-1: ABSOLUTE MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS:
The absolute maximum speed limit for all Kane County highways and township
roads within Kane County that are not otherwise posted with a lesser speed
limit pursuant to this section
21-2 shall be fifty five (55) miles per hour. Unless otherwise posted, pursuant
to this section
21-2, the maximum speed limit within the following townships and subdivisions
shall be as follows: (Ord. 96-82)
 
Roadway       Township    Subdivision       Ordinance Number Speed Limit (mph)
All dedicated Elgin       Almora Heights    06-301           25
streets                   Subdivision, 1-4
All dedicated Elgin       Hidden Hills      05-141           30
streets                   Subdivision
All dedicated St. Charles Farmington        05-261           25
streets                   Subdivision
All dedicated St. Charles Five Islands      06-118           25
streets                   Subdivision
All dedicated St. Charles Fox River Estates 05-261           25
streets                   Subdivision
 
21-2-2: SPEED LIMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
   A.   The members of the Kane County Board hereby authorize the County
Engineer to set and post reduced speed limits for construction or maintenance
zones, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-605.1.
   B.   Such reduced speed limits shall be temporary and be in effect and in
full force from the time appropriate signing giving notice of the reduced speed
limits are erected until such time that said signing is removed.
   C.   Construction or maintenance zone speed limit signs shall: 1) be of a
design approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation, 2) give proper
warning that a construction or maintenance speed zone is being approached, 3)
indicate the maximum speed limit in effect, and 4) state the amount of the
minimum fine for a violation as established by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-605.1.
   D.   A record shall be maintained by the Division of Transportation naming
each location, the reduced speed limit set and posted for the construction or
maintenance zone and dates during which the reduced speed limit was in effect.
   E.   Affected jurisdictions shall be notified of the changes in the posted
speed limits so that they may be properly enforced. (Ord. 05-296, 8-9-2005)
21-3: THROUGH STREETS 1 :
The County Board may designate certain highways or parts of highways in the
County to be through streets. The County Superintendent of Highways shall place
signs upon or at the entrance of streets or highways designated as through
streets, giving notice of such through highways, and in the event that two (2)
or more said through highways intersect in the County, the Superintendent of
Highways may determine which highway shall be the through highway. (Res., 9-11-
1940; Res., 12-10-1941; Res., 6-15-1943; Res., 6-13-1950; Res., 9-12-1951;
Res., 12-10-1952; Res., 12-8-1953; Res., 9-15-1954; Res., 9-14-1955; Res., 9-
12-1956; Res., 9-10-1957; Res., 9-15-1958; Res., 12-11-1963; Res. 76-27, 2-10-
1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(6).
21-4: RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL IN WINTER:
   A.   The County Superintendent of Highways is hereby authorized between
February 1 and May 1 of each year to prohibit travel altogether by vehicles on
highways under the jurisdiction of the County, and, especially, on such State
aid roads that are not maintained in entirety by the State when necessary, to
prevent serious damage or destruction of such roads; and he is further
authorized, when necessity demands, to impose restrictions covering the
permissible weights of such vehicles using such highway or highways or sections
thereof in order to protect such roads from serious damage or destruction
during such period of time or during part of such period of time; provided,
however, that when such restrictions are imposed by order of the
Superintendent, such restrictions must be according to the total weight allowed
on any one axle and the total weight per inch per width of tire on any one
wheel, or both, and shall be uniform as to the application thereof to all types
or classification of vehicles using such highway or highways or sections
thereof so restricted.
   B.   The County Superintendent of Highways, when necessary, may prohibit the
operation of trucks or other commercially operated vehicles on highways under
the jurisdiction of the County, and, especially, upon State aid roads not
maintained in entirety by the State and may impose restrictions as to their
permissible weights whenever necessary to protect such road or roads or parts
thereof from serious damage; provided, however, that when such restrictions are
imposed by order of the Superintendent, such restrictions must be according to
the total weight allowed on any one axle and the total weight per inch per
width of tire on any one wheel, or both, and shall be uniform as to the
application thereof to all types or classifications of vehicles using such
highway or highways or sections thereof so restricted.
   C.   The County Superintendent of Highways shall cause to be posted the
requisite signs where use of such highway or highways or section thereof is
prohibited or restricted, and such signs or notices shall contain the
prohibition or restrictions applying to such road or sections thereof and shall
be signed by the Superintendent of Highways as follows:
      BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF SUPER-
      VISORS OF KANE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
      By                          
      COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT
      OF HIGHWAYS
   D.   The County Superintendent of Highways is hereby designated as the
enforcing officer of this section and shall have full power and authority to
impose restrictions or prohibitions with reference to the use of State aid
roads in the County to vehicle traffic thereon during the period of time from
February 1 to May 1 1  of each calendar year and is further directed,
authorized and empowered to take any and all proceedings necessary to protect
such highway or highways or sections thereof so that they will not be damaged
or destroyed during the period designated in this section.
   E.   The County Superintendent of Highways shall keep a record in his office
of all orders entered by him with reference to prohibiting vehicle traffic or
imposing restrictions as to the use of the same on said highway or highways or
sections thereof and such orders shall be final when posted by the County
Superintendent of Highways.
   F.   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this section or the
lawful orders of the County Superintendent of Highways issued in pursuance
hereto. (Res., §§ 2-7, 3-14-1951)
21-5: NO PARKING 2 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked a motor
vehicle at any location designated by the County Board to be a "no parking"
area. The County Superintendent of Highways shall erect and maintain such signs
as are necessary to enforce the "no parking" regulations; provided, however,
that the Township Highway Commissioner in which such road is located shall
erect and maintain appropriate signs to enforce parking which is marked with an
asterisk (*).
Street Side From To Time Limits Direction
Street         Side         From         To             Time Limits   Direction
The "T"
intersection
of Chateau
Drive West in
Frontenac West
Subdivision
located in
unincorporated
Dundee                                               All times      
Township (The
Dundee
Township
highway
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Armstrong Lane
(The
Blackberry
Township
highway        Both         North Mill   Herrington     All times     East and
commissioner                Creek Drive  Boulevard                    north
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Bartelt Road
(The Kane
County
engineer is
directed to                 1,095 feet
advise the                  south of
Blackberry     West         Keslinger    Keslinger Road               
Township                    Road
highway
commissioner
to post
appropriate
signs.)
Bittersweet
Road (The St.
Charles
Township                                 A point
highway        West         Dean Street  located 60     All times      
commissioner                             feet north of
is directed to                           Dean Street
post
appropriate
signs.)
Black Willow               Hemlock      Dead end       All times      
Drive                       Drive
Bluff Drive
(The St.                                                Between the
Charles                                                 hours of 7:00
Township                                                A.M. to 6:00
highway        Both         Illinois     Park Lane      P.M. Monday    
commissioner                Route 31                    through
is directed to                                          Saturday from
post                                                    August 15 to
appropriate                                             June 15
signs.)
Bluff Drive
North (The St.                                          Between the
Charles                                                 hours of 7:00
Township                                                A.M. to 6:00
highway        Both         Bluff Drive  Dead end       P.M. Monday   Northerly
commissioner                                            through
is directed to                                          Saturday from
post                                                    August 15 to
appropriate                                             June 15
signs.)
                                         Intersection
                                         with the
                                         driveway of
                            Intersection the home
Bolcum Road                with Crane   located at     All times      
                            Road West    37W741 Bolcum
                                         Road, which is
                                         located on
                                         park district
                                         property
Burr Road (The
St. Charles
Township
highway                     Creekside
commissioner   Both         Drive        Bolcum Road    All times      
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Campton Hills
Road (The
Campton
Township
highway                    LaFox Road   Township line  All times     Easterly
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Carl Lee Road
(The St.
Charles                                  Entrance of
Township                                 the parking
highway        Both         Route 25     lot to Wise    All times      
commissioner                             Hamlin plastic
is directed to                           factory
post
appropriate
signs.)
Cherry Lane
(The Geneva
Township                                                No stadium
highway                                                 parking
commissioner   Both                                   between 3:00   
is directed to                                          P.M. and 11:
post                                                    00 P.M.
appropriate
signs.)
Clemens Drive
(The Campton
Township is
directed to    Both         LaFox Road   Old LaFox Road All times      
post
appropriate
signs.)
Crane Avenue   100 feet
(The Aurora    south of     Dearborn     All times                    
Township       Dearborn     Avenue
highway        Avenue
commissioner
is directed to 72 feet
post           south of     Plain Avenue All times                    
appropriate    Plain Avenue
signs.)
               Intersection Intersection
Crane Road     with Red     with Bolcum  All times                    
               Gate Road    Road
Creekside
Drive (The St.
Charles                                  The north
Township                                 property line
highway        Both         Burr Road    of park        All times      
commissioner                             district
is directed to                           property
post
appropriate
signs.)
Dartmouth
Drive (The
Aurora
Township                    Dead end of
highway        Lindenwood   Dartmouth    All times      Easterly       
commissioner   Drive        Drive
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Dauberman                   Keslinger    500 feet south
Road*          Both         Road         of Dauberman   All times      
                                         Road
                                         Oak Street in
                            Illinois     the
Davis Road     Both         Route 30     unincorporated All times      
                                         village of Big
                                         Rock
Dearborn
Avenue (Signs
are to be
erected and
maintained by  South        McClure Road Freeman Street All times      
the Aurora
Township
highway
commissioner.)
                            The Prairie  1/4 mile south
Dunham Road    West         Path         of the Prairie All times      
                                         Path
Ellen Lane,
Batavia (The
Batavia
Township                                                Between 7:00
highway        Both                                   A.M. and 2:00  
commissioner                                            P.M.
is directed to                                          weekdays1
post
appropriate
signs.)
Evergreen Lane
(The Batavia
Township                                                2 hour limit
highway                                                 between 7:00
commissioner   Both                                   A.M. and 4:00  
is directed to                                          P.M.
post                                                    weekdays2
appropriate
signs.)
Fabyan         Both         Randall Road Kane-DuPage    All times     Easterly
Parkway*                                 County line
                            Settler's    1,000 feet
Fabyan Parkway North        Hill         east of the    All times3     
                            entrance     Settler's Hill
                                         entrance
Florence Lane
(The St.
Charles
Township
highway        West         James Drive  260 feet south All times      
commissioner                             of James Drive
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
                                                        Any time
                                                        within 18
                                                        hours after a
                                                        snowfall of 2
Fox Mill       Both         Illinois     LaFox          inches or      
Boulevard                   Route 64     Boulevard      more unless
                                                        the street
                                                        has been
                                                        cleared of
                                                        snow4
Fox River
Drive (The St.
Charles
Township
highway        South        Weber Drive  Florence Lane  All times      
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Gale Street
(The Elgin
Township
highway                     Foothill     End of Gale
commissioner               Road         Street         All times     Northerly
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Galligan Road
(The village
of Gilberts is              Illinois
directed to    Both         Route 72     Willey Street                
post
appropriate
signs.)
                            Montgomery
Gates Street   Both         village      Melrose Avenue All times      
(The Aurora                 limits
Township                    Montgomery
highway                     village
commissioner                limits (a                   Between 5:00
is directed to              point        460 feet south A.M. and 5:00
post           Both         located 410  of Montgomery  P.M. on        
appropriate                 feet south   Road           Wednesdays
signs.)                     of                          and Thursdays
                            Montgomery
                            Road)
Highview Court
(The St.                                                Between the
Charles                                                 hours of 7:00
Township                                                A.M. to 6:00
highway        Both         Meadow Drive Bluff Drive    P.M. Monday    
commissioner                                            through
is directed to                                          Saturday from
post                                                    August 15 to
appropriate                                             June 15
signs.)
Hinman Street               Oakland      220 feet south Between 6:00
(T.R. 1041)    East         Avenue       of Montgomery  A.M. and 6:00  
(The Aurora                              Road           P.M.
Township
highway
commissioner                Montgomery   180 feet south Between 6:00
is directed to West         Road         of Montgomery  A.M. and 6:00  
post                                     Road           P.M.
appropriate
signs.)
Hunters Hill               Brown Road   500 feet west  All times      
Drive                                    of Brown Road
Indian Avenue
(The Aurora
Township
highway                     Farnsworth
commissioner   Both         Avenue       Freeman Street All times      
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
                            500 feet
Keslinger                   east of      500 feet west
Road*          Both         Dauberman    of Meridith    All times      
                            Road         Road extended
                            extended
                                                        All times
Kirk Road      Both         Illinois     Illinois Route except         
                            Route 38     64             emergency
                                                        parking only
Knollcreek
Drive (The St.
Charles
Township
highway        Both         Crane Road   West 200 feet  All times      
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
                            Campton      800 feet north
                            forest       and 400 feet
               East         preserve     south of the   All times      
                            baseball     entrance
                            diamonds
                            Entrance to  800 feet north
LaFox Road     East         the Wasco    of the         All times      
                            American     entrance
                            Legion
                            Entrance to  400 feet east
               North        the Wasco    of the         All times      
                            American     entrance
                            Legion
Lynn Drive
(The St.
Charles
Township                                 Intersection
highway        Both         Campton      of Joan Drive  All times      
commissioner                Hills Drive  and Bernice
is directed to                           Drive
post
appropriate
signs.)
                            Deerpath     1,500 feet
               Both         Road         east of        All times      
                                         Deerpath Road
Main Street                              750 feet east
(C.H. 10)      Both         Wyatt Drive  of South Mill  All times      
(Blackberry                              Creek Drive
Township)                                450 feet east
                            Illinois     of Illinois
               North        Route 47     Route 47 in    All times      
                                         Blackberry
                                         Township
Mason Road
(The Dundee
Township                    The western
highway                     Dundee
commissioner   Both         Township     1/2 mile east  All times      
is directed to              limits
post
appropriate
signs.)
Meadow Drive
(The St.                                                Between the
Charles                                                 hours of 7:00
Township                                                A.M. to 6:00
highway        Both         Bluff Drive  St. Charles    P.M. Monday    
commissioner                             city limits    through
is directed to                                          Saturday from
post                                                    August 15 to
appropriate                                             June 15
signs.)
                            2,000 feet
Meridith Road* Both         north of     Keslinger Road All times      
                            Keslinger
                            Road
North Avenue
(The Aurora
Township                    Intersection
highway                     with         Termination
commissioner   Both         Farnsworth   point of North All times     Easterly
is directed to              Avenue       Avenue
post
appropriate
signs.)
Old Kirk Road
(The Geneva
Township                                                No stadium
highway                                                 parking
commissioner   Both                                   between 3:00   
is directed to                                          P.M. and 11:
post                                                    00 P.M.
appropriate
signs.)
               Both         Clemens      Illinois 64    All times      
                            Drive
                            400 feet
                            east of      Campton
                            Campton      Township
                            Township     Community
Old LaFox Road South        Community    Center and     All times      
(The Campton                Center and   assessor's
Township is                 assessor's   office
directed to                 office       entrance
post                        entrance
appropriate                 Campton      800 feet north
signs.)                     Township     of Campton
                            Community    Township
               West         Center and   Community      All times      
                            assessor's   Center and
                            office       assessor's
                            entrance     office
                                         entrance
                                                        All times
Orchard Road   Both         Indian Trail Randall Road   except         
                            Road                        emergency
                                                        parking only
Park Lane (The                                          Between the
St. Charles                                             hours of 7:00
Township                                                A.M. to 6:00
highway                                  End of Park    P.M. Monday
commissioner   Both         Meadow Drive Lane           through        
is directed to                                          Saturday from
post                                                    August 15 to
appropriate                                             June 15
signs.)
                            Intersection Intersection
                           with Dean    with Prairie   All times      
                            Street on    bicycle path
                            the north    on the south
                                         1,300 feet
Peck Road      Both         Bricher Road north of       All times      
                                         Bricher Road
                                         1,600 feet
               East         Campton      south of       All times      
                            Hills Drive  Campton Hills
                                         Drive
Plain Avenue                285 feet     330 feet east
(The Aurora    North        east of      of McClure     All times      
Township                    McClure Road Road
highway
commissioner                15 feet west 15 feet east
is directed to North        of Crane     of Crane       All times      
post                        Avenue       Avenue
appropriate
signs.)
Plain Avenue
(T.R. 906)
(The Aurora
Township
highway        South        Crane Avenue Sartor Lane    All times      
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
                                         Westerly
                                         limits of
                                         Central
Plato Road     Both         Pease Road   Community Unit All times      
                                         school
                                         district 301
                                         property
               Both         Big Timber   Highland       All times     Southerly
                            Road         Avenue
                            Orchard                     All times
               Both         Road/        Bricher Road   except         
                            Mooseheart                  emergency
                            Road                        parking only
Randall Road*               1,000 feet                  All times
               Both         south of Red Big Timber     except         
                            Haw Lane/Oak Road           emergency
                            Crest Circle                parking only
                                                        All times
               Both         I-90         North County   except         
                                         Line Road      emergency
                                                        parking only
Roberts Lane
(The Batavia
Township                                                2 hour limit
highway                                                 between 7:00
commissioner   Both                                   A.M. and 4:00  
is directed to                                          P.M.
post                                                    weekdays2
appropriate
signs.)
                            770 feet     1,170 feet
School Road                south of     south of       All times      
                            Illinois 64  Illinois 64
Silver Glen
Road* (C.H. 5)             Illinois 31  500 feet west  All times      
paved roadway                            of Illinois 31
surface
South Hyde                               Across South
Park                                     Mill Creek
(Blackberry    North        Wyatt Drive  Drive to east  All times     Easterly
Township)                                edge of park
                                         district
South Mill
Creek Drive    Both                                   All times      
(Blackberry
Township)
State Street*               Illinois     South village
(C.H. 43)      Both         Route 25     limits of      All times      
                                         South Elgin
Summit Avenue
(The Aurora
Township
highway                     Easterly
commissioner   Both         dead end     250 feet       All times     Westerly
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Thornly Road
(The St.
Charles
Township                                                Between 2:00
highway        East         Red Haw Lane Oak Ridge Lane P.M. and 4:00 Northerly
commissioner                                            P.M. school
is directed to                                          days
post
appropriate
signs.)
Twin Silos
Drive (The St.
Charles
Township
highway        Both         Crane Road   West 600 feet  All times      
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Union Street
(The Aurora
Township
highway                     South end
commissioner               (dead end)                 All times      
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Wyatt Drive                 South Hyde   Approximately
(Blackberry    West         Park         350 feet north All times      
Township)                                of Main Street
625 South
Farnsworth
Avenue (The
Aurora
Township
highway                                              All times      
commissioner
is directed to
post
appropriate
signs.)
Notes:
    1.    Violators shall be fined $20.00 for each offense.
    2.    Violators shall be fined not more than $50.00 for each offense.
    3.    Violators shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense.
    4.    Violators shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense.
(Ord. 76-60, 4-13-1976; Ord. 76-75, 5-11-1976; Ord. 76-119, 8-10-1976; Ord. 77-
15, 1-11-1977; Ord. 77-27, 2-8-1977; Ord. 77-78, 5-10-1977; Ord. 77-114, 8-9-
1977; Ord. 77-149, 11-8-1977; Ord. 79-164, 9-11-1979; Ord. 88-87, 5-10-1988;
Ord. 88-159, 9-13-1988; Ord. 89-18, 1-10-1989; Ord. 89-19, 1-10-1989; Ord. 89-
76, 4-11-1989; Ord. 89-170, 9-12-1989; Ord. 89-194, 10-10-1989; Res. 90-58, 3-
13-1990; Res. 90-142, 6-12-1990; Res. 91-199, 8-13-1991; Ord. 91-203, 8-13-
1991; Ord. 93-27, 1-12-1993; Ord. 94-16, 1-11-1994; Ord. 94-41, 2-8-1994; Ord.
94-220, 8-9-1994; Ord. 97-163, 6-10-1997; Ord. 97-286, 10-14-1997; Ord. 97-339,
11-12-1997; Ord. 99-323, 11-9-1999; Ord. 99-324, 11-9-1999; Ord. 99-325, 11-9-
1999; Ord. 00-249, 9-12-2000; Ord. 01-88, 3-13-2001; Ord. 01-208, 6-12-2001;
Ord. 01-288, 8-14-2001; Res. 01-470, 12-11-2001; Ord. 02-154, §§ 1, 2, 5-14-
2002; Ord. 02-262, § 1, 8-13-2002; Ord. 02-351, §§ 1-4, 10-8-2002; Ord. 03-317,
§§ 1, 2, 10-14-2003; Ord. 03-399, §§ 1, 2, 12-9-2003; Ord. 04-219, § 1, 5-11-
2004; Ord. 04-220, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-2004; Ord. 04-264, § 1, 6-8-2004; Ord. 04-265,
§§ 1, 2, 6-8-2004; Ord. 04-290, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-2004; Ord. 05-263, 7-12-2005;
Ord. 06-410, § 1, 10-10-2006; Ord. 06-460, § 1, 11-14-2006; Ord. 07-112, § 1,
3-13-2007; Ord. 07-231, § 1, 6-12-2007; Ord. 08-190, § 1, 5-13-2008; Ord. 08-
191, § 1, 5-13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-316.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(1).
21-6: RED LIGHTS ON CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Vehicles operated by the following are hereby authorized as law enforcement
vehicles and the use of a red oscillating, rotating or flashing light on said
vehicle is hereby permitted 1 :
   A.   The director and the deputy director of the county's emergency
management agency while performing official duties;
   B.   The county coroner and deputy county coroners. (Res. 74-74, 5-14-1974;
Res. 13, 1-14-1975; Ord. 83-194, § 1, 12-13-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-215.
21-7: AMBER LIGHTS ON CERTAIN VEHICLES:
Vehicles operated by the following are hereby authorized as emergency vehicles
and the use of an amber oscillating, rotating or flashing light on said
vehicles is hereby permitted: a) personnel belonging to the county's emergency
management agency while performing official duties. (Ord. 83-194, § 2, 12-13-
1983)
21-8: ASSESSMENT OF COURT COSTS FOR DUI VIOLATIONS:
The office of the circuit clerk, sixteenth judicial circuit, is hereby
authorized to assess against and shall collect from those persons fined for
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, a sum of thirty dollars
($30.00) 1  for the purpose of assisting in the financing of the county court
system. (Ord. 86-134, § 1, 10-14-1986, eff. 12-1-1986)
 
Notes
1 2. 55 ILCS 5/5-1100.
21-9: SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITATION ON CERTAIN COUNTY ROADS:
Size and weight limitations on county highways are hereby established as
follows:
   A.   All highways in the county highway system except those highways
hereinafter designated as class II truck routes:
 
Width          8'0"
Height         13'6"
Length         In accordance with Illinois department of transportation's class
               III truck route designation
Weight:         
 Single axle  18,000 pounds
 Tandem axle  32,000 pounds
 Gross weight 73,280 pounds
 
   B.   The following highways in Kane County are hereby designated class II
truck routes for the purpose of weight, length and width as adopted and defined
by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(g), 5/15-107 and 5/15-102:
Highway From To
Highway                     From                     To
Allen Road                  0.7 mile west of State   U.S. 20
                            Street
Anderson Road (Kane County) Keslinger Road (C.H. 41) Illinois Route 38
Fabyan Parkway              Paramount Parkway        Randall Road
Kane County Highway 85      Kane County Highway 41   Illinois Route 38 for a
(Anderson Road)             (Keslinger Road)         distance of 1.62 miles
Kirk Road                   IL 56                    IL 64
Main Street                 0.15 mile west of I-88   IL 47
                            Tollway
Orchard Road                U.S. 30                  Randall Road
Randall Road                Orchard Road             Kane-McHenry County line
                            Kane/DuPage County line  Illinois Route 25 for a
                                                     distance of 3.28 miles
Stearns Road                                         Kane County Highway 34
                            Illinois Route 25        (Randall Road) for a
                                                     distance of 0.42 miles
 
   C.   Trucks used exclusively for garbage or refuse disposal equipped with
self-compactors or industrial roll-off hoists and roll-off containers are
allowed axle loads and gross weights thirty three percent (33%) above those
provided for by statute and may use the roadways designated as class II truck
routes subject to the following limitations:
      1.   Single axles: Twenty two thousand (22,000) pounds;
      2.   Tandem axles: Forty thousand (40,000) pounds;
      3.   Gross weight: Fifty four thousand (54,000) pounds.
The maximum speed of said trucks used exclusively for garbage or refuse
disposal equipped with self-compactors or industrial roll-off hoists and roll-
off containers on the roadways designated as class II truck routes shall not
exceed forty five (45) miles per hour.
   D.   The following highways in Kane County are hereby designated class II
truck routes for the purpose of length and width only as adopted and defined by
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-107 and 5/15-102:
 
Highway        From                    To
Fabyan Parkway Kane-DuPage County line Paramount Parkway
 
   E.   In order to prevent damage to Geneva Township highways, it is necessary
for the township to adopt regulations prohibiting the use of designated Geneva
Township highways when exceeding a weight of ten (10) tons in accordance with
the following designated roads:
 
Highway       From                                             To
Cherry Lane   Kirk Road, east                                  Old Kirk Road
Elm Road      The southwest corner of lot 10 in block 9        End of Elm Road
              (approximately 337 feet north of Route 38) north
McKee Street  Deerpath                                         Wenmoth Road
Old Kirk Road The Northwestern Railroad crossing, south        Kirk Road
Wenmoth Road  Geneva/Batavia Township line                     Fabyan Parkway
 
   F.   The following streets or highways in Dundee Township are hereby
designated routes for the purpose of a weight restriction of ten (10) tons
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-316(c):
 
Highway   From          To
Bolz Road Williams Road 0.65 mile west of IL 25
 
   G.   Repealed.
   H.   The following streets or highways in Kane County are hereby designated
to have the following following weight limits:
Highway From/To Weight Limit
Highway                         From/To                            Weight Limit
Engel Road (Burlington Twp.)    Plank Road to Lenschow Road        8 tons
Former Randall Road (C.H. 34)   Fletcher Drive to C&NW Railroad    6 tons
Lenschow Road (Burlington Twp.) Kane/DeKalb County line to Walker  8 tons
                                Road
Marcy Road (Burlington Twp.)    Kane/DeKalb County line to McGough 21 tons
                                Road
Miner Road (Kaneville Twp.)     Owens Road to Perry Road           9 tons
Owens Road (Kaneville Twp.)     County Line Road to Main Street    9 tons
Romke Road (Burlington Twp.)    Burlington Road to Plank Road      21 tons
Winters Road (Virgil Twp.)      Meridith Road to west county line  10 tons
 
(Ord. 89-112, § 1, 6-13-1989; Ord. 92-207, §§ I-IV, 9-8-1992; Res. 94-205, 7-
12-1994; Ord. 98-164, 6-9-1998; Ord. 98-189, 7-14-1998; Ord. 01-416, 11-13-
2001; Ord. 01-418, 11-13-2001; Ord. 03-396, § 1, 12-9-2003; Ord. 04-78, 2-10-
2004; Ord. 04-175, 4-13-2004; Ord. 04-78, 2-10-2004; Ord. 04-175, 4-13-2004;
Ord. 04-345, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-2004; Ord. 05-93, 3-8-2005; Ord. 05-97, 3-8-2005;
Ord. 05-460, 12-13-2005; Ord. 06-404, 10-10-2006; Ord. 10-389, 12-14-2010; Ord.
13-269, 9-10-2013; Ord. 15-388, 12-8-2015)
21-9-1: FEES FOR OVERWEIGHT AND OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES:
Pursuant to Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 and
5/15-302, the fees for overweight and oversize vehicles shall be as follows:
 
Overweight         Fee
Standard           $ 50.00
Nonstandard review $100.00 plus structural engineering review costs
Oversize           $ 50.00
Return trip        35.00
Oversize 90 day    250.00
 
(Ord. 99-186, 6-8-1999, eff. 7-1-1999; per correspondence dated 4-21-2014)
ARTICLE II. PARKING, STOPPING, STANDING AND OTHER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
21-10: Speed Limits
21-11: State Traffic Law Adopted
21-12: Traffic Signs, Signals, Etc.
21-13: Kane County Parking Areas
21-14: Parking Violations
21-15: Prohibiting Right Turn On Red
21-10: SPEED LIMITS:
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle within any Kane County facility as
hereinafter described at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper having
regard to the traffic and use of way or so as to endanger the life or limb or
property of any person, nor in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 92-
295, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-4, 1-12-1993)
21-11: STATE TRAFFIC LAW ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the
operation and parking of vehicles, including disabled persons, that certain law
known as the Illinois traffic law, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended,
and the same is hereby adopted and represented as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within all named county
facilities. (Ord. 92-295, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-4, 1-12-1993)
21-12: TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, ETC.:
All traffic control systems, signs, signals or devices which are in place on
the adoption date hereof within the following described parking areas are
hereby ratified and confirmed except as are or as may be modified by
administrative parking restrictions and regulations, the current restrictions
and regulations being attached hereto and made a part of this article. (Ord.
92-295, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-4, 1-12-1993)
21-13: KANE COUNTY PARKING AREAS:
The Kane County parking areas which are designated as follows are restricted
parking areas:
   A.   Parking lots contained within the Kane County Government Center
complex;
   B.   Parking lots contained within the Kane County Courthouse complex;
   C.   Parking lots contained within the youth home;
   D.   Parking lots contained within the diagnostic center;
   E.   Parking lots contained within the family court; and
   F.   Parking lots contained within the circuit clerk's premises.
The parking of motor vehicles in the above described areas, whether marked by
color coding or numbered minutes or described as "Restricted Parking",
"Reserved-County Board", "Reserved- Judiciary", shall be restricted and limited
to such Kane County officers, employees, officials and other persons
transacting county business. A schedule of the current parking restrictions and
regulations and assignments of parking promulgated by the county administration
committee of the county board is incorporated by reference as part of this
article. A schedule of said restrictions and regulations shall be filed with
the county clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 92-295, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-4, 1-
12-1993)
21-14: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Any person accused of a violation of a section of this code prohibiting
parking a vehicle in a designated area or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may be parked there may settle and compromise the claim against him for
such illegal parking by paying to the county, within forty eight (48) hours of
the time such alleged offense was committed, the following sums for the
following offenses:
 
1. Overtime parking                      $ 5.00
2. Overtime parking in excess of 8 hours 10.00
3. Prohibited parking                    15.00
 
In the event such fine is not paid within forty eight (48) hours after the
issuance of the citation therefor, the fine for each said offense shall be as
follows:
 
1. Overtime parking                      $10.00
2. Overtime parking in excess of 8 hours 20.00
3. Prohibited parking                    30.00
 
Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be subject to
having its vehicle towed from the restricted parking area. The payment of the
towing and storage charges shall be the responsibility and obligation of the
owner.
Such payment of fines shall be made at the office of the circuit clerk, or in
the fine deposit boxes located upon the facilities, and such funds shall be
promptly turned over to the county treasurer to be credited to the general
corporate fund. (Ord. 92-295, 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-4, 1-12-1993)
21-15: PROHIBITING RIGHT TURN ON RED:
The following streets or highways shall be prohibited from right turns on red
as set out in the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
306(c)(3), so as to be reasonable, safe and proper:
   Kane County Highway No. 30 (Huntley Road) at Sleepy Hollow Road.
   Kane County Highway 34 (Randall Road) at Kane County Highway 30 (Huntley
Road).
   Kirk Road at Wilson Street for the eastbound lane of Wilson Street. (Ord.
07-229, 6-12-2007; Ord. 17-55, 2-14-2017; Ord. 19-449, 12-10-2019)
CHAPTER 22
TRAILER COACH AND MOBILE HOME PARKS 1
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
SECTION:
22-1: Short Title
22-2: Definitions
22-3: Inspections And Enforcement
22-4: Records Of Zoning Officer
22-5: Certificates Of Use And Occupancy Required
22-6: Application Of Administrative Review Act
22-7: Rules And Regulations
22-8: Exemption
22-9 - 22-25: Reserved
22-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and referred to as the KANE COUNTY TRAILER COACH
AND MOBILE HOME PARK ORDINANCE. (Ord. 68-25, § 1, 4-9-1968)
22-2: DEFINITIONS 1 :
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated:
COMMITTEE: The development committee of the county board.
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach which does
not have a toilet and bath or shower facilities.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach with
self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: Any district created or operated under the provisions of the
"school code", approved May 1, 1945, as amended.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or
so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling
place, or any vehicle or similar portable structure designed to be transported
after fabrication, on a flatbed or on another trailer, or on detachable wheels
to a site where it is to be used as a dwelling ready for occupancy, except for
minor or incidental unpacking and assembly operations.
TRAILER COACH PARK OR PARK: An area of land upon which two (2) or more occupied
trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes,
and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or
intended for use as a part of the equipment of such trailer coach park.
TRAILER COACH SPACE OR TRAILER COACH SITE: Any portion of a trailer coach park
designed for the use or occupancy of one trailer coach. (Ord. 68-25, § 2, 4-9-
1968)
 
Notes
1 2. 210 ILCS 115/2 - 115/2.9.
22-3: INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 1 :
The governing body of the school district in which a trailer coach park is
located, by and through its officers, attendance officers and proper employees,
may inspect and visit a trailer coach park for the purposes of examining the
register with reference to children of school age for the purpose of enforcing
attendance of school children housed in the trailer coach park. When a trailer
coach park is located in two (2) or more school districts, the school district
boards of said districts, acting jointly, are hereby authorized to proceed
under the provisions of this chapter. The zoning officer shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the zoning officer or his deputies shall
inspect, at least once each year, each trailer coach park and all the
accommodations and facilities therewith. The zoning officer and his deputies
are hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of such
trailer coach parks at any time for the purposes herein set forth. (Ord. 68-25,
§§ 15, 18, 4-9-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/21.
22-4: RECORDS OF ZONING OFFICER:
The zoning officer shall keep a record of all trailer coach parks; said records
to show the names and addresses of all trailer coach parks, names and addresses
of the licensees, number of trailer coach lots in each park, source of water
supply; system of sewage and garbage disposal, and any other information deemed
essential by the zoning officer. (Ord. 68-25, § 12, 4-9-1968)
22-5: CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
   A.   No trailer coach park shall be occupied until a certificate of use and
occupancy shall have been issued by the zoning officer to the effect that the
trailer coach park, or the portion thereof for which such certificate is
required, is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Each trailer coach occupied as a dwelling unit located in the county
after April 9, 1968, shall meet the minimum standards for plumbing, heating and
electrical systems, as defined by the American Standard Association project
A119.1, approved March 12, 1963, as revised periodically. Trailer coaches that
display the official seal and register number of the Mobile Home Manufacturers
Association and the Trailer Coach Association will be considered to comply with
the American Standards Association, standard A119.1. Trailer coaches that do
not meet these minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems
will not be issued a certificate of use and occupancy permit by the zoning
officer.
   C.   The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as
defined by the American Standards Association project A119.1 (1963), as amended
and revised periodically, are hereby made a part of and incorporated by
reference into this chapter.
   D.   This requirement shall not apply to occupied trailer coaches in the
county prior to April 9, 1968, nor to units built prior to March 12, 1963.
(Ord. 68-25, § 9A(v), 4-9-1968)
22-6: APPLICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW ACT:
The "administrative review act" approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto shall apply to
and govern all proceedings for judicial review of final administrative
decisions of the zoning officer and the development committee hereunder. The
term "administrative decision" is defined as in section I of the
"administrative review act". (Ord. 68-25, § 20, 4-9-1968)
22-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The committee may issue rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, § 18, 4-9-1968)
22-8: EXEMPTION:
   A.   This chapter shall not apply to any trailer coach located in a
recreational camp as defined in the zoning ordinance, the patrons of which have
other permanent residences and reside in trailer coaches within the recreation
camp only during recreational seasons.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include the state parks
of Illinois and the term "trailer coach park" shall not be construed to include
buildings, tents, or other structures maintained by any person on his own
premises and used exclusively to house his own farm labor, or any real estate
owned by the United States or of this state wherein a trailer coach or coaches
may be located or harbored, or any park on state or county fairgrounds for a
period during, immediately prior to and immediately subsequent to the holding
of the fair not to exceed a total of two (2) weeks in all, or the area or
premises on any farm upon which are harbored trailer coaches occupied by
persons employed upon such farm for not more than ninety (90) days in any
calendar year in the production, harvesting or processing of agricultural or
horticultural products produced on such farm. However, any trailer coach park
owned or operated by any municipality shall meet sanitary and safety provisions
of this chapter, shall be inspected as herein provided, shall pay or cause to
be paid to the zoning officer the respective application and license fees
provided by this chapter, and keep a register and make all reports, as herein
required of a licensee. (Ord. 68-25, §§ 3.1, 17, 4-9-1968)
22-9 - 22-25: RESERVED:
ARTICLE II. LICENSES AND PERMITS 1
SECTION:
22-26: Generally
22-27: Application
22-28: Application Processing And Issuance; Changes In Application Information
22-29: License Fee And Handling Of Funds
22-30: License Revocation Or Suspension
22-31: Records And Forms
22-32: Appeals
22-33 - 22-45: Reserved
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/18, 115/3 - 115/8.
22-26: GENERALLY:
   A.   No person shall construct a trailer coach park without first obtaining
a permit to do so. Each permit to construct, each license to operate, and each
permit to make alterations therein shall be prominently displayed in the office
of the trailer coach park for which the same was issued. Licenses issued
hereunder apply only to the premises described in the application and in the
license issued thereon, and only one location shall be so described in each
license. A license which has been issued to a person, may not be transferred to
any other person, firm or corporation, without the written consent of the
zoning officer. However, the zoning officer may not withhold such consent where
the provisions of this chapter have been met. A license which has been issued
for particular premises may not be removed or made to apply to any other
premises.
   B.   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, establish, maintain,
conduct or operate a trailer coach park without first obtaining a license
therefor from the zoning officer. Such license shall be issued for one year and
shall expire at midnight on April 30 of each year, and the license shall be
renewed from year to year upon payment of the annual license fee herein
provided. (Ord. 68-25, §§ 3, 8, 4-9-1968)
22-27: APPLICATION:
   A.   In order to obtain a permit to construct, or any original license to
operate a trailer coach park, the applicant shall file with the zoning officer
a written application setting forth:
      1.   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application.
      2.   The location and legal description of the tract of land upon which
it is proposed to operate and maintain a trailer coach park.
      3.   The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply,
sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and for a sanitary
community building, if applicable, which will include a description of toilets,
urinals, sinks, wash basins, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the
proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof.
      4.   The proposed method of lighting structures and land upon which the
park is located.
      5.   The calendar month of the year which applicant will operate said
park.
      6.   The plot plans of the park drawn on a scale of one hundred feet to
one inch (100':1"), building plans and specifications for existing buildings
and facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and
facilities, or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all showing
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The plot plans shall be drawn
on a scale of one hundred feet to one inch (100':1") and shall contain, among
other things, the following:
         a.   The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
         b.   An arrow indicating north.
         c.   All trailer coach sites shall be properly numbered on plot plans.
         d.   Complete information regarding storm sewers.
         e.   Stormwater runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
         f.   Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals shall be shown on a
separate plat and United States geological survey data shall be used for the
preparation of such plat.
         g.   Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate
plat.
      7.   A statement of the fire fighting facilities, public or private,
which are available to the trailer coach park.
   B.   An affidavit as to the truth of the matters contained in the
application shall be attached thereto. Where a permit to construct as well as
an original license to operate is sought by the applicant, request therefor
shall be made in the same application. Each application for a permit to
construct or for an original license shall be accompanied by an application fee
amounting to twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or a
fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a park. Each application fee shall be
paid to the zoning officer by a separate certified check or United States money
order in the amount of the application fee only, and said application fee, once
paid to the zoning officer, shall not be refunded. (Ord. 68-25, § 4, 4-9-1968)
22-28: APPLICATION PROCESSING AND ISSUANCE; CHANGES IN APPLICATION INFORMATION:
   A.   The committee shall examine the application for a permit to construct a
park or an application for a license to operate and maintain a park, and the
zoning officer shall, if the park is or the proposed park will be in conformity
with this chapter as determined by the committee, issue a permit to construct
or an original license, as the case may be. If the application for a permit to
construct or a license to operate and maintain is declined, the committee shall
give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant; and if the objections
can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it for
approval.
   B.   No license shall be issued for any trailer coach park which does not
fully comply with at least the minimum requirements of this chapter, regardless
of whether a license is issued for such trailer coach park for any prior
licensing year.
   C.   If a permit to construct a park has been issued, the applicant shall,
upon completion thereof, notify the zoning officer. The zoning officer shall
then inspect the park, and, if completed in accordance with the accepted
application, the zoning officer shall issue a license to operate and maintain
said park.
   D.   No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer,
drainage, garbage or waste disposal and no change in the plot plan shall be
made without first making a written application to the zoning officer and
receiving a permit therefrom. Such application shall be made in the way and
manner hereinbefore set forth, except that a fee amounting to ten dollars
($10.00) for each ten (10) acres, or a fraction thereof, used to harbor trailer
coaches thereon shall accompany each application for a permit to alter such
trailer coach park. No application fee shall be required to accompany an
application for a permit to alter a park where such alteration involves only a
reduction to the number of trailer spaces to a number less than such park is
currently licensed for. Such change or changes shall comply with such safety
and sanitary code, building code, rules and regulations as are applicable
thereto.
   E.   Such a permit does not relieve the applicant from securing permits or
from complying with the zoning ordinance, the building ordinance or any other
ordinances applicable thereto. No license to operate and maintain a park shall
be issued if such park is in violation of the zoning ordinance and such park
was not in existence at the time of the passage of such zoning ordinance. (Ord.
68-25, §§ 5, 10, 4-9-1968)
22-29: LICENSE FEE AND HANDLING OF FUNDS:
   A.   In addition to the application fee provided for herein, the licensee
shall pay to the zoning officer on or before April 30 of each year an annual
license fee, which shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) plus three dollars ($3.00)
for each trailer coach space in the park. Any applicant for an original license
to operate a new trailer coach park constructed under a permit by the zoning
officer shall only be required to pay one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee if
such park begins operating after January 31 and before May 1 of such licensing
year; or one-half (1/2) of the annual fee if such trailer coach park begins
operation after October 31 and before February 1 of such licensing year; or
three-fourths (3/4) of the annual fee if such park begins operation after July
31 and before November 1 of such licensing year; but shall be required to pay
the entire annual fee if such trailer coach park begins operation after April
30 and before August 1 of such licensing year.
   B.   Each license fee shall be paid to the zoning officer by a separate
certified check or United States money order in the amount of the license fee
only, and any license fee, or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by
the zoning officer, shall not be refunded if the license is granted.
   C.   The zoning officer shall deposit all funds received under this chapter
with the county treasurer. (Ord. 68-25, § 6, 4-9-1968)
22-30: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension by
the zoning officer; however, the zoning officer shall first serve, or caused to
be served, upon the licensee, a written notice in which shall be specified the
way or ways in which such licensee has failed to comply with this chapter. Said
notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary
or objectional condition specified in such notice within a reasonable time. If
the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice
within a reasonable time, the zoning officer may revoke or suspend such
license. (Ord. 68-25, § 7, 4-9-1968)
22-31: RECORDS AND FORMS:
   A.   When the committee has approved an application for a permit to
construct or make alterations upon a trailer coach park or the appurtenances
thereto or a license to operate and maintain the same, it shall retain the
original and keep a file thereof, and one copy shall be returned to the
applicant or his agent, one copy shall be delivered to the zoning officer.
   B.   The zoning officer shall draft and supply all forms and blanks and
specify the number and detail necessary to obtain permits to construct or make
alterations upon trailer coach parks and for a license to operate and maintain
such a park according to this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, § 11, 4-9-1968)
22-32: APPEALS:
   A.   Any person refused a permit to construct or alter a trailer coach park
or a license, or whose license is suspended or revoked, shall have the right to
a hearing before the committee, which shall have full power to conduct such
hearing, issue subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations and all other
powers necessary to such hearing.
   B.   All hearings before the committee shall be open to the public, and the
committee shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing its determination and
shall also keep records of other official actions.
   C.   In the performance of its duties under the provisions of this chapter,
the committee may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the county
board.
   D.   The committee shall adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict
with this chapter.
   E.   No hearing shall be held before the committee until notice of the time
and place of the hearing has been published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date,
said notice to contain the particular location of the trailer coach park and a
brief statement as to the reason the hearing is being held. (Ord. 68-25, § 19,
4-9-1968)
22-33 - 22-45: RESERVED:
ARTICLE III. TRAILER PARK STANDARDS 1
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
22-46: Special Provisions For Trailer Parks In B6 Zoning District
22-47: Removal Of Trailer Coaches From Existing Spaces; Permits To Bring Parks
Into Compliance
22-48 - 22-55: Reserved
Division 2. Standards Applicable To All Trailer Parks
22-56: Compliance
22-57: Office And Records
22-58: Attendant
22-59: Drainage
22-60: Minimum Area
22-61: Maximum Density Of Units Per Acre
22-62: Minimum Lot Size
22-63: Trailer Coach Stand
22-64: Minimum Width Of Trailer Coach Lots
22-65: Minimum Distance Between Trailer Coaches
22-66: Yards Abutting Common Areas
22-67: Distance Of Trailer From Park Boundary, Street, Etc.
22-68: Trailer Coach Lot Specifications
22-69: Streets And Walks
22-70: Parking Spaces
22-71: Water Supply
22-72: Sewers And Sewage
22-73: Garbage Removal And Insect And Rodent Control
22-74: Electric Lighting And Outlets
22-75: Fuel Storage Tanks
22-76: Playgrounds
22-77: Additions To Trailer Coaches
22-78: Permitted Obstructions
22-79: Screening
22-80: Miscellaneous Requirements
22-81 - 22-90: Reserved
Division 3. Standards Applicable To Parks In B5 Zoning Districts
22-91: Compliance
22-92: Toilet, Lavatory And Bathing Facilities
22-93: Laundry Room
22-94: Service Buildings
22-95: Water Supply
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/9.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
22-46: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TRAILER PARKS IN B6 ZONING DISTRICT:
Except as provided in this chapter, every park licensed or to be constructed
under the provisions of this chapter in a county B6 zoning district shall
comply with the following provisions:
   A.   No trailer coach shall be allowed in any licensed trailer coach park
that is not an independent trailer coach.
   B.   All trailer coaches in any licensed trailer coach park shall have its
wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the trailer coach affixed in whole on a
permanent foundation, or on piers.
   C.   No service building housing toilets, urinals, lavatories and/or bathing
facilities shall be permitted. (Ord. 68-25, § 9C, 4-9-1968)
22-47: REMOVAL OF TRAILER COACHES FROM EXISTING SPACES; PERMITS TO BRING PARKS
INTO COMPLIANCE:
Whenever a trailer coach is removed from an existing trailer coach park, the
lot or space left vacant shall not again be occupied by another trailer except
that the lot or space be made to meet the requirements of this chapter. Permits
may be issued for alterations of existing structures or installations which
tend to make the trailer coach park conform with this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, §
10, 4-9-1968)
22-48 - 22-55: RESERVED:
DIVISION 2. STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRAILER PARKS
22-56: COMPLIANCE:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter every park licensed or constructed
under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this
division. (Ord. 68-25, § 9, 4-9-1968)
22-57: OFFICE AND RECORDS:
Each trailer coach park shall be provided with a custodian's office where each
trailer coach entering such trailer coach park shall be assigned to a lot
location, given a copy of the trailer coach park rules, and registered
according to the prescribed form. Said registrations shall include the name and
address of every occupant of said trailer coach; the license number of all
units; the state issuing such licenses; and a statement indicating the exact
location at which such trailer coach was last parked, including the state,
city, town or village where such parking occurred. The licensee shall keep a
registry of all children of school age occupying trailer coaches in the trailer
coach park. The above mentioned register shall be signed by an occupant of the
trailer coach. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of
registration shall be deemed guilty of an offense. The registration records
shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be
destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed following the date of registration.
The register shall be available at all times for inspection by law enforcement
officers. (Ord. 68-25, § 14, 4-9-1968)
22-58: ATTENDANT:
Every park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at
all times, whose duties shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and
equipment, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and be answerable, with
the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 68-25,
§ 9A(a), 4-9-1968)
22-59: DRAINAGE:
No park shall be so located that the drainage of the park area will endanger
any water supply. All such parks shall be well drained and shall be located in
areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes may breed.
No wastewater from trailer coaches shall be deposited on the surface of the
ground. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(b), 4-9-1968)
22-60: MINIMUM AREA:
The minimum area for each trailer coach park shall be ten (10) acres. The
minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before first
occupancy is permitted shall be fifty (50). This section shall not apply to any
state licensed trailer coach park in existence on April 9, 1968. (Ord. 68-25, §
9A(c), 4-9-1968)
22-61: MAXIMUM DENSITY OF UNITS PER ACRE:
The total density of any trailer coach park shall not exceed seven (7) units
per gross acre and the net density on any particular acre within such park
shall not exceed ten (10) units per net acre. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(d), 4-9-1968)
22-62: MINIMUM LOT SIZE 1 :
The minimum area for each individual coach space will be four thousand (4,000)
square feet. Not more than one trailer coach shall be placed on a trailer coach
lot. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(e), 4-9-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/9.3.
22-63: TRAILER COACH STAND:
That part of an individual lot reserved for the placement of the trailer coach
shall be called the "trailer coach stand" and shall conform to the following
standards:
   A.   The trailer coach stand shall be so placed as to provide for the
practical placement on the lot of both the trailer coach and its appurtenant
structures and the retention of the trailer coach on the lot in a stable
condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings.
   B.   The size of the trailer coach stand shall be suitable for the general
market to be served by the individual park and suitable to fit dimensions of
trailer coaches anticipated, including trailer coach appurtenant structures or
appendages.
   C.   The location of each trailer coach stand shall be at such elevation,
distance and angle in relation to the access street and the trailer coach lot
driveway that placement and removal of the trailer coach is practical.
   D.   Construction, shall be of concrete slab or concrete runways.
   E.   There shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) longitudinal and adequate
crown or cross gradient and surface drainage.
   F.   All trailer coaches which are placed on foundations or piers shall have
the entire perimeter enclosed. The enclosure shall be of a material approved by
the county. Panels manufactured specifically for trailer coach enclosures shall
be considered to meet these requirements. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(f), 4-9-1968)
22-64: MINIMUM WIDTH OF TRAILER COACH LOTS:
The minimum average width for each trailer coach lot shall be forty feet (40'),
except that for any trailer coach unit greater than twelve feet (12') in width,
the minimum average lot width shall be forty five feet (45'). This average
shall be maintained between points ten feet (10') in front of the trailer coach
stand and five feet (5') to the rear of the stand. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(g), 4-9-
1968)
22-65: MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN TRAILER COACHES 1 :
No trailer coach shall be placed within fifteen feet (15') of another and in no
case shall the trailer coach be located closer than seven and one-half feet
(71/2') of the side or rear lot line. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(h), 4-9-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 115/9.3.
22-66: YARDS ABUTTING COMMON AREAS 1 :
The distance from the line or corner of the trailer coach stand to a private
street, a common driveway, a common parking area, a common walk, or other
common area shall be fifteen feet (15') minimum. Patios, trailer coach
appurtenances, carports and individual storage facilities shall not be included
in the determination of yard width. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(i), 4-9-1968)
 
Notes
1 2. 210 ILCS 115/9.3.
22-67: DISTANCE OF TRAILER FROM PARK BOUNDARY, STREET, ETC.:
No trailer coach shall be placed a lesser distance from the trailer coach park
boundary than fifteen feet (15'). The distance from the line or corner of the
trailer coach stand to a public street shall be not less than twenty seven feet
(27'). Patios, trailer coach appurtenances, carports and individual storage
facilities shall not be included in the determination of yard widths. (Ord. 68-
25, § 9A(j), 4-9-1968)
22-68: TRAILER COACH LOT SPECIFICATIONS:
Every trailer coach lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by permanent
markers. There shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on each
lot a number corresponding to the number of each lot as shown on the plot plan
submitted as required by this chapter, so that each lot may be easily
identified. Each trailer coach lot shall have provided thereon a patio and
adequate tenant storage conforming to the following specifications:
   A.   Patio: Each trailer coach lot shall provide an appropriate outdoor
living space to supplement the interior living space of a mobile home. The
minimum size of each trailer coach lot patio shall be one hundred eighty (180)
square feet. Every patio location shall be convenient to the entrance of the
trailer coach, appropriately related to open areas of the lot and other
facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to anticipated
trailer coach models.
Where practical, the patio shall be at an elevation at least as high as the
elevation of its trailer coach stand. Where topographical conditions permit,
the patio and adjoining yard areas on the entry side of the trailer coach stand
may be as much as two feet (2') higher than the trailer coach stand in order
that the level of the patio and outdoor living area will be close to the floor
level of an in-place trailer coach. The grade difference between the patio and
the stand may be taken up by a retaining wall or cribbing or by an earth slope.
Where the patio is higher than the trailer coach stand, adequate surface
drainage of the trailer coach stand shall be provided across the other side or
ends of the stand.
Any subgrading shall be well drained, uniformly graded and compacted.
Construction shall provide a useful outdoor surface constructed or formed
either monolithically or in movable units with weather resistant materials
placed sufficiently close together to create a paved area.
   B.   Tenant Storage: Storage facilities shall be provided on or conveniently
near each trailer coach lot for the active storage of outdoor equipment,
furniture or tools, and for the inactive storage of such other materials as are
used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and which cannot be
conveniently stored in a typical trailer coach.
There shall be a minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet provided for general storage
for each trailer coach lot. Storage facilities shall be provided on the lot or
in compounds located within a reasonable distance, but not more than five
hundred feet (500') from each trailer coach stand serviced, and located no
closer to private or public streets than the mobile home unit itself. Storage
facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of
the court and shall be constructed of suitable weather resistant materials
appropriate for the use and maintenance contemplated. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(j), 4-
9-1968)
22-69: STREETS AND WALKS:
   A.   All publicly dedicated streets shall conform to the requirements of
chapter 19 of this code. Where private streets are provided within the trailer
coach park, a right of way width of fifty feet (50') shall be required. A
minimum of twenty four feet (24') in width of pavement, back to back of curbs,
shall be provided in the center of such right of way. All private streets shall
have unobstructed access to a public street or highway.
All private and public streets constructed in connection with a trailer coach
park, no matter where the park may be located within the county, shall be
designed and laid out in accordance with the urban subdivision provisions of
chapter 19 of this code except as may be modified by this chapter. The location
of all streets, public or private, within the park shall be subject to the
approval of the development committee of the county board.
   B.   Walks shall be provided for safe, convenient, all season pedestrian
access; of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain
and shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the urban subdivision
requirements of chapter 19 of this code, except as may be modified by this
chapter. There shall be:
      1.   Individual walks to each trailer coach stand from a paved street or
from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved street.
      2.   Common walks in such locations required by the urban subdivision
requirements of chapter 19 of this code and in locations where pedestrian
traffic is concentrated; for example, at the court entrance and to the court
office and other important facilities. The location of all walks shall be
subject to the approval of the committee.
      3.   The width, alignment and gradient of walks shall be appropriate for
safety, convenience and appearance, and shall be suitable for use by both
pedestrians and for the circulation of small wheeled vehicles, such as baby
carriages and service carts.
      4.   Walks shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the
specifications of the urban subdivision requirements of chapter 19 of this
code, as modified by this code. Widths shall be at least two feet (2') for
individual walks and at least three feet (3') for common walks. Sudden changes
in alignment and gradient shall be avoided. Required walks are not to be used
as drainageways. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(k), 4-9-1968)
22-70: PARKING SPACES:
Parking spaces shall be provided for not less than one and one- half (11/2)
cars per trailer coach lot. Required parking spaces shall include one car space
on each trailer coach lot and in addition shall include a sufficient number of
parking spaces in conveniently located parking bays to bring the total number
of parking spaces up to the required one and one-half (11/2) car spaces per
trailer coach lot. Each such parking space shall be not less than ten feet
(10') wide and twenty feet (20') deep, shall be surfaced for its entire area
with durable, hard material and suitable for all weather use. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A
(l), 4-9-1968)
22-71: WATER SUPPLY:
An adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality, approved by the
development committee, shall be furnished at each trailer park and each such
water supply shall comply with the standards of the Illinois department of
public health. Each such water supply shall be connected to a public water
supply when one is reasonably available. Where a public supply of water is not
available, a private water supply with sufficient storage and rate of pumpage
to deliver at least thirty five (35) gallons per trailer coach site during each
hour shall be provided. At least one cold water supply outlet shall be provided
within three hundred feet (300') of every dependent trailer site. Each
independent trailer site shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four
inches (4") above the ground. Each such tap shall be located within or at the
edge of the trailer site which it supplies and each such tap shall have at
least twenty five (25) pounds of pressure at all times. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(m),
4-9-1968)
22-72: SEWERS AND SEWAGE:
All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be disposed of into a municipal
sewage system whenever available. Where municipal sewerage disposal facilities
are not available, a private sewerage disposal system operated as a public
utility, may be installed. All private sewerage systems shall be constructed in
conformity with the requirements of the department of public health of the
state. No private sewerage system will be permitted which interferes with any
municipal plans for the orderly extension of municipal facilities. (Ord. 68-25,
§ 9A(n), 4-8-1968; Ord., 3-13-1973, § 1)
22-73: GARBAGE REMOVAL AND INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL:
A sufficient number of adequate flyproof and watertight containers shall be
supplied for the storage of garbage, except where an adequate incinerator is
provided. Garbage containers shall be emptied at least twice weekly and shall
not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling or a breeding
place for flies. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which
creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the
building officer. Adequate insect and rodent controlled measures shall be
employed. All buildings shall be fly and rodent proof, and rodent harborages
shall not be permitted to exist in the park. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(o), 4-9-1968)
22-74: ELECTRIC LIGHTING AND OUTLETS:
All entrances, exits and driveways shall be lighted at night. Not less than a
one hundred (100) watt electric light shall be provided for each two hundred
(200) linear feet of private streets and at each entrance and exit to the
trailer coach park. At least one receptacle outlet for each trailer coach space
shall be provided; this receptacle and other electric wiring shall conform to
the county's building code. Street lighting on public streets shall conform to
the requirements of chapter 19 of this code. All electrical distribution wiring
shall be underground. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(p), 4-9-1968)
22-75: FUEL STORAGE TANKS:
No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil, gas, liquefied petroleum or
other fuels shall be permitted within the trailer coach park. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A
(q), 4-9-1968)
22-76: PLAYGROUNDS:
A recreational area shall be provided of a size not less than eight percent
(8%) of the gross site area, generally provided in a central location,
including suitable landscaping, fencing and benches. In larger parks,
decentralization will be allowed. Recreation areas shall include space for
community buildings and community use facilities, such as adult recreation,
child playgrounds and natural open space. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(r), 4-9-1968)
22-77: ADDITIONS TO TRAILER COACHES:
No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any trailer coach
as an addition to such trailer coach, nor shall any accessory structure be
permitted on any trailer coach lot. The prohibition herein against any addition
or accessory to a trailer coach shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed
for use with a trailer coach, nor to any expansion unit coverage of a trailer
coach, together with any expansion or accessory structure permitted thereto by
this chapter shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total trailer coach
lot area. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(s), 4-9-1968)
22-78: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered as
obstructions when located in the yard indicated:
   A.   In Any Yard: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces and
awnings adjoining the trailer coach if they do not exceed ten percent (10%) of
the depth of the yard; and ornamental light standards and flagpoles, fences,
trees and shrubs shall not be higher than thirty inches (30") above the
centerline grade of the intersecting street if located in that portion of a
required front or side yard situated within twenty feet (20') of the lot corner
formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines.
   B.   In Front Yards: No other obstruction shall be permitted. (Ord. 68-25, §
9A(t), 4-9-1968)
22-79: SCREENING:
Plantings shall be hardy, appropriate for use and location, and planted so as
to thrive with normal maintenance. There shall be provided plantings adequate
to screen views effectively. Views to be screened shall include laundry drying
yards, garbage and trash collection stations, nonresidential uses and yards of
all adjacent property. (Ord. 68-25, § 9A(u), 4-9-1968)
22-80: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions shall be applicable to all trailer coach parks
licensed under the provisions of this chapter:
   A.   It shall be the duty of each licensee on February 1 and September 1 of
each year to file with the school board of the school district wherein the
trailer coach park is located, a report giving the names and ages of all
children of school age living in said trailer coach park.
   B.   All streets and driveways in every trailer coach park must be
maintained in a passable and reasonable dustproof condition at all times, and
all streets and driveways in every trailer coach park established after April
9, 1968, shall have the minimum width required by this chapter.
   C.   Every trailer coach park shall be so arranged that the walking distance
from any dependent trailer coach unit parking site to the water, toilet, and
shower accommodations will not exceed two hundred feet (200').
   D.   It shall be the duty of every owner, or operator, or attendant of any
trailer coach park to report to the township health officer the full name, age,
and address of every person who is affected or suspected of being affected with
any reportable communicable disease.
   E.   The management of every trailer coach park shall assume full
responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary and
safety appliances on said park, and shall promptly bring such action as is
necessary to prosecute or eject from said park any person who wilfully or
maliciously damages such appliances, or any person who fails to comply with
this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, § 13, 4-9-1968)
22-81 - 22-90: RESERVED:
DIVISION 3. STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO PARKS IN B5 ZONING DISTRICTS 1
 
Notes
1 1. See section 25-10-6, "B5 District - Business", of this code.
22-91: COMPLIANCE:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every park licensed or to be
constructed under the provisions of this chapter in a county B5 zoning district
shall comply with the provisions of this division. (Ord. 68-25, § 9B, 4-9-1968)
22-92: TOILET, LAVATORY AND BATHING FACILITIES:
   A.   Adequate toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities for occupants of
dependent trailer coaches shall be provided in community service buildings.
Such buildings shall be conveniently located, well constructed, having good
natural and artificial lighting, adequate ventilation and floors of concrete or
similar impervious materials. Concrete curbings, extending at least six inches
(6") above the floor, shall be provided and the floor sloped to adequate
drains. Walls and partitions shall be constructed of impervious material where
subject to splash. Such buildings shall be maintained at a temperature of at
least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) during the period from October 1 to
May 1.
   B.   The service building housing toilet facilities shall be located not
closer than twenty feet (20') to, and not farther than two hundred feet (200')
from, any dependent trailer coach site, and it shall be located not closer than
ten feet (10') to the side lines of said park.
   C.   The community service building shall be provided with toilet rooms for
each sex, plainly marked by appropriate signs, in which shall be installed
water closets and lavatories adequate in number to serve the reasonable needs
of occupants of dependent trailer coaches. Each water closet shall be placed in
a separate compartment, properly separate from other water closets and shall be
not less than three feet (3') wide and shall be enclosed with proper partition.
The community service building shall also be provided with tub or shower bath
compartments, for both sexes, adequate in number to accommodate the reasonable
needs of occupants of dependent trailer coaches. In combination with each bath
or shower stall, there shall be provided an individual dressing compartment not
less than two and one-half feet by three feet (21/2' x 3') in plan so arranged
as to ensure privacy. The floor of such compartment shall be waterproof and
elevated three inches (3") above the floor of the shower stall or a six inch
(6") curbing provided, separating shower compartment from dressing room. Mats,
grids, and walkways made of wood, cloth or other absorbent materials will not
be approved for use in bath sections of community service buildings. Each
community service building shall contain, as a minimum, the following fixtures
and facilities:
Women's toilet facilities:
 Flush toilets      1 for every 5 dependent trailer sites
 Showers or tubs    1 for every 5 dependent trailer sites
 Lavatories         1 for every 5 dependent trailer sites
 Slop sinks         1 for every 15 dependent trailer sites
 Drinking fountains 1 for every 15 dependent trailer sites
Men's toilet facilities:
 Flush toilets      1 for every 6 dependent trailer sites
 Urinals            1 for every 15 dependent trailer sites
 Showers or tubs    1 for every 5 dependent trailer sites
 Lavatories         1 for every 5 dependent trailer sites
 Drinking fountains 1 for every 15 dependent trailer sites
 Slop sinks         1 for every 15 dependent trailer sites
 
(Ord. 68-25, § 9B(a), 4-9-1968)
22-93: LAUNDRY ROOM:
A laundry room or building constructed as specified herein, shall be provided
containing laundry trays to accommodate the patrons of the trailer coach park.
No laundry trays shall be located in toilet or bathrooms. Each laundry room or
building shall contain, as a minimum the following fixtures and facilities: one
automatic clothes washer and one automatic clothes dryer for every twenty (20)
trailer coach sites; and one electric outlet for ironing, for every twenty (20)
trailer coach sites. (Ord. 68-25, § 9B(a), 4-9-1968)
22-94: SERVICE BUILDINGS 1 :
Except as otherwise provided herein, all service buildings, including any
living quarters and the office for the attendant, shall be constructed in
accordance with the provisions of the county's building ordinance. (Ord. 68-25,
§ 9B(a), 4-9-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 6, "Buildings And Building Regulations", of this code.
22-95: WATER SUPPLY:
An adequate water supply shall be provided at all times for the operation of
all water closets in service buildings, and an adequate supply of hot and cold
water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing,
washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. (Ord. 68-25, § 9B(a), 4-9-1968)
CHAPTER 23
WELLS AND WATER SUPPLY
SECTION:
23-1: Scope
23-2: Definitions
23-3: Adoption By Reference
23-4: Public Water Supply Use
23-5: Potable Water Supply Required
23-6: Surface Water Supplies
23-7: Cisterns
23-8: Preexisting Water Wells
23-9: Abandoned Wells
23-10: Permit Required
23-11: Application For Permit
23-12: Issuance Of Permit
23-13: Property Owner's Responsibility
23-14: Water Well And/Or Pump Installation Contractor's Responsibility
23-15: Permit Validity
23-16: Permit Fees
23-17: Exceptions
23-18: Inspections
23-19: Inspection Of Completed Work
23-20: Containment Of Drilling Slurry
23-21: Notification For Inspection
23-22: Suspension Of Permit
23-23: Disinfection And Analysis
23-24: Penalties
23-25: Water Well Construction In Campton Township
23-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall regulate water supplies, the construction and modification
of water wells, the sealing of abandoned water wells, and the inspection of
water supplies and their components within Kane County, Illinois. (Ord. 04-199,
5-11-2004)
23-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ABANDONED WELL: A water well which is no longer used to provide water which is
in such state of disrepair that continued use for the purpose of accessing
groundwater is unsafe or impractical.
APPLICANT: The "owner" as defined herein or his or its authorized agent.
COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A public water system which serves at least
fifteen (15) service connections used by residents, or regularly serves twenty
five (25) or more residents for at least sixty (60) days per year.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Kane County health department.
HEALTH OFFICERS: The director of the health department or his authorized
representative.
MODIFICATION: Any change, replacement, or other alteration of a water well.
This includes, but is not limited to, deepening of a well, replacing or
repairing a casing, repair or replacement of well screen, installation of a
pitless adapter and any other changes of a well structure.
NONCOMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A public water system which is not a
community water system, and has at least fifteen (15) service connections used
by nonresidents, or regularly serves twenty five (25) or more nonresident
individuals daily for at least sixty (60) days per year.
OWNER: The person in whose name legal title has been recorded.
PERSON: Individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust estate, municipality or any other
entity.
POTABLE WATER: Water that is suitable for human consumption and which meets
public health standards for drinking water.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: Any supply which provides water for drinking, culinary,
and sanitary purposes and serves an owner occupied single-family dwelling.
SEMIPRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: A water supply which is not a public water system,
yet which serves a segment of the public other than an owner occupied single-
family dwelling.
WATER WELL: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug,
jetted or otherwise constructed when the intended use is for the location,
diversion, artificial recharge, or acquisition of groundwater, except
monitoring wells.
WELL SEAL: An arrangement or device used to cap a well or establish watertight
closure of the junction of a well pump or piping with the well casing at upper
terminal of the well, the purpose of which is to prevent contaminated water or
other material from entering the well. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-3: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
In addition to those provisions set forth, this chapter shall be interpreted
and enforced in accordance with provisions set forth in the following statutes,
rules, and regulations of the state of Illinois, department of public health
and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, which publications are
incorporated herein and adopted by reference as part of this chapter. Copies of
the following statutes, rules and regulations are available at the health
department:
   A.   Illinois water well construction code (77 Ill. adm. code 920).
   B.   Illinois water well pump installation code (77 Ill. adm. code 925).
   C.   Rules and regulations of sanitary practice for drinking water, sewage
disposal, and restroom facilities (77 Ill. adm. code 895).
   D.   Drinking water systems code (77 Ill. adm. code 900).
   E.   Illinois groundwater protection act.
   F.   Surface water treatment code (77 Ill. adm. code 930). (Ord. 04-199, 5-
11-2004)
23-4: PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY USE:
In those locations where a public water supply is reasonably available, that
supply shall be the sole source of water for drinking and culinary purposes. A
public water supply shall be deemed reasonably available when the subject
property is not greater than five hundred feet (500') from the nearest property
line of the property for a single-family residence and not greater than two
thousand feet (2,000') from the nearest property line of the property for
commercial establishments, subdivisions, or multi-family dwellings. (Ord. 04-
199, 5-11-2004)
23-5: POTABLE WATER SUPPLY REQUIRED:
All premises intended for human habitation or occupancy shall be provided with
a potable water supply. The potable water supply shall not be connected to
nonpotable water and shall be protected against backflow and back siphonage in
accordance with the requirements of the Illinois plumbing code. Each potable
water supply shall provide quantities of water that are sufficient for the
drinking, culinary, and sanitary needs of the dwelling or premises served. A
minimum system pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch shall be
maintained throughout each potable water supply. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-6: SURFACE WATER SUPPLIES:
All water systems which receive their source of water from ponds, lakes,
streams, rivers, or other surface collectors of water shall be designed,
constructed, and operated in accordance with the "surface water treatment
code". No surface water shall be utilized as a potable water supply unless the
health officer has reviewed and approved the supply and its components. (Ord.
04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-7: CISTERNS:
Cisterns shall not be used as a potable water supply except where adequate
groundwater resources are not available. Cistern water shall receive treatment
in accordance with the surface water treatment code. No surface water shall be
utilized as a potable water supply unless the health officer has reviewed and
approved the supply and its components. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-8: PREEXISTING WATER WELLS:
All water wells constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
comply with any provision of this chapter deemed necessary by the health
officer to protect groundwater and the public health. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-9: ABANDONED WELLS:
Wells that are abandoned shall be sealed in a manner prescribed by the health
officer and the Illinois water well construction code. It shall be the
responsibility of the water well contractor to ensure that a permit has been
issued and the health officer notified prior to sealing of an abandoned well.
The health officer shall inspect abandoned wells at the time of sealing to
determine compliance with this chapter. In questionable cases, the health
officer shall make the determination as to whether a water well is considered
abandoned, based upon the definition of an "abandoned well" and the facts in
each particular case. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-10: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No water well shall be constructed or deepened, or an abandoned well sealed
except in accordance with this chapter, and it shall be unlawful to proceed
with such work unless a permit has first been obtained from the health officer.
A noncommunity public water supply shall not be operated without first
obtaining a permit from the Illinois department of public health. (Ord. 04-199,
5-11-2004)
23-11: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All applications for permits under the provisions of this chapter shall be made
in writing and in such form as prescribed by the health officer. Sufficient
data shall be included to determine whether the proposed application for permit
meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-12: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Upon submission of the application for permit, including the plans and
specifications of the proposed water well or component thereof, the health
officer shall review said application prior to issuance of a permit. The health
officer may require additional information, which may include the location of
private sewage disposal systems and/or water wells on adjacent properties. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant or an authorized agent of the
applicant to obtain all necessary data and to design a system which shall meet
the requirements of this chapter. If the health officer, upon review of said
application, finds that such application meets the requirements of this
chapter, and upon payment of the required fee, a permit shall be issued to the
applicant. Such permit shall include specifications specific to each proposed
water well and shall include a statement as to any restrictions relating to the
location, materials, components, or type of water well to be constructed. (Ord.
04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-13: PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to obtain a permit before
any construction or deepening of a water well is begun. Failure of the property
owner to obtain a permit before construction or deepening of a water well is
begun shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-14: WATER WELL AND/OR PUMP INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the responsibility of the water well contractor to ensure that a
permit has been issued before any construction or deepening of a water well is
begun and to follow the conditions of said permit. Failure of the water well
contractor to ensure said permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
All water wells shall be constructed in accordance with the Illinois water well
construction code.
All individuals who construct water wells and install well pumps shall be
licensed by the Illinois department of public health in accordance with the
water well and pump installation contractor's license act chapter 111,
paragraph 7101 et seq., latest edition. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-15: PERMIT VALIDITY:
A permit to construct or deepen a water well or seal an abandoned well is valid
for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. If construction
has not started within this period, the permit is void. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-
2004)
23-16: PERMIT FEES 1 :
The schedule of the fees for this chapter is on file in the office of the
county clerk. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. Fees collected shall be credited to fund 041 (health fund), line item 18-
  02 (well).
23-17: EXCEPTIONS:
A permit to construct or deepen a water well shall not be required by the
health authority when such water well does or will serve a community public
water system or function as a monitoring well. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-18: INSPECTIONS:
The health authority shall have the authority to enter any property at any
reasonable time for inspection purposes to determine compliance with provisions
of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to
allow the health officer free access to the property for inspection purposes to
determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-
2004)
23-19: INSPECTION OF COMPLETED WORK:
A water well shall not be placed into operation until the installation of the
water well and its components has been inspected to verify compliance with
applicable provisions of this chapter and written approval issued by the health
officer. To the degree practical and permitted by the health authority, the
completed installation shall remain uncovered and/or accessible for inspection
purposes until approved by the health officer. If the health officer, upon
inspection of the specified installation or component thereof, finds that such
work meets the provisions of this chapter, the health officer shall approve
such work and authorize operation of the water well. However, compliance with
section 23-23 of this chapter shall be obtained prior to utilizing the water
system for drinking and culinary purposes. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-20: CONTAINMENT OF DRILLING SLURRY:
The slurry from all drilling operations must be contained within the property
lines of the drilling site. The slurry shall not be permitted to flow into any
road ditch, drainageway, drainage easement, detention/retention basins or any
other surface or subsurface waterway or system, or any conservation easement.
(Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-21: NOTIFICATION FOR INSPECTION:
The health officer shall be notified prior to commencing the construction or
deepening of a water well for which a permit has been issued. The health
officer shall also be notified prior to completion of the following
installations at which time a date for inspection will be arranged:
   A.   The construction or deepening of a water well under permit;
   B.   The sealing of an abandoned well.
It shall be the responsibility of the water well contractor to notify the
health authority as required. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-22: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Upon inspection by the health officer, if it is found that any provision of
this chapter to any permit specification for a stated property has been
violated, the health officer shall notify the installer to make such specified
changes in the work to allow compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
the permit. If such changes are not made within a period of time specified by
the health officer, said permit shall be suspended, and it shall be unlawful to
place the water well into operation.
When the health department discovers a violation of this chapter that pertains
to the actions or inactions of a person who constructs or modifies a water
well, it shall notify the Illinois department of public health of the violation
and the person responsible. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-23: DISINFECTION AND ANALYSIS:
All components of a new water well construction and/or modification shall be
thoroughly disinfected with a chlorine solution which will yield a dosage of at
least one hundred (100) parts per million to the water in the well. After
purging the system of any chlorine residual, a water sample shall be taken.
Owners of newly constructed wells or other types of water supplies which supply
a private or semiprivate water system shall have the water from their
semiprivate water supply analyzed and approved by either the laboratory of the
Illinois department of public health or a laboratory approved by the Illinois
department of public health, before the well or other water supply is placed
into service. A copy of the analysis shall be filed with the health department.
The water obtained from a surface supply shall meet the nitrate, turbidity and
bacteriological requirements contained in sections 900.50, 900.60 and 900.70 of
the Illinois department of public health drinking water systems code (77 Ill.
adm. code 900), and the water obtained from a well shall meet the
bacteriological requirements of section 900.70 of the drinking water systems
code. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004)
23-24: PENALTIES 1 :
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense.
When noncompliance of regulated noncommunity well testing requires health
department staff to collect a water sample, a fee will be charged to the owner
of the noncommunity well pursuant to the health department water well permit
fee schedule. (Ord. 04-199, 5-11-2004; Ord. 04-388, 10-12-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. Fees collected shall be credited to fund 041 (health fund), line item 18-
  02 (well).
23-25: WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION IN CAMPTON TOWNSHIP:
For wells constructed in Campton Township, the water well contractor is
required to adhere to the following to minimize the impact of bypassing the
Maquoketa Shale aquitard:
   A.   Wells screened into the shallow sand and gravel aquifer are not to be
screened any more than a few feet into the top of the Maquoketa Shale.
   B.   Wells that will be open to the Maquoketa Shale and rely primarily on
that unit for water are required to extend the casing into the unit
sufficiently to prevent water from the overlying sands and gravel aquifers from
entering into the well.
   C.   Wells drilled into the Galena-Platteville and St. Peter units are not
allowed to be open to the Maquoketa Shale. Casing for Galena-Platteville or St.
Peter wells are required to extend all the way through the Maquoketa Shale
formation when drilling a deep well. (ord. 22-356, 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 24
FRANCHISES
SECTION:
24-1: Table Of Franchises
24-1:    TABLE OF FRANCHISES:
The following franchises are in force in the county:
Ordinance Number Date Subject Franchise Term    Expires
                                        (Years)
Ordinance   Date       Subject     Franchise           Term     Expires
Number                                                 (Years)
                                   Illinois Bell Tel-  -        -
            12-3-1950  Telephone   Co
                                   Amended by Ord. 73-          
                                   79, 6-11-1973
            12-9-1964  Electricity Commonwealth Edison 50       2014
                                   Co.
            12-9-1964  Gas         No. Ill. Gas Co.    50       2114
4           2-11-1975  Pipeline    Badger Pipe Line             
                                   Co.
                                                                May 13, 1989
                                   Consolidated Cable           (Extended to
                                   Utilities (see      8        December 10,
                                   minutes of 12-8-    (10 year 1989, by Ord.
                                   1981 for correction renewal  89-55, 4-11-
                                   of area             option)  1989) (Aurora
                                   descriptions)                area) December
                                                                10, 1989 (Elgin
                                                                area)
                                   Amended by Ord. 89-          
                                   34, 2-14-1989
                                   Transferred to
                                   Jones Intercable,            
                                   Inc., by Ord. 89-
81-135      10-13-1981 CATV        127, 7-11-1989
                                                                May 12, 1992
                                                                (Extended to
                                   Amended by Ord. 90-         July 16, 2004,
                                   81, 4-10-1990                by Ords. 92-
                                                                100, 92-133,
                                                                92-134, 92-135)
                                   Transferred to
                                   Jones Growth                 
                                   Partners by Ord.
                                   90-158, 7-10-1990
                                   Amended by Ord. 90-          
                                   287, 12-11-1991
                                   Amended by Ord. 91-          
                                   49, 3-12-1991
82-5        5-11-1982  CATV        Multimedia          14       January 1, 1996
                                   Cablevision, Inc.
                                   Dowden
                                   Communications Of   -        -
                                   Illinois, Inc.
                                   Amended by Res. 85-          
                                   71, 5-14-1985
                                   Transferred to
                                   Dowden Cable
84-136      11-13-1984 CATV        Partners, L.P., by           
                                   Res. 87-42, 3-10-
                                   1987
                                   Transferred to
                                   Triax Midwest
                                   Associates L.P., by          
                                   Res. 88-69, 5-10-
                                   1988
                                   Dowden
                                   Communications Of   15       November 2003
88-31       3-9-1988   CATV        Illinois, Inc.
                                   Amended by Ord. 88-          
                                   68, 5-10-1988
                                   United Cable
88-67       5-10-1988  CATV        Television Of       10       May 1, 1998
                                   Northern Illinois
                                   Dowden                       February 1,
89-35       2-14-1989  CATV        Communications      15       2004
                                   Investors, L.P.
                                   Dowden                       September 1,
89-171      9-12-1989  CATV        Communications      15       2004
                                   Investors, L.P.
                                   Transferred from
                                   Dowden
                                   Communications
92-32       2-11-1992  CATV        Investors, L.P. to           
                                   Multimedia
                                   Cablevision Of
                                   Illinois, Inc.
                                   TCI of Northern
                                   Illinois            -        -
94-48       3-8-1994   CATV        territorial changes
                                   Multimedia
                                   Cablevision         -        -
                                   territorial changes
                                   Transfer and
                                   assignment from
                                   Multimedia
                                   Cablevision Of
                                   Illinois, Inc., to
                                   Communications
                                   Services, Inc., for          May 12, 1999;
98-197      8-11-1998  CATV        the unincorporated  -        September 1,
                                   areas of Batavia             2004
                                   Township, Campton
                                   Township, Rutland
                                   Township, Plato
                                   Township and parts
                                   of St. Charles and
                                   Elgin Townships
                                   Transfer from Jones
                                   Growth Partners,
99-02       1-12-1999  CATV        L.P., to Comcast    -        September 22,
                                   Cable                        2004
                                   Communications,
                                   Inc.
                                   Transfer from Cable
                                   TV Fund 15-A, Ltd.,          September 22,
99-03       1-12-1999  CATV        to Comcast          -        2004
                                   Communications,
                                   Inc.
                                   Transfer and
                                   assignment of
                                   franchise from               September 22,
99-04       1-12-1999  CATV        Jones Growth        -        2004
                                   Partners, L.P., to
                                   TCI Cablevision Of
                                   Ohio, Inc.
                                   Transfer and
                                   assignment of
99-05       1-12-1999  CATV        franchise from      -        September 22,
                                   Cable TV Fund 15-A,          2004
                                   Ltd., to TCI Of
                                   West Virginia, Inc.
                                   Change of control
                                   of 3 franchises
99-06       1-12-1999  CATV        from affiliates of  -        September 22,
                                   Telecommunications,          2004
                                   Inc. (TCI) to AT&T
                                   Corporation
                                   Transfer and
                                   assignment of
                                   franchise from               November 13,
99-253      9-14-1999  CATV        Triax Midwest               1999
                                   Associates, L.P.,
                                   to Mediacom
                                   Illinois LLC
                                   Extension of the
                                   existing franchise           November 13,
99-303      11-9-1999  CATV        agreement with      1        2000
                                   Triax Midwest
                                   Associates, L.P.
                                   Extension of the
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with Communications
00-120      5-9-2000   CATV        Services, Inc., for 1        May 11, 2001
                                   the unincorporated
                                   area of Batavia
                                   Township
                                   Extension of the
                                   cable television
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with Mediacom
                                   Illinois, LLC, for
00-310      11-14-2000 CATV        the unincorporated  1        November 13,
                                   areas of Big Rock,           2001
                                   Kaneville, and
                                   Blackberry
                                   Townships and part
                                   of Sugar Grove
                                   Township
                                   Extension of the
                                   cable television
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with United Cable
                                   Television
                                   Corporation Of
Res. 01-145 5-8-2001   CATV        Northern Illinois,  1        May 11, 2002
                                   DBA TCI Cablevision
                                   Of Northern
                                   Illinois, for the
                                   unincorporated
                                   areas of Dundee and
                                   part of Rutland
                                   Township
                                   Extension of the
                                   cable television
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with Communications
Res. 01-146 5-8-2001   CATV        Services, Inc., a   1        May 11, 2002
                                   subsidiary of TCI,
                                   for the
                                   unincorporated area
                                   of Batavia Township
                                   Extension of the
                                   cable television
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with Mediacom
                                   Illinois, LLC, for
01-361      11-13-2001 CATV        the unincorporated  1        November 13,
                                   areas of Big Rock,           2002
                                   Kaneville, and
                                   Blackberry
                                   Townships and part
                                   of Sugar Grove
                                   Township
                                   Extension of the
                                   cable television
                                   franchise agreement
                                   with Mediacom
                                   Illinois, LLC, for
03-343      11-12-2003 CATV        the unincorporated  1        November 13,
                                   areas of Big Rock,           2004
                                   Kaneville, and
                                   Blackberry
                                   Townships and part
                                   of Sugar Grove
                                   Township
 
CHAPTER 25
ZONING
ARTICLE I. TITLE
SECTION:
25-1-1: Designated
25-1-1: DESIGNATED:
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the KANE COUNTY ZONING
ORDINANCE. It is an ordinance:
   A.   Dividing the unincorporated part of Kane County into districts;
   B.   Regulating and restricting the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for residence, agriculture, business, industry, aviation
and for other specified uses within said districts;
   C.   Regulating and restricting the intensity of such use;
   D.   Establishing building lines;
   E.   Requiring permits; and
   F.   Providing for the administration of said ordinance pursuant to "an act
in relation to county zoning" passed by the general assembly of the state of
Illinois, and enacted into law June 28, 1935. (Ord. 80-37, § 1, 3-13-1980)
ARTICLE II. PURPOSE
SECTION:
25-2-1: Stated
25-2-1: STATED:
The Kane County zoning ordinance is adopted "For the purpose of promoting the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general welfare; conserving the
values of property throughout the county; and reducing or avoiding congestion
in the public streets and highways".
The standards and requirements contained in this ordinance and district mapping
reflected on the Kane County zoning maps are intended to further the
implementation of the objectives and policies of the 2040 land resource
management plan for Kane County, as well as protect all desirable existing
structures and uses. (Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
ARTICLE III. RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
25-3-1: Established
25-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
In the construction of this ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in
this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise. In further amplification and for clarity of interpretation
of the context, the following definitions of word use shall apply:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel", and "plots";
the word "building" includes all other structures of every kind regardless of
similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrases
"arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied
for".
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined
as follows:
ACCESSORY OR INCIDENTAL BUILDING OR USE: A building or use which is:
   A.   Located or conducted on the same zoning lot as the principal building
or use served, except as may be specifically provided elsewhere in this
ordinance;
   B.   Clearly incidental to, subordinate in purpose to, and serves the
principal use; and
   C.   Either in the same ownership as the principal use or is clearly
operated and maintained solely for the comfort, convenience, necessity, or
benefit of the occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of or to the
principal use.
ADULT BUSINESS: Any establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade or business activity in a use such as, but not
limited to, the following: adults only bookstores, adults only motion picture
theaters, adult entertainment centers, massage parlors, rap parlors, adults
only nightclubs or adults only saunas, where explicit sexual conduct is
depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or
tolerated.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Synonymous with "adult business", as defined in
this section.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: An enclosed building or part of an enclosed
building, which contains one or more coin operated mechanisms which when
activated permit a customer to view a live person nude or in such attire,
costume or clothing as to expose to view the human male or female genitalia;
pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; or, female breast, at or
below the areola thereof. In addition, the viewing of a live person, in the
above described manner, after paying of any admission or fee for the viewing of
same activity.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS ADVERTISING: No adult-use cannabis business establishment
shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an advertisement,
of cannabis or a cannabis-infused product in any form or through any medium:
   A.   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of a school grounds,
playground, hospital, healthcare facility, recreation center or facility, child
care center, public park or public library, or any arcade to which admission is
not restricted to person’s age twenty-one (21) years or older;
   B.   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
   C.   On or in a publicly owned or public operated property;
   D.   Which contains information that is false or misleading, promotes
excessive consumption, depicts a person under twenty-one (21) years of age
consuming cannabis, or includes the image of a cannabis leaf;
   E.   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors, including
cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to children, or any
imitation of candy packaging or labeling, or that promotes the consumption of
cannabis; and
   F.   These restrictions do not apply to noncommercial messages.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization. All adult-use cannabis businesses shall comply with
all state rules and regulations and have the appropriate state licenses. In
addition, all adult-use cannabis businesses shall comply with adult cannabis
business establishments setbacks, as defined herein.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS ESTABLISHMENTS SETBACKS: All adult-use cannabis businesses
shall comply with the following setbacks from other uses:
 
Type of Business    1      2      3
Craft Growers       1,000' 1,000' 1,000'
Cultivation Centers 2,500' 2,500' 2,500'
Dispensers          1,000' 250'   1,000'
Infusers            1,500' 250'   1,500'
Processors          1,500' 250'   1,500'
 
      1.   Facility may not be located within ( ‘) of the property line of a
pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary
school, or day care center.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within ( ‘) of the
property line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential
purposes.
      3.   Facility may not be located within ( ‘) of the property line of pre-
existing forest preserve, public park, place of worship or township owned open
space.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder. All cultivation and processing of cannabis shall take
place in an enclosed locked facility.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. All
cultivation of cannabis shall take place in an enclosed locked facility.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSER: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder. In
addition, all adult-use cannabis dispensers shall only operate between the
hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. There shall be no
more than one (1) dispenser approved in the unincorporated areas of Kane
County.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporated cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ADULTS ONLY: Any items or activities emphasizing, depicting, describing or
relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity.
ADULTS ONLY BOOKSTORE: An adults only establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin operated
means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity,
explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or
otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. An establishment, having
adults only items as a substantial or significant portion of its stock, that
sells or displays adults only items for sale to patrons therein.
ADULTS ONLY MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used regularly and
routinely for presenting adults only material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit
sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise),
bestiality or sadomasochistic activity, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULTS ONLY NIGHTCLUB: An establishment or place either occasionally or
primarily in the business of featuring topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic
dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, where
explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or
implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULTS ONLY SAUNA: An establishment or place primarily in the business of
providing a steam bath and/or massage services, where explicit sexual conduct
is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or
tolerated.
ADVERTISE AS DEFINED FOR ADULT USE CANNABIS ADVERTISING: Means to engage in
promotional activities including, but not limited to: newspaper, radio,
internet and electronic media, and television advertising; the distribution of
fliers and circulars; billboard advertising; and the display of window and
interior signs. “Advertise” does not mean exterior signage displaying only the
name of the licensed cannabis business establishment.
ADVERTISING DEVICE: Any advertising sign, billboard, statuary or poster panel
which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not
exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located or to which it
is affixed; but does not include those advertising signs, billboards, or poster
panels which direct attention to the business on the premises or to a brand
name of a product or commodity with which the business is specifically
identified and which is sold on the premises.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES: Means and includes planting, raising or harvesting of
any agricultural or horticultural commodities, including the related handling,
packing and processing upon the farm where produced or at the point of first
processing. This shall not include the cultivation of cannabis as defined by
the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
AGRICULTURAL CULTURE CENTER: A facility used to educate the public about the
practices or heritage of agriculture.
AGRICULTURE: Land, including buildings and structures accessory thereto, used
for agricultural purposes; provided, the principal use involves the production,
cultivation, or growing of soil crops and the raising of livestock (including
poultry, bees, fish, horses, etc.), the lot contains not less than five (5)
acres of land area, and only byproducts thereof may be sold from the lot.
Buildings or structures used, or to be used, for agricultural purposes shall be
required to conform to building setback lines. This shall not include buildings
used primarily for residences. This shall not include the cultivation,
processing, infusing, dispensing or transporting of cannabis as defined by the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
AGRICULTURE PRODUCT: A product derived from a plant or animal, including, but
not limited to, produce, meat, eggs, honey, flowers, and fibers.
AGRICULTURE PRODUCT, VALUE-ADDED: Agriculture Products that have been changed
from their raw state into a new product through packaging, processing,
freezing, drying, extracting, fermenting, or any other type of process that
differentiates the product from the raw commodity.
AGRITOURISM EVENT VENUE: An actively farmed parcel also used to hold public or
private events that are intended to impart event attendees with an educational
or aesthetic appreciation of agriculture or farming culture. Event examples
include, but are not limited to, weddings, rodeos, horse shows, and agriculture
festivals.
AGRITOURISM, INTENSIVE: Activities located on an operational farm that bring
customers onsite for the purpose of education or aesthetic appreciation of
agricultural products, practices or culture. Intensive Agritourism activities
may include the following activities and similar uses as determined by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer: Agriculture Culture Center, Agritourism Event
Venue, Farmers Market, Farm Market, Participatory Farm, Rural Retreat, Tasting
Room, Transient Agritourism Lodging, and Restaurant, Farm-Based.
AGRITOURISM, LIMITED: Activities located on an operational farm that bring
customers onsite for the purpose of education or aesthetic appreciation of
agricultural products, practices or culture. Limited Agritourism activities may
include the following activities and similar uses as determined by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer: Hay rides, corn mazes, farm tours, agriculture training,
and petting zoos (farm-animals only).
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation of, or flight in, the air. As used in this ordinance, the term
aircraft includes, but is not limited to, airplanes and helicopters.
AIRPLANE: A fixed wing aircraft heavier than air that is driven by a propeller
(s) and supported by the reaction of the air against its wings.
ALLEY: A public or private right of way primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those residential, commercial and
industrial properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
APPROVED: Reference herein to an approved community water supply or an approved
community sewerage disposal system shall mean approval of such supply or system
by the county of Kane and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
ARCADE: Premises and/or place of business whose principal operation consists of
the location and/or operation of coin operated amusement devices, as defined
herein, or, a premises and/or place of business wherein the area of the use
and/or location of said coin operated amusement devices exceeds ten percent
(10%) of the floor area. For determining floor area ratio, the definition for
"floor area", as defined in this section, shall be used, except that only the
floor(s) on which the devices are located and/or used shall be counted in this
determination.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A building and premises where the proprietor
furnishes lodging and varying degrees of custodial care to persons who are
elderly or who require assistance in daily living, but are otherwise in good
health.
AUTO WRECKING YARD: Any place where motor vehicles not in running condition, or
the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to
operation, or any land, building, or structure used for the wrecking or storing
of such motor vehicles or the parts thereof. (See definition of Junk (Or
Salvage) Yard.)
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or premises used for dispensing or
sale of automobile fuels, lubricating oil or grease, tires, batteries, or minor
automobile accessories. Services offered may include the installation of tires,
batteries and minor accessories; minor automobile repairs; and greasing or
washing of individual automobiles.
BALCONY: An exterior floor system projecting from a structure and supported by
that structure, with no additional independent supports.
BASED AIRCRAFT: An "aircraft", as defined in this section, is based at a
facility and is a based aircraft for purposes of this ordinance if such
aircraft operates out of such facility in the sense that such facility is the
point of origin of its operation or general maintenance of the aircraft is
conducted there.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building below the first or ground floor level with
its entire floor below exit discharge grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An owner occupied, single-family detached
dwelling, or portion thereof, where overnight accommodations are available for
compensation for a temporary time period. This shall not include a restaurant
establishment, hotel, motel, lodging house or lodging rooms. No guestroom shall
have any kitchen facilities. Further, the establishment must satisfy all
requirements of the Kane County health department and the Kane County building
code prior to the issuance of a permit to establish use.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, shorelines of waterways,
municipal boundary lines, township lines or county lines.
BOAT MARINA: Shall include the term "boat livery", and shall mean and describe
establishments for the sale, rental, repair, storage, and servicing of boats,
boating equipment, accessories and supplies, and products and services related
thereto.
BOOTH: Any enclosure that is specifically offered to patrons of an adult
business for the private viewing of any adults only item or movie. Said
definition does not include enclosures that are used as private offices by any
operator, employee or agent for attending to the tasks of their employment and
are not offered for use by the public.
BUILDING: Any structure which is designed, used or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or other property and
which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building attached to another building when the buildings
share at least eight feet (8') of a common wall. Also, the attachment must be
constructed on a minimum of a forty two inch (42") deep foundation and be
enclosed by a roof and permanent walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot as a
principal building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of
the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building which is designed, used, or intended to be
occupied and maintained for the principal use on a zoning lot.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes:
   A.   Height and area of buildings.
   B.   Location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, streets, or other
buildings.
   C.   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio).
   D.   All open spaces allocated to buildings.
   E.   Amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit.
CAMPGROUNDS: See definition of Recreational Camp.
CANNABIS: Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) of greater than 0.3%
on a dry weight basis and all other naturally produced cannabinol derivatives,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, in accordance with the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027). Cannabis includes
cannabis concentrate and cannabis-infused products. Cannabis shall not include
industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act.
CAR WASH: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing one
or more automobiles, using production line methods with a chain conveyor,
blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space,
water, equipment, or soap for the complete or partial hand washing of such
automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
CERTIFICATE, ZONING: The written approval of the zoning enforcing officer
certifying that the applicant's plans and drawings comply with all applicable
provisions of this ordinance. The "zoning certificate" may consist of a
standardized independent form bearing the signature of the zoning enforcing
officer. It may be represented as a part of the building permit or application.
CLINIC: An individual or organization offering medical, psychological and/or
dental services.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT): A nonprofit association of persons, who are
bona fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or
portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their
guests. The affairs and management of such "private club or lodge" are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen
by the members. It shall be permissible to serve meals and beverages on such
premises, and where licensing is required, such license shall be prerequisite
to the issuance of a permit.
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine which upon monetary exchange
between patron and owner and/or his employee or upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public generally for the
use as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, electronic
games, skill balls, mechanical grab machines, pool tables, coin operated music
players and all games, operations or transactions, similar thereto under
whatever names games may be known.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A private home for the care of the aged or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders.
CUBICLE: Synonymous with "booth", as defined in this section.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound
level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in "decibels".
DECK: An exterior floor system supported on at least two (2) opposing sides by
an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers, or other independent supports.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A section of the county within which the regulations
governing the use of land are uniform.
DOOR: Full, complete, nontransparent closure device that obscures the view or
activity taking place within the enclosure.
DRIVE-IN AND/OR TAKEOUT ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business being operated for
the sale and purchase at retail of food and other goods, services or
entertainment, which is laid out and equipped so as to allow its patrons to be
served or accommodated while remaining in their automobiles, or which allows
the consumption of food or beverage in automobiles on the premises or elsewhere
on the premises but outside any completely enclosed structures. If, in addition
to the consumption of any food or beverages in automobiles or elsewhere on the
premises outside any completely enclosed structure, an establishment also
allows for the consumption of such products within a completely enclosed
structure, it shall be considered a drive-in and/or takeout establishment. The
term "drive-in and/or takeout establishment" shall include, but is not limited
to: automobile service stations; car washes; drive-in restaurants, diners,
grills, luncheonettes, sandwich stands, snack shops, soda fountains or short
order cafes; drive-in banks; and drive-in theaters.
DUSTLESS SURFACE: Surface constructed of concrete, asphalt, or smooth grass
turf.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
multiple-family dwellings and apartment hotels, but not including hotels,
motels, trailer coaches or mobile homes.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by party walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, or portion thereof, containing three (3)
or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities that are used, or intended to be used,
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
ERECTED: Set up, raised, built or moved into place.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A place of business carrying on operations which are
separate and distinct from those of any other place of business located on the
same zoning lot.
EXIT DISCHARGE GRADE: The elevation of finished exterior surface of paved or
unpaved ground at any exit discharge doorsill.
EXTENDED MEDICAL CARE FACILITIES: Those medical facilities designed to
accommodate inpatients in need of recuperative periods requiring nursing
attention and periodic medication.
FAMILY: Excepting domestic employees, any number of persons related by blood or
marriage, or not to exceed five (5) persons not so related, using common
cooking facilities and living and eating together on the premises as a single
housekeeping unit.
FARM MARKET: Facility accessory to a working farm that sells products related
to the subject farm.
FARMERS MARKET: A collection of vendors at a single location primarily selling
agricultural products or value-added agricultural products to the general
public.
FARMSTAND: A structure for the display and sale of food and agricultural
products which are produced on the premises, with no space for customers within
the structure itself. Farmstands shall not count toward the number of accessory
structures permitted on a property.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal
area of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2)
buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall include basement floor area,
elevator shafts, and stairwells on each floor, floor space used for mechanical
equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof),
penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet (7') or more, interior
balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area devoted to accessory
uses. However, any space devoted to off street parking or loading shall not be
included in "floor area".
The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials including,
but not limited to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks shall be
determined on the basis of height in feet; i.e., ten feet (10') in height shall
equal one floor.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements): The
sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or
portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located
within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets, and any
floor area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of
goods or to business or professional offices.
However, "floor area" for the purposes of measurement for off street parking
spaces shall not include: floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes
(except as otherwise noted herein); floor area devoted to off street parking or
loading facilities, including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space, or
mechanical or storage floor area other than area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The floor area of the building or buildings on a zoning
lot divided by the area of such zoning lot, or, in the case of planned unit
developments, by the net site area. The "floor area ratio" requirements, as set
forth under certain zoning districts, shall determine the maximum floor area
allowable for the building or buildings (total floor area of both principal and
accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.
FOWL: Birds belonging to one of two (2) biological orders, namely the gamefowl
or landfowl (Galliformes) and the waterfowl (Anseriformes).
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and is an
index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE, BLOCK: The length of all the property fronting on one side of a
street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the
right-of-way line of the street, or if dead ended, then all of the property
abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the
street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: The width of all the property of such zoning lot fronting
on a street, measured between side lot lines at the street right-of-way line.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
term storage, by prearrangement, of motor driven vehicles, as distinguished
from daily storage, furnished transients, and at which motor fuels and oils are
not sold, and motor driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold.
GARAGES, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building
housing the automobiles of the occupants of the premises.
GARAGES, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage
garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling,
storing or parking motor driven vehicles. The term "repairing" shall not
include an automotive body repair shop or the rebuilding, dismantling, or
storage of wrecked or junked vehicles, unless expressly authorized.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of foods.
GARBAGE DISPOSAL: Collected or community garbage disposal by covered burial or
incineration within a fully enclosed building.
GOVERNMENTAL CENTERS: Land and/or buildings owned or leased by a unit of local
government established under applicable State Statutes for the purpose of
providing governmental and other services to the public for general health,
safety, and welfare.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
GROUND FLOOR: The lowest habitable level of a building, excluding the basement,
regardless of its relation to the surrounding exterior grade.
GROUP HOME: A dwelling occupied by no more than eight (8) persons with a
handicap as the word "handicap" is defined in the Federal Fair Housing Act as
amended (42 USC 3602(h)).
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a hotel or
motel or apartment hotel accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent
residence.
GUINEA FOWL (AGELASTES, NUMIDA, GUTTERA, ACRYLLIUM): An African bird related to
pheasants and marked by a bare neck and head and slaty plumage speckled with
white.
HEALTH AND RECREATION CLUB OR ASSOCIATION: An organization engaged in the
business of providing for its members, services and facilities related to
encouraging and promoting the health and well being of its members, by
providing recreational facilities of swimming pool, tennis courts, handball and
racquetball courts, and weight control facilities of sauna and steam baths,
weightlifting equipment, exercise equipment, whirlpool and massage, and such
other services and facilities consistent with and directly related to fostering
the health and well being of its members. This shall not include the
cultivation, processing, infusing, dispensing or transporting of cannabis as
defined by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
HELICOPTER: An aircraft that is supported in the air by one or more rotors
revolving on a substantially vertical axis.
HELIPORT: Any area of land which is used or intended for use for the landing
and taking off of helicopters and any appurtenant areas, including rights-of-
way, which are used or intended for use for buildings or other facilities
related to the operation, service and storage of helicopters on said area of
land.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation, profession, business or commercial
activity engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling as an accessory use,
incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling and shall meet
the following requirements: shall be operated entirely within the dwelling and
only by the occupant of the dwelling; shall not permit the conduct of retail
business, other than by mail, manufacturing business or repair shop of any
kind; shall not be operated in any accessory building; shall not include any
outside employees; shall not include the arrival and/or departure of outside
employees from the residence and/or property; shall not permit any commercial
vehicles in excess of 3/4 ton inside or outside of any buildings on the
property; shall not permit more than one (1) commercial vehicle under 3/4 ton;
shall not permit the parking of more than three (3) cars simultaneously on the
property, outside of the road right-of-way, for customers or clients; shall not
permit delivery by other than private passenger vehicles, parcel service, or
letter carrier; shall not permit teaching, with musical, dancing and/or other
instruction and counseling of more than one (1) person at a time; shall not
permit any exterior display, storage or evidence of the home occupation, except
for one (1) sign, not over two (2) square feet in area; shall not allow the
operation of a barber shop or beauty parlor with more than one (1) chair. Any
home occupation that creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust,
vibrations, or electrical interference outside the structure, or more than
normal residential traffic, or a nuisance to neighboring property, shall be
prohibited.
HOME OCCUPATION, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE: A gainful occupation, profession,
business or commercial activity engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling as an
accessory use, incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling,
that engages in the production of food or agriculture products grown or
produced on the premises, and which shall meet the following requirements:
shall be operated entirely on the parcel containing the residence or on
adjacent Packet Pg. 81 parcels; shall be operated only by the occupant of the
dwelling; shall be permitted one (1) farmstand for the sale of products
produced on the premises; shall be established with the County and may only
operate once any required permits have been issued; shall not include any
outside employees; shall not include the arrival and/or departure of outside
employees from the residence and/or property; shall not permit any commercial
vehicles in excess of 3/4 ton inside or outside of any buildings on the
property; shall not permit more than one (1) commercial vehicle under 3/4 ton;
shall not permit the parking of more than three (3) cars simultaneously on the
property, outside of the road right-of-way, for customers or clients; shall not
permit delivery by other than private passenger vehicles, parcel service, or
letter carrier; shall not permit any advertisement or branding, except for one
(1) sign, not over twenty five (25) square feet in area; any home occupation
that creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust, vibrations, or electrical
interference outside the structure, or more than normal residential traffic, or
a nuisance to neighboring property, shall be prohibited.
HOSPITAL OR SANATORIUM: An institution open to the public in which patients or
injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or for the care of
contagious diseases.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached living or
sleeping accommodations with individual bathrooms and designed for use by
transients in contradistinction to a boarding, rooming, or lodging house.
INCIDENTAL BUILDING OR USE: See definition of Accessory Or Incidental Building
Or Use.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use or service which is unsuitable for direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous, or
discordant.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area
designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries, providing them
with all necessary facilities and services in attractive surroundings among
compatible neighbors.
ITINERANT AIRCRAFT: "Aircraft", as defined in this section, en route between
two (2) or more points but not based aircraft at a given facility.
JUDICIAL CENTERS: Land and/or buildings owned or leased by the County of Kane,
including County Board approved subleases to public, not-for-profit entities,
for the purposes of providing judicial functions and supporting operations,
housing of juvenile and adult inmates, food preparation and services for
inmates and for the general public, inpatient and outpatient drug and alcohol
addiction recovery services for inmates and for the general public, vehicle
maintenance and repair facilities for government owned and/or leased vehicles,
and other governmental services offered to the public for general health,
safety, and welfare.
JUNK (OR SALVAGE) YARD: Any place where waste or scrap materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including,
but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and
bottles. A "junk or salvage yard" includes an auto wrecking yard (see
definition in this section).
KENNEL: An establishment where household pets, such as dogs and cats, are bred,
trained, boarded or groomed.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY: A public highway or street, including a toll highway,
duly designated as a "freeway" pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
highway code.
LIVESTOCK: Domestic animals, such as horses, sheep, hogs or goats, raised for
home use or for profit.
LODGING HOUSE (Including Boarding And Rooming House): A residential building,
or portion thereof, other than a motel, apartment hotel, or hotel, containing
lodging rooms which accommodate persons, not exceeding twenty (20) in number,
who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging with or without meals is
provided for compensation.
LODGING ROOM (ROOMING UNIT): A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room" for the purposes of this
ordinance.
LOT: A parcel of land which is either a "lot of record" or a "zoning lot".
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and
rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly
recorded lake or river.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated
public street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way. The
owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line as the front lot line.
In the case of land locked or partially land locked land, the front lot line
shall be that lot line that faces the access to the lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder of Kane County, or a parcel of
land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of said county recorder.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or
less parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a "through lot"
both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured at the required setback line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which is
designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built
upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot or
lots" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
MARQUEE: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the
wall of a building.
MASSAGE PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of
providing massage services, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or
sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate story between the floor and ceiling of a main story
and extending over only part of the main floor.
MIGRANT LABOR CAMP: As defined in the Illinois migrant labor camp law, 210
Illinois Compiled Statutes 110/2, one or more buildings, structures together
with the land appertaining thereto established, operated or maintained as
living quarters for ten (10) or more migrant workers or four (4) or more
families containing migrant workers who are engaged in agricultural activities.
MIGRANT WORKER: Any person who moves seasonally from one place to another,
within or without the state, for the purpose of employment in agricultural
activities.
MIXED USE: A building under one ownership which contains dwellings either
located above the ground floor or to the rear of the building and permitted
restricted business uses, per this chapter, located on the ground floor or to
the front of the building.
MOBILE HOME: A dwelling unit designed to be transported on streets and highways
to the place where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready
for year round and permanent occupancy; except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations,
and connection to electrical, water, and sewer systems in a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for
locating mobile homes, provided each mobile home contains a kitchen, flush
toilet, and shower or bath. It shall not include a sales lot in which
automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes are parked for the purpose of inspection
or sale. Mobile home parks shall comply with all Kane County ordinances.
MOTEL: See definition of Hotel Or Motel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight, shipped by motor
truck or railroad, is received, assembled, sorted, and/or rerouted for local,
intrastate, or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MUSEUM: A place or building in which works of artistic, historical or
scientific value are cared for and exhibited.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and
space for dancing by patrons only. A nightclub shall not include an "adult
business". This shall not include the cultivation, processing, infusing,
dispensing or transporting of cannabis as defined by the Illinois Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, lawful at the
time of enactment of this ordinance, which:
   A.   Does not comply with all of the regulations of this ordinance or of any
amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which such building
or structure is located; or
   B.   Is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of land, buildings, or structures, lawful at the
time of the enactment of this ordinance, which does not comply with all of the
regulations of this ordinance or of any amendment hereto governing use of the
zoning districts in which such use is located.
NUDITY: The display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair;
buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; female breast, at or below the
areola thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or,
male genitalia, in a discernible turgid state, with or without covering.
NURSERY SCHOOL/PRESCHOOL/CHILDCARE CENTER: Any establishment which regularly
provides supplemental parental care and supervision, and/or educational
instruction for less than twenty four (24) hours per day to more than eight (8)
children in a facility other than a single-family home. In addition, the
establishment shall conform to all other licensing standards and requirements
for daycare centers adopted by the state of Illinois.
NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOME: A building and premises for the care of sick,
infirm, aged, or injured persons to be housed; or a place of rest for those who
are bedfast or need considerable nursing care, but not including hospitals,
assisted living facilities or group homes.
OBSCENE 1 : Any material or performance is obscene if:
   A.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
   B.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate
sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals; and
   C.   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in
order to classify sound according to pitch.
ODOROUS MATTER: Any matter or material that yields an odor which is offensive
in any way.
OPERATOR: Any person (whether said persons be an individual, partner,
corporation, joint stock company, fiduciary, officer, director, stockholder,
employee, or manager), that conducts, maintains or owns any adult business.
OWNER/APPLICANT: The person, firm, corporation, company, limited liability
corporation or other entity seeking county approval under this chapter, as well
as its successor(s), assign(s) or transferee(s), for a wind energy turbine
(WET). An owner/applicant must have the legal authority to represent and bind
the landowner or lessee who will construct, own, and operate the WET. The
duties and obligation regarding building permit approval for any approved WET
shall be with the owner/applicant of the WET, and jointly and severally with
the owner and operator or lessee of the WET if different than the owner/
applicant.
PARKING SPACE: An enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area permanently reserved for
the temporary storage of one automobile and appropriately connected with a
street or alley by a surfaced driveway affording adequate ingress and egress.
Such space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in
length and meet all other requirements of this ordinance.
PARTICIPATORY FARM: Working farm where customers pay to participate in the
operation of the farm.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Dust, smoke, or any other form of airborne pollution in the
form of minute separate particles.
PATIO: A paved ground area near the house.
PATRON: Any customer, patron or visitor to an adult business who is not
employed by any operator of said establishment.
PEA-FOWL (PAVO CRISTATUS, PAVO MUTICUS, AFROPAVO CONGENSIS): The peacock or pea
hen, large terrestrial pheasants.
PERSON: Any, person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
PETS: Animals kept for amusement or companionship, such as dogs and cats.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a
size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single landowner
or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to control, to be developed
as a single entity, and the environment of which is compatible with adjacent
parcels; the developer or developers may be granted relief from specific land
use regulations and design standards in return for assurances of an overall
quality of development, including any specific features which will be of
exceptional benefit to the county as a whole.
PORCH, OPEN: A covered platform at an entrance to a house which is not enclosed
wholly or in part.
POULTRY: Domesticated birds or rabbits, or both, dead or alive, capable of
being used for human food.
POULTRY FARM: Any tract of land on which poultry or poultry products are raised
or produced for sale.
PRIVATE LANDING STRIP: Any area of land which is used or intended for use for
landing and taking off of airplanes and any appurtenant land areas which are
used or intended for use as housing for such airplanes or storage facilities
connected therewith.
PROPERTY LINES: The lines bounding a "lot of record" or a zoning lot, as
defined herein.
PUBLIC USE AIRPORT: An area of land which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas, including rights-
of-way, which are used or intended for use for buildings or other facilities
related to the operation, service and storage of aircraft on said area of land.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
RAP PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing
nonprofessional conversation or similar services for adults, where explicit
sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly
encouraged or tolerated.
RECREATIONAL CAMP: Any area of land where one or more tents, travel trailers,
or other nonpermanent type shelters are erected or maintained primarily for
recreational camping activities. It shall include all related buildings and
facilities and may include not more than one permanent residence for manager or
caretaker. Related buildings and facilities may include an office and
delicatessen and/or grocery store to be operated during the camping season for
patrons of camp only. Individual sites for tents, travel trailers, or other
temporary shelters shall be not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in
area, not including any required roadways, walkways or screening.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but no facilities for the manufacture of products for sale.
RESERVOIR PARKING FACILITIES: Those off street parking spaces allocated to
automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
RESTAURANT: A business establishment within which food is offered for sale and
consumption within the structure on the premises, or, on the premises.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: See definition of drive-in and/or takeout establishment.
RESTAURANT, FARM-BASED: Restaurant accessory to a working farm in which the
meals served primarily showcase products grown on-site or on parcels that are
part of the subject farm.
RESTAURANT, TAKEOUT: See definition of drive-in and/or takeout establishment.
RESTRICTED LANDING FIELD: Any area of land which is used or intended for use
for the landing and taking off of aircraft authorized in an A-1 District and
any appurtenant areas, including rights-of-way, which are used or intended for
use for buildings or other facilities related to the operation, service and
storage of aircraft based on said area of land.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
information Circular 8333 and on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray
for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke and smoke density.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission or the light
obscuring capacity of the smoke.
ROADSIDE STAND: A structure for the display and sale of agricultural products,
with no space for customers within the structure itself. This shall not include
the cultivation, processing, infusing, dispensing or transporting of cannabis
as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ROOM: Synonymous with "booth", as defined in this section.
ROOMING UNIT: A term used in this ordinance to regulate residential density in
boarding, lodging, and rooming houses. "Rooming unit" is synonymous with
"lodging room".
ROOSTER: A male chicken.
RURAL RETREAT: An establishment that is part of a working farm that provides
temporary overnight accommodations for individuals or groups engaged in
supervised training or personal improvement activities. Examples include
corporate retreat facilities, educational retreat facilities and working farm
learning centers. Cafeterias not meeting the definition of Restaurant, Farm-
Based and open only to retreat attendees are an allowed accessory use.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY: Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person; a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume. In addition, the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the
intent to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the recipient.
SELL: Includes to solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale
and to keep with intent to sell.
SETBACK: The minimum distance, maintained between a street right of way and the
nearest supporting member of any structure on the lot.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Ultimate sex acts (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual
or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. In addition, physical
contact, intended to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the
recipient, with a person's unclothed genitalia, buttocks, perineum, anal or
pubic regions, or female breast.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is
affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building, structure,
or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization, or business. However, a "sign"
shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor
shall it include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit,
school, or religious group. A "sign" shall not include a sign located
completely within an enclosed building, which sign is not visible from outside
the building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING, BILLBOARD: A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at any location
other than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed. For the purpose of this definition, an advertising sign or billboard
may be single faced, double faced or a V-type structure.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted, or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered, upon
the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN DISPLAY AREA: The advertising display surface area (copy area) encompassed
within any regular geometric figure which would enclose all parts of the sign.
The structural support for a sign, whether they be columns, pylons, or a
building, or a part thereof, shall not be included in the advertising area.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such
sign is in use. For the purpose of this ordinance, any moving, illuminated sign
shall be considered a "flashing sign".
SIGN, MONUMENT: An identification sign which is so designed and constructed as
to complement the premises being identified. Ordinarily, the letters or numbers
of such sign are engraved into or raised upon natural stone, heavy lumber, or
masonry.
SIGN, OBSOLETE: Any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any
person or advertises a business, service, product, tenant, or activity no
longer conducted, available, or in existence.
SIGN, POLITICAL: Any temporary sign which supports the candidacy of any
candidate for public office or urges action on any other matter on the ballot
of primary, general, or special elections.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign which extends more than six inches (6") from the face
of the wall of the structure to which it is affixed.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building
and which is wholly or partially supported by said building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL: A temporary or seasonal sign shall include signs
displayed in F District - Farming, only for the purpose of identifying
activities or products associated with the farming operations during
appropriate seasons of the year, to be removed at end of said season.
SIGN, WALL: Any flat sign which is placed against a building or other structure
and attached thereto in such manner that only one side is visible.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any temporary sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a
window, or any sign located inside a building within six feet (6') of the
interior side of a window and displayed so as to attract the attention of
persons outside the building. Merchandise which is included in a window display
shall not be considered as part of a window sign.
SMALL STRUCTURE MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (SSM-WET): A structure mounted wind
energy system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of
equipment (wind turbine, a tower or post, and associated control or conversion
electronics). SSM-WETs are attached to a structure's roof, walls, foundation,
or another elevated surface. SSM-WETs have nameplate capacities that do not
exceed ten kilowatts (10 kW) and are intended to primarily reduce on site
consumption of utility power.
SMALL TOWER MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (STM-WET): A tower mounted wind energy
system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of equipment
(wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics). STM-
WETs have nameplate capacities that do not exceed one hundred kilowatts (100
kW) and are intended to primarily reduce on site consumption of utility power.
SOLAR ACCESSORY: A solar-electric (photovoltaic) system primarily intended to
reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
SOLAR UTILITY: A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) system that provides
retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to off-site
households, businesses or utilities, and including any ancillary equipment or
infrastructure necessary for the distribution or storage of power generated on-
site.
STABLE, BOARDING: A building or structure where horses are kept for
remuneration but limited to not more than ten (10) horses and not including the
sale of any products.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A building or structure which is located on a lot on which a
dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be
used, for housing horses for private use of occupants of the dwelling.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building or structure where horses are kept for remuneration,
hire or sale, and may include sale of riding equipment.
STORY: That part of a building between any floor and the floor next above, and
if there be no floor above, then the ceiling above. A basement is a story if
its ceiling is six feet (6') or more above the level from which the height of
the building is measured, or if it is used for business purposes, or if it
contains any dwelling units other than one dwelling unit for the caretaker of
the premises.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of
vehicular access to abutting property, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, lane, throughway, or however otherwise designated,
but does not include driveways to buildings.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building or
structure, including any change in bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, and
supports and frames of signs and billboards.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires a location on or in the
ground, or attached to something having a location on or in the ground,
including advertising signs and billboards and supports and frames thereof.
TASTING ROOM: A facility in which alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages produced
from products grown on-site, or on parcels that are part of the subject farm,
may be tasted and sold.
TELEPHONE BOOTH: A small, enclosed structure usually accommodating a single
person and equipped with a telephone for use by the public.
TELEPHONE, PEDESTAL MOUNTED: A small, semi-enclosed structure mounted on a
pedestal type support and containing a telephone for use by the public.
TOURIST COURT AND MOTOR LODGE: A group of detached buildings containing
individual sleeping or living units, including bathrooms, designed for or used
temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or
parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motor
lodges, or other similar type facilities, provided that there is allotted to
each living unit not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of
lot area not including driveway and service areas.
TOWER HEIGHT: The vertical distance as measured from the ground level of the
base of an STM-WET tower to the uppermost vertical extension of a rotor blade,
or the maximum height reached by any part of an STM-WET.
TOWNHOUSE: A multiple-family dwelling which is normally two (2) but can be one
to three (3) stories in height, usually with the living room, dining room, and
kitchen on the ground floor, with sleeping rooms on the upper floor(s).
Townhouses provide flexibility by allowing several single-family dwelling units
with additional living space in the basement to be constructed in one structure
around a street or court. This type of construction provides low lot coverage
with open space and landscaping.
TRAILER COACH: See definition of mobile home.
TRAILER PARK: See definition of mobile home park.
TRANSIENT AGRITOURISM LODGING: An establishment, accessory to a working farm,
offering rooms for rent to customers participating in agritourism activities on
said farm.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to
be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. A
"travel trailer" shall include the following: self-contained travel trailer,
pickup coach, motorized home and camping trailer.
TRUCKS: For the purpose of this ordinance, a truck will be any vehicle that
exceeds the standards of the State of Illinois licensure classification of "B",
which is a second division vehicle weighing up to eight thousand (8,000)
pounds.
UNDERAGE 2 : Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, the legal minimum age
at which one can purchase or view adults only items.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, INTERIM FOR DISPENSING OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES LICENSED BY THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS: An interim use that may be granted on zoning lots in the RB, B1, and
B3 Districts specifically for the dispensing of controlled substances licensed
by the State of Illinois. An "interim special use" may be granted for only a
limited period of time, not to exceed five (5) years.
USE, INTERIM SPECIAL: A special use that may be granted on zoning lots in the F
and F2 Districts which might remain unused or unoccupied by uses otherwise
permitted in the district. An "interim special use" may be granted for only a
limited period of time, not to exceed five (5) years.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations,
and standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use. A "principal use" may be "permitted" or
"special".
USE, SPECIAL: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district or districts. After due consideration, in each case, of the
impact of such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular location, such "special use" may or may not be
granted, subject to the terms of this ordinance.
VIBRATION: The periodic motion of particles or elastic body.
VIBRATION FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second of a vibration.
WALL SIGN: See definition of sign, wall.
YARD: An unoccupied open space on the same zoning lot with a building or
structure. A "yard" extends along a lot line, and to a depth or width specified
in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which such zoning lot is
located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which adjoins a public street.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A yard which is located immediately adjacent to another
recorded or zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another
lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between
the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the
rear yard.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: That yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a
Commercial District which adjoins a zoning lot in a Residential District, or
that yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in an Industrial District
which adjoins a zoning lot in either a Residential or Commercial District.
ZONING ENFORCING OFFICER: The officer designated by the County Board as the
officer responsible for enforcing and administering the requirements of this
zoning ordinance. (Ord. 78-79, § 1, 6-13-1978; Ord. 80-37, § 2, 3-13-1980; Ord.
82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 83-15, 1-11-1983; Ord. 88-62, 5-10-1988; Ord. 90-176, 8-
14-1990; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-46, 2-11-1997; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997;
Ord. 98-45, 4-14-1998; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord. 08-07, 1-8-2008; Ord. 10-
140, 5-11-2010; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014; Ord. 17-189, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017;
Ord. 18-460, 12-11-2018, eff. retroactive to 11-13-2018; Ord. 19-421, 12-10-
2019; Ord. 20-03, 1-14-2020; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021; Ord. 22-355, 10-11-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/11-20.
2 1. 720 ILCS 5/11-20.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
25-4-0: Generally
25-4-1: Zoning Enforcing Officer
25-4-2: Zoning Board Of Appeals
25-4-2-1: Creation And Membership
25-4-2-2: Chairman And Meetings
25-4-2-3: Jurisdiction
25-4-2-4: Rules
25-4-3: Permits
25-4-3-1: Permit To Be Obtained
25-4-3-2: Permit For Certain Signs And Fences
25-4-3-3: Application For Permit
25-4-3-4: Conformance Required
25-4-3-5: Conditions Restricting Construction; Corrections
25-4-4: Variances
25-4-4-1: Purpose
25-4-4-2: Public Hearing
25-4-4-3: Standards For Variances
25-4-4-4: Decision Of The Zoning Board
25-4-4-5: Petitions For Variations Of Ten Percent Or Less
25-4-5: Appeals
25-4-5-1: Scope Of Appeals
25-4-5-2: Stay Of Any Action
25-4-5-3: Notice Of Hearing
25-4-5-4: Decision Of The Zoning Board
25-4-6: Appeals To Courts
25-4-7: Amendments
25-4-7-1: Initiation Of Amendments
25-4-7-2: Public Hearing
25-4-7-3: Action By The County Board
25-4-7-4: Optional Revocation
25-4-8: Special Uses
25-4-8-1: Purpose
25-4-8-2: Public Hearing
25-4-8-3: Conditions And Guarantees
25-4-8-4: Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use
25-4-8-5: Revocation
25-4-8-6: Action By The County Board
25-4-9: Fees
25-4-9-1: Fee Schedule
25-4-9-2: Exemptions
25-4-10: Enforcement And Penalties
25-4-10-1: Penalty For Violation
25-4-10-2: Enforcement
25-4-0: GENERALLY:
The primary administration and enforcement responsibilities of this ordinance
are hereby vested in the zoning enforcing officer, the zoning board of appeals
and the county board of Kane County, Illinois.
25-4-1: ZONING ENFORCING OFFICER:
There is hereby created the position of zoning enforcing officer, whose office
shall be located in the county government center, and said person to be
selected by the county board shall be designated as the zoning enforcing
officer. It shall be his duty to administer and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance, and to that end he shall have the power to make such orders,
requirements, decisions, and determinations as are necessary with respect to
applications for permits and the enforcement of this ordinance.
25-4-2: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
25-4-2-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A zoning board of appeals, hereafter referred to by the term "zoning board" or
"board of appeals", is hereby authorized to be established. Such zoning board
shall consist of seven (7) regular members and two (2) alternate members
appointed by the chairman of the county board and confirmed by the members of
the county board of Kane County. Alternate members shall serve as members of
the Zoning Board only in the absence of regular members. All members shall be
appointed for a five (5) year term.
Vacancies shall be filled by the chairman of the county board for the unexpired
terms only subject to confirmation by the county board at its next meeting. The
chairman of the county board shall have power to remove any members of the
zoning board, for cause, after a public hearing upon giving ten (10) days'
written notice thereof. (Ord. 19-212, 6-11-2019)
25-4-2-2: CHAIRMAN AND MEETINGS:
The chairman of the county board of Kane County shall name one of the members
of the zoning board as chairman upon his appointment and in case of vacancy
shall name the chairman. All meetings of the zoning board shall be held at the
call of its chairman or any three (3) members of the zoning board, at such
times and places within the county as the zoning board may determine. Such
chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the zoning board shall be
open to the public.
The zoning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member upon every question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official
actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the zoning board located in the
development and community services department and shall be a public record. In
the performance of its duties, the zoning board may incur such expenditures as
shall be authorized by the county board of Kane County. The zoning board shall
adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the statute or this
ordinance.
25-4-2-3: JURISDICTION:
The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning enforcing officer
charged with the enforcement of this ordinance. It shall also hear and decide
all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any orders, requirements, decisions or determinations of
the zoning enforcing officer or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any
variations in this ordinance.
The board of appeals shall also have the power to exercise such other powers as
are or may be vested in the board of appeals. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019)
25-4-2-4: RULES:
In addition to the rules specified in sections 25-4-2-1 through 25-4-2-3 of
this chapter as well as in the state statutes, the following rules of the Kane
County zoning board of appeals, as adopted on May 26, 1938, and amended from
time to time, shall apply:
   A.   Acting Chairman: The ranking member of the zoning board shall act as
chairman in the absence of the chairman.
   B.   Points Of Order: All points of order, not otherwise covered, shall be
decided by the chairman, subject to appeal to the zoning board.
   C.   Zoning Board Of Appeals Records: The director of the development and
community services department shall be responsible for the keeping of the
minutes of the proceedings of the zoning board and to direct the keeping of its
records in the development and community services department. Each case coming
before the zoning board shall be numbered consecutively and all records of the
zoning board relating thereto shall carry such number and be filed together.
   D.   Publications And Notices: The chairman, or in his absence the acting
chairman, shall determine the time and place of each meeting and hearing.
Official publications and notices of the zoning board shall be prepared and
processed by the director of the development and community services department,
in the name of the zoning board.
   E.   Meetings And Hearings: Four (4) members shall be necessary in order to
vote on: 1) the granting of a variation, 2) reversing any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the enforcing officer, or 3) recommending passage
of a proposed amendment. Any two (2) or more members may, upon the stipulation
of all parties present at any public hearing, consent to sit for the purpose of
hearing and taking evidence for submission to a subsequent hearing of the
zoning board at which formal action may be taken.
   F.   Time Limit For Appeal: Notice of intention to appeal from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the enforcing officer shall be
made within thirty (30) days.
   G.   Withdrawals: Any appeal or application may be withdrawn prior to action
with the consent of the zoning board, but in no case shall fees received be
returned without proper action of the Kane County development committee.
   H.   Rehearings: No rehearing on an appeal or application for a variation or
amendment previously denied by the zoning board, or reconsideration of the vote
thereon, may again be entertained unless in the judgment of the zoning board
new plans or new conditions materially change the aspect of the case or new
evidence should be heard. In case of a reversal, the rights of others to appeal
to a court shall not be prejudiced. All petitions for a rehearing shall be
presented within ten (10) days after decision of the zoning board of appeals.
   I.   Annual Report: A report of the activities of the zoning board as of
November 30 shall be made to the county board of Kane County at their December
meeting each year.
   J.   Rules Of Order: "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the procedure of
the zoning board where they apply and do not conflict with these rules, the
zoning ordinance or the statutes.
   K.   Suspension Of Rules: These rules may be suspended only upon the
affirmative vote of five (5) members of the zoning board.
   L.   Amendment: These rules may be amended at any meeting by a majority vote
of the zoning board, provided the notice of the meeting contains the proposed
amendment.
   M.   Investigations: Upon the filing of an application for an amendment or
for a variation and the payment of the required fee, the enforcing officer
shall immediately make or direct such inspections, studies, photographs and
drawings of the existing conditions involved and the effect of the proposed
building, structure or use as may be necessary for careful consideration of the
proposal by the zoning board, and after each member is encouraged to visit the
site before the hearing. (Ord. 78-3, 1-10-1978; Ord. 78-141, 10-10-1978; Ord.
05-304, 9-13-2005; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
25-4-3: PERMITS:
25-4-3-1: PERMIT TO BE OBTAINED:
A written permit shall be obtained from the building enforcing officer, located
in the county government center, Geneva, Illinois, before starting:
   A.   To establish any new use of property;
   B.   To excavate for or build any foundation;
   C.   To erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, alter or move any building
or structure;
   D.   To change the use of any building, structure, or land from one
classification to another; or
   E.   In the case of nonconforming uses, to change from one use to another;
   F.   To dig or drill any well; and
   G.   To install, add to or repair any sewerage disposal system.
25-4-3-2: PERMIT FOR CERTAIN SIGNS AND FENCES:
Signs (except as herein provided) and fences which cannot be viewed through,
and concrete, stone or masonry walls, shall require permits. Each permit issued
for a main building shall also cover any accessory buildings constructed at the
same time. Any new use or change in use authorized by permit but not started or
made within ninety (90) days shall require a renewal permit.
25-4-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for the permits shall be filed in written form with the enforcing
officer, shall state the legal description of the property as of public record
and the name of owner and applicant and shall describe the uses to be
established or extended, and shall give the estimated cost and such other
information as may be required for the enforcement of this ordinance. Each copy
of the application shall be accompanied by a dimensioned drawing of the
building plot showing the location of buildings and structures, lot areas to be
used, auto parking areas, and other pertinent information. All applications for
permits and copies of permits issued shall be systematically kept for ready
public reference by the enforcing officer.
25-4-3-4: CONFORMANCE REQUIRED:
No building permit as required by this ordinance shall be issued for a building
to be constructed on any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land that does not
conform with the provisions of 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes, in force from
time to time, and the subdivision regulations and other applicable ordinances
in force from time to time in this county, and also the building ordinance of
Kane County, Illinois, adopted December 15, 1954, as amended from time to time.
25-4-3-5: CONDITIONS RESTRICTING CONSTRUCTION; CORRECTIONS:
No building or structure, except advertising signs as permitted herein, shall
be constructed on land which is unsuitable for such construction by reason of
flooding, bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography, or any
other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the
future inhabitants of said land. Where such condition can be corrected or where
construction can be designed to overcome such condition, such correction or
construction shall be designed by an Illinois licensed professional engineer or
architect, qualified for such work, prior to issuance of permit. (Ord. 88-62,
5-10-1988; Ord. 12-268, 10-9-2012)
25-4-4: VARIANCES:
25-4-4-1: PURPOSE:
Whenever in a specific case, after an application for a permit has been made to
the zoning enforcing officer, an appeal is made to the zoning board that there
are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of any regulations relating to the construction, alteration
or location of buildings or structures, the zoning board may determine and vary
its application in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such
regulations, upon such conditions as may be considered appropriate and in the
public interest, and in accordance with the rules herein set forth.
25-4-4-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
No variation shall be made except after a public hearing before the zoning
board of which there shall be at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time
and place of such hearing published in a newspaper of general circulation
published in the township where property is located. If no newspaper is
published in such township, then such notice shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation published in the county where such property is located.
Said notice shall contain the particular location for which the variation is
requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed variation consists.
However, the zoning board may consider an appeal for and decline to grant a
variation without a duly advertised hearing upon seven (7) days' written notice
to petitioner.
25-4-4-3: STANDARDS FOR VARIANCES:
No variation shall be made unless the zoning board of appeals finds that there
is a practical difficulty or some particular hardship upon the property if the
regulations are applied, and shall further find that such variations will not:
   A.   Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property;
   B.   Increase the hazard from fire and other dangers to adjacent property;
   C.   Diminish the value of adjacent land and buildings;
   D.   Increase the congestion or traffic hazards in the public streets and
highways; and
   E.   Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general
welfare.
25-4-4-4: DECISION OF THE ZONING BOARD:
The board of appeals shall reach its decision within thirty (30) days from the
date of the public hearing on the request for variance. Four (4) of the seven
(7) members of the board of appeals must concur in order to grant a variance.
If the variance is granted, the action of the zoning board in granting a
variation shall contain or be accompanied by a finding of fact specifying the
reason for making such variation.
25-4-4-5: PETITIONS FOR VARIATIONS OF TEN PERCENT OR LESS:
All petitions for variances which seek a variation of ten percent (10%) or less
of the requirements of this code regarding the location of structures or bulk
requirements shall be reviewed and decided upon by the Kane County zoning
enforcement officer without a hearing before the zoning board of appeals.
However, before such variation may be granted, a notice of the intent to grant
such variation shall be sent by certified mail to all adjoining landowners. If
any adjoining landowner files a written objection with the zoning enforcement
officer within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of such notice, the variation
shall not be considered by the zoning enforcement officer under this
subsection, but shall be considered pursuant to section 25-4-4-2 of this
chapter. (Res. 91-52, 3-12-1991; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-2005)
25-4-5: APPEALS:
25-4-5-1: SCOPE OF APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board or bureau of the county
may appeal to the zoning board to review any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the enforcing officers or to interpret the regulations.
Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the
zoning board by general rule as set forth in section 25-4-2-4 of this chapter,
by filing with the enforcing officers from whom the appeal is taken and with
the zoning board, a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
enforcing officer shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
25-4-5-2: STAY OF ANY ACTION:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the enforcing officer certifies to the zoning board, after the notice of
appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the zoning board, or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the enforcing officer and on due cause
shown.
25-4-5-3: NOTICE OF HEARING:
The zoning board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and
give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by
attorney. The zoning board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of
the enforcing officer.
25-4-5-4: DECISION OF THE ZONING BOARD:
The board of appeals shall reach its decision within thirty (30) days from the
date of the public hearing on the appeal. The concurring vote of four (4)
members of the zoning board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the enforcing officer. (Ord. 05-304,
9-13-2005)
25-4-6: APPEALS TO COURTS 1 :
All final administrative decisions of the board of appeals are subject to
judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the "administrative review act",
approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto.
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
25-4-7: AMENDMENTS:
25-4-7-1: INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS:
For the purposes of this section, the term "text amendment" means an amendment
to the text of this ordinance, which affects the whole county, and the term
"map amendment" means an amendment to the zoning map which affects an
individual parcel or parcels of land. Amendments may be proposed by the county
board, the zoning board of appeals or by any person, firm, corporation, or
other legal entity having a freehold interest in the subject property, or a
possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest and which is specifically enforceable.
Proposed amendments shall be directed to the zoning board of appeals for
consideration and report to the county board.
25-4-7-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
No amendment to this ordinance shall be made without a hearing before the
zoning board of appeals. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county. Hearings on text amendments shall be held in the courthouse or
other county building with more adequate facilities for such hearings. Hearings
on map amendments shall be held in the township or road district affected by
the terms of such proposed amendment or in the courthouse, or other county
building with more adequate facilities for such hearings. Provided, that if the
owner of any property affected by such proposed map amendment so requests in
writing, such hearing shall be held in the township or road district affected
by the terms of such proposed amendment. Within thirty (30) days after the
final hearing, the zoning board shall file a report with the county board.
25-4-7-3: ACTION BY THE COUNTY BOARD:
   A.   Text Amendments: Text amendments may be passed at a county board
meeting by a simple majority of the elected county board members, unless:
      1.   Written protests against the proposed text amendment are signed by
five percent (5%) of the landowners of the county, or
      2.   A written protest by resolution of the corporate authorities of a
zoned municipality is filed with the county clerk, or
      3.   In the case of a text amendment affecting an unincorporated area of
a township having a plan commission, written objections are submitted by the
township board of trustees to the county board within thirty (30) days after
the hearing before the zoning board of appeals,
in which case such amendments shall not be passed except by the favorable vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the county board.
   B.   Map Amendments: Map amendments may be passed at a county board meeting
by a simple majority of the elected county board members, except that in case
of written protest against any proposed map amendment that is either:
      1.   Signed by the owner or owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of
the perimeter of the land to be rezoned, or
      2.   Signed by the owner or owners of land immediately touching, or
immediately across a street, alley, or public right of way from at least twenty
percent (20%) of the perimeter of the land to be rezoned, or
      3.   In cases where the land affected lies within one and one-half (11/2)
miles of the limits of a zoned municipality, by resolution of the corporate
authorities of the zoned municipality with limits nearest adjacent, filed with
the county clerk, or
      4.   In the case of a map amendment affecting an unincorporated area of a
township having a plan commission, written objections are submitted by the
township board of trustees to the county board within thirty (30) days after
the hearing before the zoning board of appeals.
Such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-
fourths (3/4) of all the members of the county board.
   C.   Written Protests: The original copy of a written protest must be filed
with the Kane County clerk not later than the Friday preceding the county board
meeting. A copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or
protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the
applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such
applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if a map amendment is
proposed solely to correct an error made by the county as a result of a
comprehensive rezoning by the county, the map amendments may be passed at a
county board meeting by a simple majority of the elected board.
25-4-7-4: OPTIONAL REVOCATION:
In the case of property zoned by the county board of the county but not used
within one year from date of said zoning, for purposes permitted in
classification to which said property has been zoned, or, if the use of said
property has been discontinued for a continuous period of three (3) years, the
zoning board of appeals shall have the power to institute proceedings, on its
own motion, to consider the rezoning of said property to another
classification. (Ord. 78-79, §§ 3, 4, 6-13-1978; Ord. 79-229, § 1, 12-11-1979;
Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-214, 8-12-1997; Ord. 97-
240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002)
25-4-8: SPECIAL USES:
25-4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The development and execution of this ordinance is based upon the division of
the county into districts within which districts the use of land and buildings,
and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land
are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain
uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public
need for the particular use in the particular location.
To provide for the location of special classes of uses which are deemed
desirable for the public welfare within a given district or districts, but
which are potentially incompatible with typical uses herein permitted within
them, a classification of "special uses" is hereby established.
25-4-8-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
Uses as hereinafter enumerated, which may be proposed for classification as
"special uses", shall be considered at a public hearing before the zoning
board, and its report of findings of fact and recommendations shall be made to
the county board following the public hearing; provided, that the county zoning
board, in its report of findings of facts and recommendations to the county
board, shall not recommend a special use unless the zoning board shall find:
   A.   That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use
will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort or general welfare;
   B.   That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
   C.   That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
   D.   That adequate utility, access roads, drainage and/or other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
   E.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets
and roads;
   F.   That the special use shall in all other respects conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the county board pursuant to
the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals.
25-4-8-3: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to the granting of any special use, the zoning board may recommend and
the county board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions, upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the county board shall
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied
with.
It shall be required that a detailed plat of all improvements (site plan) shall
be submitted to the zoning board of appeals for approval or amendment at the
public hearing. Such plat, when approved by the county board, shall become a
part of this ordinance and development of the site shall be in accordance with
said plat. Minor variations in the development of the approved plat may be
authorized by the development committee.
25-4-8-4: EFFECT OF DENIAL OF A SPECIAL USE:
No application for a special use, which has been denied wholly or in part by
the county board, shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of
change of conditions found to be valid by the zoning board or county board.
25-4-8-5: REVOCATION:
In any case where a special use has not been established (substantially under
way) within one year from the date of granting thereof, then, without further
action by the county board, the special use or authorization thereof shall be
null and void, unless in the opinion of the zoning enforcing officer,
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee indicate that establishment
of the use has been impossible.
If the special use has been established and subsequently discontinued, the
zoning board of appeals shall have the power to institute proceedings on its
own motion to consider revocation of said special use.
25-4-8-6: ACTION BY THE COUNTY BOARD:
   A.   A special use may be passed at a county board meeting by a simple
majority of the elected county board members. (Ord. 76-29, 3-9-1976; Ord. 82-
66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-
2005)
25-4-9: FEES 1 :
 
Notes
1 1. See section 16-1 of this code.
25-4-9-1: FEE SCHEDULE:
The fee schedule for activities associated with the enforcement of the
requirements of this zoning ordinance shall be established by the Kane County
board, as amended from time to time.
25-4-9-2: EXEMPTIONS:
None of the fees established by the Kane County board shall be collected from
any municipal, public or governmental body or corporation. (Ord. 97-240, 9-9-
1997)
25-4-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
25-4-10-1: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm, company or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this ordinance, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each week that a violation remains
uncorrected constitutes a separate offense.
25-4-10-2: ENFORCEMENT:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this ordinance, the proper authorities of the county,
or any person, the value or use of whose property is or may be affected by such
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings in the circuit court:
   A.   To prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
   B.   To restrain, correct or abate such violation;
   C.   To prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or
   D.   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the
premises. (Ord. 76-29, 3-9-1976; Ord. 94-79, 4-12-1994; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997)
ARTICLE V. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
25-5-1: Interpretations, Purposes And Conflicts
25-5-2: Conflicting Ordinances
25-5-3: Validity
25-5-4: Scope Of Regulations
25-5-4-1: Things Regulated
25-5-4-2: Jurisdiction Limited
25-5-4-3: Public Utility Exemption
25-5-4-4: Agricultural Exemption
25-5-4-5: Underground Installation Exemption
25-5-4-6: Small Tower Mounted Wind Energy Turbine (STM-WET) Exemption
25-5-4-7: Small Structure Mounted Wind Energy Turbine (SSM-WET) Exemption
25-5-4-8: Wind Energy Conversion Systems
25-5-4-9: Commercial Solar Energy Facilities
25-5-5: Number Of Buildings On A Recorded Or Zoning Lot In Residential
Districts
25-5-6: Minimum Lot Size
25-5-7: Existing Vacant Substandard Lots
25-5-8: Contiguous Parcels
25-5-9: Accessory Buildings
25-5-9-1: Time Of Construction
25-5-9-2: Percentage Of Required Yard Occupied
25-5-9-3: On Reversed Corner Lots
25-5-9-4: Separation Between Buildings
25-5-9-5: Maximum Size Of Residential Accessory Buildings
25-5-10: Bulk Regulations
25-5-10-1: Continued Conformity With Bulk Regulations
25-5-10-2: Division Of Zoning Lots
25-5-10-3: Location Of Required Open Space
25-5-10-4: Required Yards, Existing Buildings
25-5-10-5: Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards
25-5-11: Existing Special Uses
25-5-12: Regulations Along Limited Access Highways
25-5-13: Public Use Airports, Restricted Landing Fields, Private Landing Strips
And Heliports
25-5-13-1: Restrictions On Location
25-5-13-2: Distance Between Restricted Landing Areas
25-5-13-3: Distance From Highway Or Railroad Right Of Way
25-5-13-4: Obstructions
25-5-13-5: Distance Between Property Lines And Blast Areas
25-5-13-6: Dustless Surface
25-5-14: Development Of Air Rights
25-5-15: Interpretation Of Use Lists
25-5-1: INTERPRETATIONS, PURPOSES AND CONFLICTS:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be
held to being the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals, comfort and general welfare.
Due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of
property values and the directions of building development to the best
interests of the entire county.
It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
ordinance, resolution, rules, regulations or permits, previously adopted or
issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance
relative to the use of buildings, structures or land, nor is it intended by
this ordinance to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or
other agreements between parties; provided, however, that wherever this
ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, structures,
land, or requires greater setback, then the provisions of this ordinance shall
control.
25-5-2: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All ordinances or resolutions or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions
herein set forth are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict.
25-5-3: VALIDITY:
   A.   Should any section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
   B.   No section, clause or provision of this ordinance is intended, nor
shall be construed, to be contrary to the federal fair housing act 1 , as
amended, including, but not limited to, those provisions contained in the
federal fair housing act which may apply to group homes as defined herein.
(Ord. 90-176, 8-14-1990)
 
Notes
1 1. 42 USC 3601 et seq.
25-5-4: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
25-5-4-1: THINGS REGULATED:
Hereafter outside the limits of cities, villages and incorporated towns, the
erection of any new building or structure, or the relocation, enlargement or
structural alteration of any existing building or structure, or any change in
use or new or additional use made of any tract of land or existing building or
structure:
   A.   Shall be for only those principal uses as permitted in the district in
which such building, structure or land is located, including any use or
activity customarily incidental or accessory thereto unless otherwise
restricted or prohibited;
   B.   Shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance concerning population
density;
   C.   Shall provide and preserve the required setback distance from adjoining
roads or streets, the required side yards, and the required parking space;
   D.   Shall observe the regulations of the Illinois department of
transportation, division of highways, concerning "freeways"; and the county
division of transportation access control regulations;
   E.   Shall be done only after obtaining a zoning permit, all as specified in
this ordinance.
25-5-4-2: JURISDICTION LIMITED:
This ordinance shall not apply to territory within the limits of cities,
incorporated towns and incorporated villages.
25-5-4-3: PUBLIC UTILITY EXEMPTION:
As required by statute, the type or location of any poles, towers, wires,
cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or any similar distributing equipment of a
public utility are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance with the
following exception: 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-12001.1 gives counties
the authority to regulate certain specified facilities of a telecommunications
carrier. A "telecommunications carrier" is defined in the public utilities act
as of January 1, 1997. A "facility" means that part of the signal distribution
system used or operated by a telecommunications carrier under a license from
the FCC consisting of a combination of improvements and equipment including: a)
one or more antennas; b) a supporting structure (tower) and the hardware by
which antennas are attached; c) equipment housing; and d) ancillary equipment
such as signal transmission cables and miscellaneous hardware.
   A.   The following restrictions shall apply to a facility of a
telecommunications carrier unless a variance is obtained in accordance with
section 25-4-4 of this chapter:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size: A facility is not permitted in residentially zoned
lots that are less than two (2) acres in size.
      2.   Height:
         a.   Residential Zoned District: The height of the facility shall not
exceed seventy five feet (75').
         b.   Nonresidential Zoned District: The height of the facility shall
not exceed two hundred feet (200').
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   Residential Zoning District: The setback distance to the nearest
residentially zoned lot shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the height of
the tower.
         b.   Nonresidential Zoning District: The setback distance to the
nearest principal residential building shall be at least equal to the height of
the tower.
         c.   Any Zoning District: The setback distance of a facility shall be
at least ten feet (10') to the side and rear lot lines, thirty five feet (35')
to the road right of way line, and fifty feet (50') to any limited access
highway right of way line.
   B.   In designing a facility, a telecommunications carrier shall comply with
the following guidelines:
      1.   No building or tower that is part of a facility shall encroach onto
any recorded easement prohibiting the encroachment unless the grantees of the
easement have given their approval.
      2.   Lighting shall be installed for security and safety purposes only.
Except with respect to lighting required by the FCC or FAA, all lighting shall
be shielded so that spillover lighting onto adjacent property shall not exceed
0.5 lumen per square foot.
      3.   No facility shall encroach onto an existing septic field or
expansion area.
      4.   No facility shall be located in a special flood hazard area or
wetland without meeting the legal requirements for those lands.
      5.   Existing trees more than three inches (3") in diameter shall be
preserved if reasonably feasible during construction. If any tree more than
three inches (3") in diameter is removed during construction, a tree three
inches (3") or more in diameter of the same or similar species shall be planted
as a replacement. Tree diameter shall be measured at a point three feet (3')
aboveground.
      6.   If any elevation of a facility faces an existing, adjoining
residential use, low maintenance landscaping shall be provided on or near the
facility lot to provide at least partial screening of the facility. Landscaping
shall be done in accordance with subsection 25-14-1-2D of this chapter.
      7.   Fencing shall be installed around the facility.
      8.   Any building that is part of a facility located adjacent to a
residentially zoned lot shall be designed with exterior materials and colors
that are reasonably compatible with the residential character of the area.
25-5-4-4: AGRICULTURAL EXEMPTION:
Buildings, structures or land used or to be used principally for "agriculture"
as herein defined, are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, except
that such buildings or structures must comply with applicable setback
requirements.
25-5-4-5: UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION EXEMPTION:
Pipelines and other underground installations, to the extent that the same are
completely buried beneath the surface of the soil, are exempt from the
requirements of this ordinance, provided that any incidental or associated
structures, installations or equipment, except markers, used in connection with
such pipelines or other underground installations, and which protrude or are
extended above the surface of the soil, shall to the extent of such protrusion
or extension be subject to all of the applicable provisions thereof.
25-5-4-6: SMALL TOWER MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (STM-WET) EXEMPTION:
55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-12020, gives counties the authority to
regulate the siting of electric generating wind devices.
STM-WETs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and subject to the
following general provisions, unless a variance is obtained in accordance with
section 25-4-4 of this chapter:
   A.   Accessory Use:   STM-WETs shall only be permitted as an accessory use
to an existing principal building, but will not add to the number of detached
accessory structures as limited in section 25-5-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Building Permit: A building permit must be submitted and approved prior
to construction, installation, relocation, or modification. The owner/applicant
or operator must apply for and receive the building permit.
   C.   Lot Size:   STM-WETs shall not be permitted on any parcel that is less
than two (2) acres.
   D.   Tower Height:
      1.   Residential uses: Tower heights up to seventy six feet (76') shall
be allowed on residentially zoned parcels between two (2) and five (5) acres.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: So long as the tower height meets setback
requirements, there shall be no specific height limitation, except as imposed
by federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations.
   E.   Setbacks Applying To All Districts:
      1.   The base of the tower shall be set back 1.1 times the tower height
from all property lines.
      2.   The base of the tower shall be set back 1.1 times the tower height
from any public road right of way, unless written permission is granted by the
governmental entity with jurisdiction over the road.
      3.   The base of the tower shall be set back 1.1 times the tower height
from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the
affected utility.
      4.   Ancillary parts of the turbine system, including guywires, shall
follow the setback in the subject zoning district.
   F.   Lighting:   STM-WETs shall not be artificially illuminated unless
required by the FAA.
   G.   Visual Appearance:
      1.   STM-WETs shall be finished in a single nonreflective, unobtrusive
color, such as off white, light gray, or other neutral color that conforms to
the surrounding natural environment.
      2.   The appearance of the STM-WET and all accessory structures shall be
maintained throughout the life of the unit.
   H.   Electrical Wires: All electrical wires associated with an STM-WET,
other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring,
the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall
be located underground.
   I.   Sound: Any nuisance noise from an STM-WET shall comply with chapter 15,
subsection 15-2C5, "Harsh, Prolonged Or Unusual Noise", of this code.
   J.   Access: Public access shall be restricted through the use of a fence
with locked gates, nonclimbable towers or other suitable methods.
   K.   Signs: All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification, appropriate
warning signs, or owner identification on a tower, wind energy system,
building, or other structure associated with a small wind energy turbine
visible from any public road shall be prohibited.
   L.   Soil Conditions: A soil analysis is recommended and may be required by
the building officer as part of the building permit application and inspection
process to confirm that the soils meet the minimum bearing capacity assumed by
the structural design of the tower and the foundation.
   M.   Performance And Safety Standards: The manufacturer and model of the
proposed small wind energy system must be on an approved list by the California
energy commission or the New York state energy research and development
authority until the small wind certification council becomes mainstream. The
zoning enforcing officer has the ability to review other wind energy system
models to determine their adequate performance and safety.
   N.   Quantity:
      1.   Residential uses: One STM-WET is allowed per zoning lot.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: Five (5) STM-WETs are allowed per zoning lot.
   O.   Utility Notification And Interconnection: No STM-WET shall be installed
until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off
grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
   P.   Abandonment:
      1.   An STM-WET that is out of service for a continuous twelve (12) month
period will be deemed to have been abandoned. The zoning enforcing officer may
issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of an STM-WET that is deemed to have
been abandoned.
      2.   If the STM-WET is determined to be abandoned, the owner of a small
wind energy system shall remove the wind generator from the tower at the
owner's sole expense within three (3) months of receipt of notice of
abandonment. If the owner fails to remove the wind generator from the tower,
the zoning enforcing officer shall enforce this as a violation of the Kane
County zoning ordinance subject to administrative adjudication hearings.
   Q.   Violation: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or
operate a small wind energy system that is not in compliance with this section.
   R.   Review Fee: Flat fee, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per tower.
25-5-4-7: SMALL STRUCTURE MOUNTED WIND ENERGY TURBINE (SSM-WET) EXEMPTION:
55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-12020 gives counties the authority to
regulate the siting of electric generating wind devices.
SSM-WETs shall be permitted in all zoning districts and subject to the
following general provisions, unless a variance is obtained in accordance with
section 25-4-4 of this chapter:
   A.   Accessory Use: An SSM-WET shall only be permitted as an accessory use
to an existing principal building, but will not add to the number of detached
accessory structures as limited in section 25-5-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Mounting: All rooftop wind energy systems shall be controlled in a
manner consistent with the building code and as approved by the zoning
enforcing officer.
   C.   Height: The maximum height of an SSM-WET shall be fifteen feet (15')
above the highest point of the roofline of the structure it is mounted upon.
   D.   Diameter: The maximum diameter of the blades or rotor shall be ten feet
(10').
   E.   Lighting:   SSM-WETs shall not be artificially illuminated unless
required by the FAA.
   F.   Visual Appearance:
      1.   SSM-WETs shall be finished in a single nonreflective, unobtrusive
color, such as off white, light gray, or other neutral color that conforms to
the surrounding natural environment.
      2.   The appearance of SSM-WETs and all accessory structures shall be
maintained throughout the life of the unit.
   G.   Sound: Any nuisance noise from SSM-WETs shall comply with chapter 15,
subsection 15-2C5, "Harsh, Prolonged Or Unusual Noise", of this code.
   H.   Signs: All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's
identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification, appropriate
warning signs, or owner identification on a tower, wind energy system,
building, or other structure associated with a small wind energy turbine
visible from any public road shall be prohibited.
   I.   Performance And Safety Standards: The manufacturer and model of the
proposed small wind energy system must be on an approved list by the California
energy commission or the New York state energy research and development
authority until the small wind certification council becomes mainstream. The
zoning enforcing officer has the ability to review other wind energy system
models to determine their adequate performance and safety.
   J.   Quantity:
      1.   Residential uses: Only five (5) rooftop wind energy systems are
allowed per zoning lot.
      2.   Nonresidential uses: The number of rooftop wind energy systems shall
not be restricted.
   K.   Structure Mounting: A structural analysis of the existing structure is
recommended and may be required by the building officer as part of the building
permit application and inspection process to confirm that the structure is
capable of supporting the minimum loads assumed by the structural design of the
turbine and mounting system.
   L.   Utility Notification And Interconnection: No SSM-WET shall be installed
until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off
grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
   M.   Review Fee: Flat fee, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per structure
mounted turbine. (Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 98-45, 4-
14-1998; Ord. 10-140, 5-11-2010)
25-5-4-8: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
   A.   Definitions:
                                   The entity who submits to the County an
                                   application for the siting and operation
                                   of any WECS or Substation. All references
APPLICANT:                         to Applicant in this division shall
                                   include Applicant's successors-in-
                                   interest and assigns, which includes a
                                   WECS Permittee (as defined below).
                                   A wind energy conversion facility of
                                   equal or greater than 500 kilowatts in
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY FACILITY:   total nameplate generating capacity. Also
                                   referred to herein as "Wind Energy
                                   Conversion System" or "WECS" or "WECS
                                   Project".
                                   The calendar date on which the WECS
COMMERCIAL OPERATION DATE:         Project produces power for commercial
                                   sale, not including test power.
                                   Assurance from a credit worthy party,
FINANCIAL ASSURANCE or FINANCIAL   examples of which include a surety bond
SECURITY or DECOMMISSION SECURITY: (e.g., performance and payment bond),
                                   trust instrument, cash escrow, or
                                   irrevocable letter of credit.
                                   Those towers which are erected primarily
                                   to measure wind speed and direction plus
                                   other data relevant to siting and
                                   operation of a WECS Project. For purposes
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER:              of this division, Meteorological Towers
                                   do not include towers and equipment used
                                   by airports, the Illinois Department of
                                   Transportation, or other similar
                                   applications or government agencies, to
                                   monitor weather conditions.
                                   A residence that is located on
                                   nonparticipating property and that is
NONPARTICIPATING RESIDENCE:        existing and occupied on the date that an
                                   application for a permit to develop the
                                   WECS Project is filed with the county.
NONPARTICIPATING PROPERTY:         Real property that is not a participating
                                   property.
                                   A written document, named as such,
                                   stating that the Applicant expresses an
                                   intent to commence construction
NOTICE TO PROCEED:                 activities on a WECS Project and
                                   identifying the date on which the
                                   construction activities are scheduled to
                                   commence.
                                   Any one or more of the following
                                   buildings that is existing and occupied
                                   on the date that the application for a
OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING:       permit to develop the WECS Project is
                                   filed with the county: a school, place of
                                   worship, day care facility, public
                                   library, or community center.
                                   The person or entity responsible for the
                                   day-to-day operation and maintenance of a
                                   wind energy conversion system, including
OPERATOR:                          any third-party subcontractors. The
                                   Operator must be a qualified wind power
                                   professional. All references to Operator
                                   in the Ordinance shall include Operator's
                                   successors-in interest and assigns.
                                   The person or entity or entities with an
                                   equity interest in a wind energy
                                   conversion system, including their
                                   respective successors-in-interest and
                                   assigns. The Owner does not mean (i) the
                                   property owner from whom land is leased
                                   for locating a wind energy conversion
                                   system (unless the property owner has an
                                   equity interest in a wind energy
OWNER:                             conversion system); or (ii) any person
                                   holding a security interest in a wind
                                   energy conversion system solely to secure
                                   an extension of credit, or a person
                                   foreclosing on such security interest,
                                   provided that after foreclosure, such
                                   person seeks to sell a wind energy
                                   conversion system at the earliest
                                   practicable date. This definition
                                   includes the definition of Facility Owner
                                   as defined in 55 ILCS 5/5-12020.
                                   A residence that is located on
                                   participating property and that is
PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE:           existing and occupied on the date that an
                                   application for a permit to develop the
                                   WECS Project is filed with the county.
                                   Real property that is the subject of a
                                   written agreement between a facility
                                   owner and the owner of the real property
                                   that provides the facility owner an
                                   easement, option, lease, or license to
PARTICIPATING PROPERTY:            use the real property for the purpose of
                                   constructing a WECS Project or supporting
                                   facilities. "Participating property" also
                                   includes real property that is owned by a
                                   facility owner for the purpose of
                                   constructing WECS Project or supporting
                                   facilities.
                                   A qualified individual who is licensed as
                                   a professional engineer in any state in
                                   the United States. Where a structural
                                   engineer is required to take some action
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER:             under terms of this division, a
                                   Professional Engineer may serve as the
                                   structural engineer if he or she has the
                                   appropriate structural engineering
                                   certification.
                                   Real property that is subject to a
                                   permanent conservation right consistent
                                   with the Real Property Conservation
PROTECTED LANDS:                   Rights Act, or registered or designated
                                   as a nature preserve, buffer, or land and
                                   water reserve under the Illinois Natural
                                   Areas Preservation Act.
                                   Land owned in fee title by County, state
                                   or federal agencies and managed
                                   specifically for conservation purposes,
                                   including but not limited to County,
                                   state and federal parks, state and
                                   federal wildlife management areas, state
                                   scientific and natural areas, and federal
                                   wildlife refuges and waterfowl protection
                                   areas. Public conservation lands do not
PUBLIC CONSERVATION LANDS:         include private lands upon which
                                   conservation easements have been sold to
                                   government agencies or non-profit
                                   conservation organizations. Public
                                   conservation lands also do not include
                                   private lands for which the owners have
                                   entered into contractual relationships
                                   with government or non-profit
                                   conservation organizations for
                                   conservation purposes.
                                   A petition for a special use approved by
                                   the County Board, after a public hearing,
                                   allowing a particular use at a specified
                                   location subject to compliance with
SPECIAL USE:                       certain specified special conditions as
                                   may be required by the County Board in
                                   accordance with ARTICLE IV.
                                   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT, Section
                                   25-4-8: Special Uses.
                                   The apparatus that collects and connects
                                   the electrical collection system of the
SUBSTATION:                        WECS(s) and increases the voltage for
                                   connection with the utility's
                                   transmission lines.
                                   The transmission lines, substations,
                                   access roads, meteorological towers,
SUPPORTING FACILITIES:             storage containers, and equipment
                                   associated with the generation and
                                   storage of electricity by the WECS.
                                   An Applicant who applies for and receives
                                   a Special Use Permit under this division
                                   for the siting and operation of any WECS
WECS PERMITTEE:                    or Substation. All references to a WECS
                                   Permittee in this division shall include
                                   a WECS Permittee's successors-in-interest
                                   and assigns.
                                   The collection of WECSs and Substations
                                   operations and maintenance buildings, and
WECS PROJECT:                      permanent Meteorological Towers, as
                                   specified in the Special Use Approval
                                   Permit application.
WECS TOWER or WIND TOWER:          Means and includes wind turbine tower,
                                   nacelle, and blades.
                                   The distance from the rotor blade at its
WECS TOWER HEIGHT:                 highest point to the top surface of the
                                   WECS foundation.
                                   A permit necessary for the commencement
                                   of work performed toward the
                                   construction, erection or installation of
                                   an approved WECS, Substation or
                                   operations and maintenance building in
                                   connection with a WECS Project. A WECS
                                   Building Permit may be issued by the
                                   County after a WECS Project has obtained
                                   approval of a Special Use from the County
                                   Board and the Building Officer determines
                                   that all conditions, if any, have been
                                   satisfied that are imposed by the
                                   approved Special Use, and that all
                                   required and related permits for road
WECS BUILDING PERMIT:              access locations and a Kane County
                                   Stormwater Permit have been applied for
                                   and issued. The WECS Building Permit
                                   shall require the Applicant (WECS
                                   Permittee) to deliver a written "Notice
                                   to Proceed" for the WECS Project to the
                                   County prior to commencement of
                                   construction of the WECS Project. The
                                   term "commencement of construction", as
                                   used in this division, includes any site
                                   development work (e.g., demolition,
                                   grubbing, grading, excavation, road work,
                                   construction of Project-related
                                   structures and infrastructure
                                   improvements, etc.) regarding the WECS
                                   Project.
                                   Any piece of electrical generating
                                   equipment that converts the kinetic
WIND TURBINE:                      energy of moving wind into electrical
                                   energy through the use of airfoils or
                                   similar devices to capture the wind.
 
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   This division governs the siting of WECS and Substations that
generate electricity to be sold to wholesale or retail markets.
      2.   Owners of WECS with an aggregate generating capacity less than 0.5MW
who locate the WECS(s) on their own property are not subject to this division.
   C.   Prohibition:
      1.   No WECS Project, WECS or Substation governed by this division shall
be constructed, erected, installed, or located within the County, unless prior
siting approval has been obtained for each individual WECS Project, WECS and
Substation or for a group of WECS Projects and Substations under a joint siting
application pursuant to this division.
   D.   Special Use Application:
      1.   To obtain siting approval, the Applicant must first submit a Special
Use application to the County.
      2.   The Special Use application shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
         a.   A WECS Project Summary, including, to the extent available: (a) a
general description of the project, including (i) its approximate overall name
plate generating capacity, (ii) the potential equipment manufacturer(s), (iii)
type(s) of WECS(s), (iv) the number of WECS, and name plate generating capacity
of each WECS, (v) the maximum height of the WECS Tower(s) and maximum diameter
of the WECS(s) rotor(s), (vi) the number of Substations, (vii) a project site
plan, project phasing plan and project construction timeline plan, and (viii)
the general location of the project; and (b) a description of the Applicant,
Owner and Operator, including their respective business structures;
         b.   The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of the Applicant
(s), Owner and Operator, and all property owner(s), if known, and documentation
demonstrating land ownership or legal control of the property;
         c.   A site plan for the WECS Project showing the planned location of
each WECS Tower, including legal descriptions for each site, guy lines and
anchor bases (if any), Participating and Non-participating Residences, Occupied
Community Buildings parcel boundary lines (including identification of
adjoining properties), setback lines, public access roads and turnout
locations, Substation(s), operations and maintenance buildings, and permanent
Meteorological Towers, electrical cabling from the WECS Tower to the Substation
(s), ancillary equipment, third party transmission lines, the location of any
wetlands, flood plain, drainage structures including surface ditches and
subsurface drainage lines, underground mines, scenic and natural areas within
one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed WECS, the location of
all known communications towers within two (2) miles of the proposed WECS, and
the layout of all structures within the geographical boundaries of any
applicable setback;
         d.   All determinations of No Hazard to Air Navigation from the
Federal Aviation Administration;
            e.   A proposed Decommissioning Plan for the WECS Project including
cost estimations;
         f.   All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this division;
         g.   An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed
between the Applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture;
         h.   The topographic map shall include the WECS Project site and the
surrounding area;
         i.   Any other information normally required by the County as part of
its permitting requirements for siting buildings or other structures including
conformance with Chapter 9 Stormwater Management;
         j.   Waivers from the setback requirements executed by the occupied
community building owners and/or the non-participating property owners bearing
a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming that the
waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
         j.   Waivers from the shadow flicker mitigation requirements executed
by the occupied community building owners and/or the non-participating property
owners bearing a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming
that the waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
         k.   Results and recommendations from the Illinois Dept. of Natural
Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool or a
comparable successor tool;
         l.   Results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with the United States Fish and Wildlife
Service's Land-Based Wind Energy Guidelines;
         m.   Information demonstrating that the WECS Project will avoid
protected lands;
         n.   Any other information requested by the County or the County
consultants that is necessary to evaluate the siting application and operation
of the WECS Project and to demonstrate that the WECS Project meets each of the
regulations in this division, including the Special Use Permit standards set
forth below.
      4.   Material changes to the application are not permitted once the
notice of the public hearing has been published, unless requested or permitted
by the County.
      5.   The Applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the Special Use
Permit application to the County, and at least one (1) copy in electronic
format.
   E.   Design And Installation:
      1.   Design Safety Certification:
         a.   WECSs shall conform to applicable industry standards, including
those of the American National Standards Institute ("ANSI"). Applicants shall
submit certificates of design compliance that equipment manufacturers have
obtained from Underwriters Laboratories ("UL"), Det Norske Veritas ("DNV"),
Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energie ("CGL"), or an equivalent third party. All
turbines shall be new equipment commercially available; no used or experimental
equipment shall be used in the WECS Project without the approval of a variance
by the County Board.
         b.   Following the granting of siting approval under this division, a
structural engineer shall certify, as part of the WECS Building Permit
application process, that the foundation and tower design of the WECS is within
accepted professional standards, given local soil, subsurface and climate
conditions.
      2.   Controls and Brakes: All WECSs shall be equipped with a redundant
braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed controls (including
variable pitch, tip, tilt, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.
Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation shall
not be considered a sufficient braking system for overspeed protection.
      3.   Electrical Components: All electrical components of the WECS shall
conform to applicable local, state, and national codes, and relevant national
and international standards (e.g. ANSI and International Electrical
Commission).
      4.   Aesthetics and Lighting: The following items are recommended
standards to mitigate visual impact:
         a.   Coatings and Coloring: Towers and blades shall be painted white
or gray or another non-reflective, unobtrusive color.
         b.   Turbine Consistency: To the extent feasible, the WECS Project
shall consist of turbines of similar design and size, including tower height.
Further, all turbines shall rotate in the same direction. Turbines shall also
be consistent in color and direction with nearby facilities.
         c.   Lighting: WECS Projects shall utilize minimal lighting that is
compliant with the applicable FAA regulations, as amended by the FAA. To the
extent that such tower lighting is available, and is approved by the FAA for a
WECS Project, the Applicant shall install Aircraft Detection Lighting Systems
("ADLS") or other similar technology to reduce light pollution and visual
impacts caused by the WECS Towers.
         d.   Intra-project Power and Communication Lines: All power lines used
to collect power from individual turbines and all communication lines shall be
buried underground at a depth in accordance with the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement until same reach the property line or a substation
adjacent to the property line.
      5.   Warnings:
         a.   A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and Substations, and at all
entrances to the Wind Towers.
         b.   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of fifteen (15) feet from the ground.
      6.   Climb Prevention:
         a.   All WECS Towers must be unclimbable by design or protected by
anti- climbing devices such as:
            (1)   Fences with locking portals at least six (6) feet high; or
            (2)   Anti-climbing devices twelve (12) feet vertically from the
base of the WECS Tower.
      7.   Setback Requirements: WECS Towers shall be sited as follows, with
setback distances measured from the center of the base of the WECS Tower;
         a.   Occupied Community Buildings: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS Tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure.
         b.   Participating Residences: 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height
of the WECS Tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the structure;
         c.   Nonparticipating Residences: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip
height of the WECS Tower to the nearest point on the outside wall of the
structure;
         d.   Boundary Lines of Participating Property: None.
         e.   Boundary Lines of Nonparticipating Property: 1.1 times the
maximum blade tip height of the WECS Tower to the nearest point on the property
line of the nonparticipating property.
         f.   Public Road Rights-of-Way: 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height
of the WECS Tower to the center point of the public road right-of-way.
         g.   Overhead Communication and Electric Transmission and Distribution
Facilities (Not Including Overhead Utility Service Lines to Individual Houses
or Outbuildings): 1.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the WECS Tower to
the nearest edge of the property line, easement, or right of way containing the
overhead line.
         h.   Overhead Utility Service Lines to Individual Houses or
Outbuildings: None.
         i.   Fish and Wildlife Areas and Illinois Nature Preserve Commission
Protected Lands: 2.1 times the maximum blade tip height of the WECS Tower to
the nearest point on the property line of the fish and wildlife area or
protected land.
   The setback requirements may be waived by the written consent of the owner
(s) of each affected property. The Applicant does not need obtain a variance
from the County upon waiver by the property owner of the setback requirement.
Any waiver of any of the above setback requirements shall run with the land and
be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of the County.
      8.   Compliance with Additional Regulations: Nothing in this division is
intended to preempt other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
      9.   Use of Public Roads:
         a.   An Applicant proposing to use any County, municipality, township
or village road(s), for the purpose of transporting WECS or Substation parts
and/or equipment for construction, operation, or maintenance of the WECS(s) or
Substation(s), shall:
            (1)   Identify all such public roads; and
            (2)   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant
government agencies prior to construction.
         b.   To the extent an Applicant must obtain a weight or size permit
from the County, municipality, township or village, the Applicant shall:
            (1)   Conduct a pre-construction baseline survey to determine
existing road conditions for assessing potential future damage; and
            (2)   Any proposed public roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved in writing by the respective Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer prior to the granting of the
Special Use. Traffic for construction purposes shall be limited to these roads.
All overweight and/or oversized loads to be transported on public roads may
require a permit from the respective highway authority. Any road damage caused
by the transport of the facility's equipment, the installation, maintenance, or
removal, must be completely repaired to the reasonable satisfaction of the Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer. The Road District Commissioner
and County Engineer may choose to require either remediation of road repair
upon completion of the WECS Project or are authorized to collect fees for
overweight and/or oversized load permits. Further, financial assurance in an
amount to be fixed by the Road District Commissioner to ensure the Road
District or the County that future repairs are completed to their reasonable
satisfaction shall be provided. Applicant shall submit a draft form of said
financial assurance with application for Special Use.
            (3)   Enter into a road use agreement with the County and each
affected Road District that includes the following provisions, at a minimum:
               (a)   Project layout map;
               (b)   Transportation impact analysis;
               (c)   Pre-construction plans'
               (d)   Project traffic map;
               (e)   Project scope of repairs;
               (f)   Post-construction repairs;
               (g)   Insurance;
               (h)   Financial Security in forms and amounts acceptable to the
County;
      The road use agreement shall require Applicant to be responsible for the
reasonable cost of improving roads used to construct WECS and the reasonable
cost of repairing roads used by the facility owner during construction of the
WECS so that those roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public
after the completion of the WECS construction. Roadways improved in preparation
for and during the construction of the WECS shall be repaired and restored to
the improved condition at the reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways
have degraded or were damaged as a result of construction-related activities.
         c.   All repairs and improvements to County public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the County before being
made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance by the County after
such repairs and improvements are completed. The County's road use agreement,
and any further agreements contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and
repair of County public roads and highways, must be approved by the County
Board prior to the Board's approval of any WECS Building Permit applications
related to the construction of the proposed WECS Project.
      10.   Site Assessment: To ensure that the subsurface conditions of the
site will provide proper support for the WECS Towers and soil restoration, the
Applicant, at its expense, shall provide soil and geotechnical boring reports
to the Building Officer with respect to each WECS Tower location, as part of
its WECS Building Permit and Stormwater Permit. The Applicant shall follow the
guidelines for Conservation Practices Impact Mitigation submitted by the Kane-
DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District (or equivalent regulatory agency).
The Applicant shall submit grading plans for the proposed Substations for
review and comment by the Kane-Dupage Soil and Water Conservation District
prior to the issuance of any WECS Building Permit or Stormwater Permit for the
construction of said substations.
      11.   Communications Analysis; Interference:
         a.   The Applicant, at its expense, shall have a third party,
qualified professional (after submission of resume and relevant work
experience) conduct an appropriate analysis of the television reception
documenting the television stations that are received within one and one-half
(1 ½) miles of the footprint of the WECS Project. The results of said study
shall be public record and will serve as a baseline reading for television
reception conditions prior to the construction of the WECS Project and shall be
submitted as part of the Special Use Permit application.
         b.   The Applicant, at its expense, shall have a third party,
qualified professional (after submission of resume and relevant work
experience), conduct a communications analysis that indicates that the E9-1-
1 communications, emergency communications or official County and local
municipal communications reception shall not be negatively impacted or
influenced by the proposed wind power facility. Said communication analysis
shall be a public record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use
Permit application.
         c.   The Applicant and the Operator, at the Applicant's expense, shall
take immediate actions to minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves or
television signals and to eliminate any such interference that impacts local
government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services, emergency
management services, 911 dispatch) communications, caused by the operation of
the WECS. The Applicant shall provide the applicable microwave transmission
providers and local emergency service provider(s) (911 operators) copies of the
WECS Project Summary and Site Plan, as set forth in Section V(B)(1) and V(B)(3)
of this division. To the extent that the above provider(s) demonstrate a
likelihood of interference with its communications resulting from the WECS(s),
the Applicant and the Operator, at Applicant's expense, shall take reasonable
measures to minimize and mitigate such anticipated interference and with regard
to interference with local, government public safety (police, fire, emergency
medical services, emergency management services, 911 dispatch) communications,
the Applicant and the Operator, at Applicant's expense, shall take all
necessary and available commercial measures to eliminate any such interference.
If, after construction of the WECS, the Applicant (WECS Permittee) or Operator
receives a written complaint related to the above-mentioned interference, the
Applicant (WECS Permittee) shall take commercially reasonable steps to respond
to the complaint, except in the case of a complaint of interference with local,
government public safety (police, fire, emergency medical services, emergency
management services, 911 dispatch) communications. In the case of local,
government public safety communications, the Applicant (WECS Permittee) and the
Operator, at the Applicant's expense, shall immediately take all necessary and
available commercial measures to eliminate any such interference and cease
operations until such interference is eliminated.
         d.   If, after construction of the WECS, the Applicant (WECS
Permittee) or Operator receives a written complaint related to interference
with local broadcast residential television, the Applicant (WECS Permittee)
shall take commercially reasonable steps to respond to the complaint. A summary
of complaint and subsequent response from Applicant shall be forwarded to the
Kane County Board for review. Once the construction is complete and a
television reception complaint is received by the County, who will have thirty
(30) calendar days to verify the complaint, the Applicant (WECS Permittee) will
be given fifteen (15) calendar days to respond, in writing (validation date).
Said response shall be addressed and forwarded to both the County and the
complainant. Such response shall include but not be limited to the following:
an acknowledgment that a complaint was made and evaluated by the Applicant
(WECS Permittee). If considered valid by the Applicant (WECS Permittee): an
explanation, including a timeline, as to what the Applicant (WECS Permittee)
intends to do about the complaint. The Applicant (WECS Permittee) of the wind
power facility will be given an additional fifteen (15) calendar days from the
validation date to resolve said TV reception issue. If considered invalid by
the Applicant (WECS Permittee), an explanation, including supporting
documentation and expert opinions, as to why the Applicant (WECS Permittee)
believes the complaint is not valid. Television reception complaints must be
filed within six (6) months from the date each wind turbine generator goes
online.
      12.   Noise Levels: Noise levels from each WECS or WECS Project shall be
in compliance with applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB)
regulations. The Applicant shall submit manufacturer's wind turbine sound power
level characteristics and other relevant data regarding wind turbine noise
characteristics necessary for a competent noise analysis. The Applicant,
through the use of a qualified professional, shall appropriately demonstrate
compliance with the applicable noise requirements in its Special Use
application.
      13.   Agricultural Impact Mitigation: Pursuant to 505 ILCS 147/15(a), the
Applicant, at its expense, shall enter into an Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture prior to any public
hearing required before a siting decision on the WECS Project application. All
impacted agricultural land, whether impacted during construction, operation, or
decommissioning activities, must, at a minimum, be remediated by the Applicant
pursuant to the terms of the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture. The Applicant shall submit the executed
Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement to the County as part of the Special
Use application.
      14.   Avian and Wildlife Impact Study: The Applicant, at its expense,
shall have a third party, qualified professional (after submission of resume
and relevant work experience) conduct an avian and wildlife impact study and
submit said study to the County as part of the Special Use Permit application.
Each WECS or WECS Project shall be located, designed, constructed, and operated
so as to avoid and, if necessary, mitigate the impacts to wildlife.
      15.   As-Built Map and Plans: Within sixty (60) calendar days of
completion of construction of the WECS Project, the Applicant or Operator shall
deliver "as-built" maps, site plan and engineering plans for the WECS Project
that have been signed and stamped by a Professional Engineer and a licensed
surveyor.
      16.   Engineer's Certificate: The WECS Project engineer's certificate
shall be completed by a structural engineer registered in the State of Illinois
or by a Professional Engineer with a certification from a structural engineer
registered in the State of Illinois and shall certify that the WECS tower and
foundation design is compatible with and appropriate for each turbine design
proposed to be installed and that the specific soils and subsurface conditions
at the site can support the apparatus, given local soil, subsurface and climate
conditions. All commercially installed wind turbines must utilize self-
supporting, tubular towers. The WECS Project engineer's certificate shall be a
public record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
      17.   Conformance with Approved Application and Plans: The Applicant
shall construct and operate the WECS Project in substantial conformance with
the construction plans contained in a County approved submitted Special Use
Permit application(s), conditions placed upon the operation of the Facility,
the Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance, this division and all
applicable state, federal, and local laws and regulations.
      18.   Additional Terms and Conditions:
         a.   All technical submissions as defined in the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS 325/4(w)) and contained in the
Special Use Permit Application shall be prepared and signed by an Illinois
Professional Engineer (or structural engineer) for the relevant discipline.
         b.   The County may retain a qualified, independent code inspector or
professional engineer both to make appropriate inspections of the WECS Project
during and after construction and to consult with the County to confirm that
the construction, substantial repair, replacement, repowering and/or
decommissioning of the WECS Project is performed in compliance with applicable
electrical, building and Stormwater codes. The cost and fees so incurred by the
County in retaining said inspector or engineer shall be promptly reimbursed by
the Applicant of the WECS Project.
         c.   The Applicant shall provide locked metal gates or a locked chain
are installed at the access road entrances of all the wind turbine generator
locations. An exception may be made when the landowner has filed a written
statement with the County which states that the owner does not want a locked
metal gate installed and has provided a signed liability waiver to the County.
         d.   The Special Use granted to the Applicant shall bind and inure to
the benefit of the Applicant, its successors-in-interest and assigns. If any
provision in this division, or conditions placed upon the operation of the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this division that can be given effect without
the invalid provision and, to this end, the provisions in this division are
severable.
         e.   The Applicant shall provide an executed road use agreement
between the Applicant and, the appropriate governing road and highway
jurisdictions or the Illinois Department of Transportation, to the County
showing approved entrances prior to the issuance of any WECS Building Permit or
prior to construction of the WECS Project.
         f.   No wind turbine generator shall be installed in any location
where its proximity with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception
antenna for radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal
communication systems would produce electromagnetic interference with signal
transmission or reception. The wind turbine generator shall not be installed in
a location along the major axis of existing microwave communications link where
its operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's
operation.
         g.   The Applicant of the WECS Project shall use two (2) methods to
detect icing conditions on turbine blades: (1) sensors that detect when blades
become imbalanced or create vibration due to ice accumulation; and (2)
meteorological data from on-site meteorological towers, on-site anemometers,
and other relevant weather sources that will be used to determine if ice
accumulation is occurring. These control systems will either automatically shut
down the turbines(s) in icing conditions or the Applicant will manually shut
down the turbine(s) if icing conditions are identified.
   F.   Operation:
      1.   Maintenance:
         a.   Annual Report. The Applicant (WECS Permittee) must submit, on an
annual basis on the anniversary date of the siting approval application, an
operation and maintenance report to the County. The report shall contain the
following information:
            (1)   A general description of any physical repairs, replacements
or modification(s) to the WECS and/or its infrastructure;
            (2)   Complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, shadow flicker,
appearance, safety, lighting and use of any public roads received by the
Applicant concerning the WECS and the resolution of such complaints;
            (3)   Calls for emergency services;
            (4)   Status of liability insurance; and
            (5)   A general summary of service calls to the WECS.
      Failure to provide the annual report shall be considered a material
violation of this division and subject to Article XI (Remedies).
         b.   Re-Certification. Any physical modification to the WECS that
alters the mechanical load, mechanical load path, or major electrical
components shall require re-certification under Design and Safety Certification
section, paragraph 1, of this division. Like-kind replacements and
modifications that are made in the ordinary course of operations, including
expected repairs and warranty items, shall not require re-certification. Prior
to making any physical modification (other than a like-kind replacement or
other modifications made in the ordinary course of operations), the Applicant
shall confer with a relevant third-party certifying entity identified in Design
and Safety Certification section, paragraph 1, of this division to determine
whether the physical modification requires re-certification.
      2.   Coordination with Emergency Responders:
         a.   The Applicant shall submit to the local emergency responders a
copy of the Site Plan, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Standard
Operating Guidelines (SOGs), and any amendments to such documents, for the wind
power facility so that the local law enforcement, fire protection district and
rescue units, emergency medical service providers and emergency management
service providers that have jurisdiction over each tower site may evaluate and
coordinate their emergency response plans with the Applicant of the WECS
Project.
         b.   The Applicant, at its expense, shall provide annual training for,
and the necessary equipment to, the Operator and local emergency response
authorities and their personnel so that they can properly respond to a
potential emergency at the WECS Project. Special equipment to be provided
includes, but is not limited to, permanently installed rescue equipment such as
winches, pulleys, harnesses, etc.
         c.   The Applicant and the Operator shall cooperate with all local
emergency responders to develop an emergency response plan. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, 24 hour contact information (names, titles, email
addresses, cell phone numbers) for the Applicant and the Operator and at least
three (3) designated WECS Project representatives (a primary representative
with two (2) alternate representatives, each of whom are on-call "24 hours per
day/7 days per week/365 days per year"). Any change in the designated WECS
Project representative or his/her contact information shall be promptly
communicated to the County. The content of the emergency response plan,
including the 24-hour contact information, shall be reviewed and updated on an
annually basis.
         d.   Nothing in this division shall alleviate the need to comply with
all other applicable life safety, fire / emergency laws and regulations.
      3.   Water, Sewer, Materials Handling, Storage and Disposal:
         a.   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation, and
maintenance of the WECS shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of
in accordance with all federal, state and local laws.
         b.   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation,
and maintenance of the WECS shall be handled, stored, transported and disposed
of in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
         c.   The WECS Project shall comply with existing septic and well
regulations as required by the County Health Department and the State of
Illinois Department of Public Health.
      4.   Shadow Flicker: The Applicant must present to the County Board a
model study on potential shadow flicker. The Applicant shall appropriately
demonstrate to the County Board through industry standard modeling that no
occupied community building or non-participating residence will experience an
expected duration of thirty (30) hours or more per year. An occupied community
building owner or a non-participating participating residence owner may waive
this shadow flicker mitigation requirement. Each waiver of the above shadow
flicker mitigation requirement shall be set forth in a written waiver executed
by the occupied community building owner or non-participating residence owner
and filed with the County Recorder of Deeds Office against title to the
affected real property.
      5.   Signage: Signage regulations are to be consistent with ANSI and AWEA
standards. A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed
at the base of all pad- mounted transformers and substations, and at all
entrances to Wind Towers.
      6.   Drainage Systems: The applicant will make application to Kane County
for a Stormwater permit and comply with the Kane County Stormwater Management
Ordinance in accordance with CHAPTER 9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, of the Kane
County Code. The Applicant, at its expense, will repair, in a prompt and timely
manner, all waterways, drainage ditches, agricultural drainage systems, field
tiles, or any other private and public infrastructure improvements damaged
during construction, maintenance, and operation phases of the WECS Project in
accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement.
      7.   Complaint Resolution: The Applicant shall, at its expense and in
coordination with the County, develop a system for logging and investigating
complaints related to the WECS Project. The Applicant shall resolve such non-
emergency complaints on a case-by-case basis and shall provide written
confirmation to the County. All costs and fees incurred by the County in
attempting to or resolving complaints shall be reimbursed by the Applicant of
the WECS Project. The Applicant shall also designate and maintain for the
duration of the WECS Project either a local telephone number or a toll-free
telephone number and an email address as its public information I inquiry / and
complaint "hotline" which shall be answered by a customer service
representative 24/7 basis. The Applicant shall post the telephone number(s) and
email address(es) for the customer service representative(s) in an prominent,
easy to find location on their websites and at the WECS Project site on
signage.
   G.   Liability Insurance: Commencing with the issuance of a WECS Building
Permit, the Applicant shall maintain a current general comprehensive liability
policy and automobile liability coverage covering bodily injury, death and
illness, and property damage with limits of at least Five Million Dollars
($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and in the aggregate; and, shall further
maintain the above-stated lines of insurance from delivery of the "Notice to
Proceed by the Applicant under the turbine supply and/or balance of plant
construction contract(s) for the WECS Project, in coverage amounts of at least
Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and Twenty Million Dollars
($20,000,000.00) in the aggregate during the life of the WECS Project. The
Applicant shall file the original certificate of insurance upon commencement of
project construction prior to the issuance of a WECS Building Permit,
corresponding policies and endorsements to be provided within sixty (60) days
of issuance, and at each subsequent renewal, at least annually thereafter. The
County shall be provided with notification of any changes pertaining to
insurance coverage prior to the effective date of any such changes.
   H.   Decommissioning And Site Reclamation Plan Required: The Applicant must
formulate a Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan to ensure that the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility is properly decommissioned. The Decommissioning
and Site Reclamation Plan shall be binding upon the Applicant and its
successors-in-interest and assigns, and shall apply to all participating
parcels in the Commercial Wind Energy Facility, irrespective of the owner of
title to such parcels. A signed Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan must
be submitted to the county prior to the granting of the Special Use Permit. The
Applicant shall ensure that the Commercial Wind Energy Facility is properly
decommissioned within twelve (12) months of the end of the Commercial Wind
Energy Facility life. The Applicant shall include removal of all physical
material of the project improvements to a depth of sixty (60) inches beneath
the soil surface and the restoration of the area in accordance with the
Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement.
      1.   A Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan shall be prepared by an
independent Illinois Certified Professional Engineer and shall include:
         a.   A description of the methodology and cost to remove all above
ground and below ground WECS facilities of the approved Special Use Permit;
         b.   Provisions for the removal of all above ground and below ground
WECS facilities of the approved Special Use Permit;
         c.   Methodology and cost to restore all areas used for construction,
operation and access to a condition equivalent to the land prior to the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility construction;
         d.   A work schedule and a permit list necessary to accomplish the
required work;
         e.   Methodology to identify and manage any hazardous or special
materials.
         f.   Submission of a draft form of Financial Security to the County in
the form of a surety bond (performance and payment bond), irrevocable letter of
credit or a cash escrow account that names County as the beneficiary, or other
type of Financial Security that is approved by the County. If an irrevocable
letter of credit or surety bond (performance and payment bond) is selected, the
original of the irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond shall be held by
the County. If a cash escrow is selected, the cash escrow shall be held and
managed by an independent third party (e.g., escrow agent or title company) on
behalf of the County, subject to escrow instructions that incorporate the
applicable decommissioning and repair / replacement / restoration obligations
of this Agreement as executed by the County and the Applicant. The County shall
be provided with notification of any changes pertaining to the Financial
Security prior to the effective date of any such changes;
         g.   The amount of Financial Security shall be equal to the total cost
of all decommissioning and restoration work minus the salvage value of the WECS
Project. To determine that amount, the Applicant shall: (a) obtain bid
specifications provided by a professional structural engineer; (b) request
estimates from construction I demolition companies capable of completing the
decommissioning of the WECS Project; and (c) certification of the selected
estimate by a professional structural engineer. An independent engineer of the
County's choosing, and the Building Officer will review all estimates and make
a recommendation to the County Board for an acceptable estimate. The County
reserves the right to pursue other estimates. All costs to secure the estimates
will be funded by the Applicant;
         h.   A provision that the terms of the Decommissioning and Site
Reclamation Plan shall be binding upon the Applicant including any of its
successors-in-interest and assigns;
         i.   Confirmation by affidavit that the obligation to decommission the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility is included in the lease agreement for every
parcel included in the Special Use Permit application. A list of all landowners
should be kept current, and affidavits shall be secured from Applicant and
landowners stating their financial understanding;
         j.   A provision that allows for the County to have the legal right to
transfer applicable Commercial Wind Energy Facility material to salvage firms;
         k.   Identification of and procedures for the County to access the
Financial Assurances; and
         l.   A provision that the County shall have access to the site,
pursuant to reasonable notice to affect or complete decommissioning. A portion
of the Decommission Security will be required to be held for one (1) year past
the decommissioning to settle any potential disputes.
      2.   Provisions triggering the decommissioning of any portion of the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility:
         a.   Inactive construction for twelve (12) consecutive months.
         b.   If no electricity is generated by the WECS Project for twelve
(12) consecutive months after electricity is initially generated or the
Applicant has not paid landowner's amount owed in accordance with their lease
agreements for a period of six (6) consecutive months.
         c.   The Applicant dissolves or abandons the WECS Project without
first transferring the WECS Project to a successor-in-interest or assign.
         d.   If any part of an individual turbine or the WECS Project falls
into disrepair, is in threat of collapsing or any other health and safety issue
as determined by the County Building Officer.
      3.   Provisions for the removal of structures, debris and cabling; both
above and below the soil surface:
         a.   Items required to be removed include but are not limited to:
turbines, transformers, foundation pads, electrical collection systems and
transporters, underground cables, fencing, access roads and culverts. A
landowner must sign an agreement if they wish for the access roads or culverts
to remain.
      4.   Provisions for the restoration of soil and vegetation:
         a.   A Kane County Stormwater Management permit is required prior to
beginning any decommissioning work.
         b.   All affected areas shall be inspected, thoroughly cleaned and all
construction related debris shall be removed.
         c.   All affected areas must be remediated pursuant to the terms of
the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the Illinois Department of
Agriculture.
         d.   Items required to be restored include but are not limited to:
windbreaks, waterways, site grading, drainage tile systems and topsoil to
former productive levels.
            (1)   In work areas involving decommission from expansion of
turbine crane pads, widening access roads or any other work areas, the topsoil
must be first removed, identified and stored separate from other excavated
material for later replacement as applicable.
            (2)   The sixty (60)-inch below-surface excavation area shall be
filled with clean sub-grade material of similar quality to that in the
immediate surrounding area.
            (3)   All sub-grade material will be compacted to a density similar
to surrounding grade material.
            (4)   All unexcavated areas compacted by equipment used in
decommissioning shall be de-compacted in a manner that adequately restores the
topsoil and sub-grade material to the proper density consistent and compatible
with the surrounding area.
            (5)   Where possible, the topsoil shall be replaced to a minimum of
its original depth and surface contours.
            (6)   Any topsoil deficiency and trench settling shall be mitigated
with imported topsoil that is consistent with the quality of the effected site.
         e.   Items required to be repaired after decommissioning include but
are not limited to: roads, bridges and culverts.
         f.   An independent drainage engineer shall be present to ensure
drainage tiles, waterways, culverts, etc. are repaired as work progresses.
         g.   A soil erosion control plan shall be approved by the Kane-DuPage
Soil and Water Conservation District.
         h.   All applicable stormwater management, floodplain and other
surface water rules, regulations and ordinances shall be followed including
CHAPTER 9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, of the Kane County Code.
      5.   Estimating the costs of decommissioning:
         a.   Costs shall include but not be limited to engineering fees, legal
fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, decommissioning and site restoration
minus the salvage value of the Commercial Wind Energy Facility.
         b.   Adjustments to the financial assurance amount that reflect
changes in the decommissioning costs shall be submitted every five (5) years
after the initial ten (10) years of operation and shall be adjusted for
inflation and other factors. The amount of the Decommission Security shall be
adjusted accordingly within six (6) months of receiving the updated information
as determined by an Illinois professional engineer. Failure to provide
financial assurance as outlined herein shall be considered a cessation of
operation.
      6.   Financial assurance:
         a.   Financial Security shall be phased in and provided to the County
over the first eleven (11) years of the project as follows:
            (1)   On or before the first anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover ten (10) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning the WECS
Project as determined in the Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan.
            (2)   On or before the sixth anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover fifty (50) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning the WECS
Project as determined in the Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan.
            (3)   On or before the eleventh anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover one hundred (100) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning
the WECS Project as determined in the Decommissioning and Site Reclamation
Plan.
         b.   The County shall have immediate access, upon written notice to
the Applicant, to use the Decommission Security if:
            (1)   After abandonment of the Project, the Applicant, upon a
reasonable determination by the County Board, fails to address a health and
safety issue in a timely manner; or
            (2)   The Applicant fails to decommission the abandoned turbine(s)
or the entire WECS Project in accordance with the Decommissioning and Site
Reclamation Plan.
         c.   If possible for the type of Decommission Security provided, the
Applicant shall grant perfected security in the Decommission Security by use of
a control agreement establishing the County as an owner of record pursuant to
the Secured Transit Article of the Uniform Commercial Code, 810 ILCS 9/ et seq.
         d.   The County Board or its escrow agent shall release the
Decommission Security when the Applicant has demonstrated and the County
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or upon written
approval of the County to implement the decommissioning plan. Ten percent (10%)
of the Decommission Security shall be retained one (1) year past the date to
settle any outstanding concerns.
         e.   Any interest accrued on the Decommission Security that is over
and above the total value as determined by the Illinois professional structural
engineer shall go to the Applicant.
         f.   The Applicant shall identify procedures for the County to assess
the financial assurances, particularly if it is determined that there is a
health and/or safety issue with the Commercial Wind Energy Facility and the
principal company fails to adequately respond as reasonably determined by the
County Board.
         g.   The County shall be listed as a debtor in connection with any
proceeding in insolvency or bankruptcy but shall not be responsible for any
claims against the Applicant.
         h.   The Applicant shall agree that the obligations and liabilities
under a Special Use Permit shall be binding upon the Applicant (which, for the
avoidance of doubt, includes its successors-in-interest and assignees) and the
Operator. The Applicant further shall agree that the sale, assignment in fact
or at law, or other transfer of the Applicant's financial interest in the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility shall in no way effect or change the
Applicant's obligation to continue to comply with the terms, covenants and
obligations of a Special Use Permit unless such successor-in-interest or
assignee agrees to assume all obligations of the Special Use Permit, including
but not limited to the decommissioning obligations associated with the
Commercial Wind Energy Facility.
         i.   The County and its authorized representatives have the right of
entry onto the Commercial Wind Energy Facility for the purpose of inspecting
the methods of reclamation or for performing actual reclamation, if necessary.
The Applicant and/or Operator shall be liable for payment of any costs incurred
by the County for performing actual reclamation.
   I.   Remedies:
      1.   The Applicant's failure to materially comply with any of the
provisions under the Special Use, any conditions imposed on the project, and/or
failure to comply with any law or regulation shall be a default and shall be
grounds for revocation of the Special Use by the County Board.
      2.   Prior to implementation of the applicable County procedures for the
resolution of default(s), the County Board must first provide written notice to
the Applicant and Operator, setting forth the alleged default(s) and provide an
opportunity for the Applicant or the Operator to cure the default(s) within a
thirty (30) calendar day period from the date of the notice. Should the
Applicant commence the cure within that thirty (30)-day cure period, and
diligently pursues a cure, then the Applicant shall receive an additional sixty
(60) days to continue to pursue the cure before the County pursues procedures
for the resolution of default. If the default relates to a life safety issue or
interference with local, government public safety (police, fire, emergency
medical services, emergency management services, 911 dispatch) communications,
the Applicant or the Operator shall take all necessary and available commercial
measures to immediately cure the default. If the Applicant or Operator cannot
cure the default(s) or resolve the alleged default(s) within the cure period,
then applicable County ordinance provisions addressing the resolution of such
default(s) shall govern.
   J.   Fee Schedule And Permitting Processes:
      1.   Application Fees:
         a.   Prior to processing any Application for a Commercial Wind Energy
Facility, the Applicant must submit a certified check to the County for the
Application Fee per Chapter 16-1: ZONING ORDINANCE FEE SCHEDULE. These funds
shall be placed in an FDIC insured account and will be used to cover the
county's cost incurred in processing the Application.
         b.   Should the actual costs to the County exceed the submitted
Application Fee, the Applicant shall be responsible for those additional costs
and shall remit additional funds to the County within fifteen (15) days of
receipt of a request from the County. No hearings on an Application shall be
conducted nor final decisions rendered on an Application if there are
Application fees due to the County.
         c.   Any unused amounts of the Application Fee shall be refunded to
the Applicant within six months of the County Board rendering a final decision
on the matter, unless any pending litigation, disputes, or negotiations
involving the County exist regarding the Commercial Solar Energy Facility, in
which case any amounts owed to the Applicant shall be refunded within six
months of the conclusion of the litigation, disputes, or negotiations. An
Applicant may request any unused Application Fee be applied toward the Building
Permit or Stormwater Permit Fees for the Facility.
      2.   Building Permit Fees: Prior to the issuance of building permits, the
Building Permit Applicant must deposit a Building Permit Fee per Chapter 6-12:
FEE SCHEDULE.
      3.   Stormwater Permit Fees: Prior to the issuance of a Stormwater
permit, the Permit Applicant shall pay the fee per the Stormwater Management
Fee Schedule for Unincorporated Kane County.
      4.   All Costs to be Paid by Applicant or Owner: In addition to all fees
noted above, the Applicant or Owner shall pay all costs incurred by the County,
including but not limited to, those costs associated with all offices, boards
and commissions of the County, and third-party costs incurred by the County.
This includes, but is not limited to, the direct or indirect costs associated
with the hearing, permitting, operations, inspections, decommissioning,
litigation, disputes, and/ or negotiations.
   K.   Review And Consideration Of Special Use Application:
      1.   The Zoning Enforcing Officer shall review the application for
completeness with the requirements of this section in a preliminary
investigation.
      2.   Upon completion of this preliminary investigation, the Zoning
Enforcing Officer shall schedule a date for a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals to be held within forty-five (45) days and in accordance with
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT Section 25-4-8: Special Uses.
   L.   Hearing Facilitator:
   The County may engage the services of a hearing facilitator. The hearing
facilitator shall be an independent contractor who shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with all applicable rules of the Board and the County but has no
adjudicatory responsibility other than ruling on requests for continuances,
procedural matters, admissibility of evidence, and the propriety of any
arguments.
   The hearing facilitator shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois. The Applicant shall reimburse the County for the fees and
costs charged by the facilitator.
   M.   Hearing Factors: The County Board may approve a Commercial Wind Energy
Facility Special Use application if it finds the evidence complies with state,
federal and local law and regulations, and with the standards of this zoning
code including the factors listed in ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 25-4-8: Special Uses.
      1.   Special Use Permit Conditions and Restrictions. The County Board may
stipulate conditions, guarantees and restrictions, upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the WECS Project as are
deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements of this division.
         a.   In any case where a Special Use has been approved for a WECS
Project, the Applicant shall apply for a WECS Building Permit and a Stormwater
Permit from the County and all other permits required by other government or
regulatory agencies to commence construction, and commence and actively pursue
construction of the Project within thirty-six (36) months from the date of the
granting of the Special Use. If the Applicant fails to apply for a WECS
Building Permit and a Stormwater Permit from the County and all other permits
required by other government or regulatory agencies prior to construction and/
or fails to commence and actively pursue construction of the Project within the
thirty-six (36) month period, then without further action by the County Board,
the Special Use authorizing the construction and operation of the WECS Project
shall be automatically revoked and void. Upon written request supported by
evidence that the Applicant has diligently pursued issuance of all necessary
government and regulatory permits for the Project required to commence
construction and that any delay in commencement of construction of the Project
is due to conditions out of his/her/its control, the County Board, in its sole
discretion, may extend the above thirty-six (36) month period by passage of an
ordinance that amends the Special Use.
         b.   The Special Use shall be subject to revocation if the Applicant
dissolves or ceases to do business, abandons the WECS Project or the WECS
ceases to operate for more than twelve (12) consecutive months for any reason.
         c.   Subject to the provisions of Article XI (Remedies), a Special Use
may be revoked by the County Board if the WECS Project is not constructed,
installed and/or operated in substantial conformance with the County-approved
Project plans, the regulations of this division and the stipulated Special Use
conditions and restrictions.
      3.   Transferability; Owner or WECS Permittee. The Applicant shall
provide written notification to the County Board at least thirty (30) days
prior to any change in ownership of a WECS Project of any such change in
ownership. The phrase "change in ownership of a WECS Project" includes any kind
of assignment, sale; lease, transfer or other conveyance of ownership or
operating control of the Applicant, the WECS Project or any portion thereof.
The Applicant or successors-in-interest or assignees of the Special Use, as
applicable, shall remain liable for compliance with all conditions,
restrictions and obligations contained in the Special Use, the provisions of
this Ordinance and applicable County, state and federal laws.
      4.   Modification. Any modification of a WECS Project that alters or
changes the essential character or operation of the WECS Project in a way not
intended at the time the Special Use was granted, or as subsequently amended,
shall require a new Special Use. The Applicant or authorized representative,
shall apply for an amended Special Use prior to any modification of the WECS
Project.
      5.   Special Use Effective Date: The Special Use shall become effective
upon approval of the Ordinance by the County Board.
   N.   Interpretation: The provisions of these regulations shall be held to
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public
health, safety, and general welfare of Kane County. These regulations are not
intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing
regulations or laws of the Kane County nor conflict with any statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   O.   Severability: If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this
division is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the
Ordinance or these regulations. (Ord. 23-178, 5-9-2023)
25-5-4-9: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITIES:
   A.   Definitions:
                                    The entity who submits to the County an
                                    application for the siting and operation
                                    of any Commercial Solar Energy Facility
                                    or Substation. All references to
APPLICANT:                          Applicant in this division shall include
                                    Applicant's successors-in-interest and
                                    assigns, which includes a Commercial
                                    Solar Energy Facility Permittee (as
                                    defined herein).
                                    Any device or assembly of devices that
                                    is ground installed and uses solar
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY or energy from the sun for generating
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:     electricity for the primary purpose of
                                    wholesale or retail sale and not
                                    primarily for consumption on the
                                    property.
                                    A permit necessary for the commencement
                                    of work performed toward the
                                    construction, erection or installation
                                    of an approved Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Facility, Substation, Supporting
                                    Facilities, or operations and
                                    maintenance building in connection with
                                    a Commercial Solar Energy Facility. A
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Building Permit
                                    may be issued by the county after a
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility has
                                    obtained a Special Use Permit from the
                                    County Board and the Building Officer
                                    determines that all conditions, if any,
                                    have been satisfied that are imposed by
                                    the approved Special Use, and that all
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY BUILDING    required and related permits for road
PERMIT:                             access locations and a Kane County
                                    Stormwater Permit have been applied for
                                    and issued. The Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Building Permit shall require the
                                    Applicant to deliver a written "Notice
                                    to Proceed" for the Commercial Solar
                                    Energy Facility to the County prior to
                                    commencement of construction of the
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility. The
                                    term "commencement of construction", as
                                    used in this division, includes any site
                                    development work (e.g., demolition,
                                    grubbing, grading, excavation, road
                                    work, construction of Project-related
                                    structures and infrastructure
                                    improvements, etc.) regarding the
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
                                    An Applicant who applies for and
                                    receives a Special Use under this
                                    division for the siting and operation of
                                    any Commercial Solar Energy Facility or
COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY FACILITY    Substation. All references to a
PERMITTEE:                          Commercial Solar Energy Facility
                                    Permittee in this division shall include
                                    a Commercial Solar Energy Facility
                                    Permittee's successors-in-interest and
                                    assigns.
                                    The calendar date on which the
COMMERCIAL OPERATION DATE:          Commercial Solar Energy Facility
                                    produces power for commercial sale, not
                                    including test power.
                                    Assurance from a credit worthy party,
FINANCIAL ASSURANCE or FINANCIAL    examples of which include a surety bond
SECURITY or DECOMMISSION SECURITY:  (e.g., performance and payment bond),
                                    trust instrument, cash escrow, or
                                    irrevocable letter of credit.
                                    Real property that is not a
                                    participating property.
                                    "Nonparticipating residence" means a
                                    residence that is located on
NONPARTICIPATIN G PROPERTY:         nonparticipating property and that is
                                    existing and occupied on the date that
                                    an application for a permit to develop
                                    the Commercial Solar Energy Facility is
                                    filed with the County.
                                    A written document, named as such,
                                    stating that the Applicant expresses an
                                    intent to commence construction
NOTICE TO PROCEED:                  activities on a Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Facility and identifying the date on
                                    which the construction activities are
                                    scheduled to commence.
                                    Any one or more of the following
                                    buildings that is existing and occupied
                                    on the date that the application for a
OCCUPIED COMMUNITY BUILDING:        permit to develop the Commercial Solar
                                    Energy Facility is filed with the
                                    County: a school, place of worship, day
                                    care facility, public library, or
                                    community center.
                                    The person or entity responsible for the
                                    day-to-day operation and maintenance of
                                    a Commercial Solar Energy Facility,
                                    including any third-party
OPERATOR:                           subcontractors. The Operator must be a
                                    qualified solar power professional. All
                                    references to Operator in the Ordinance
                                    shall include Operator's successors-in-
                                    interest and assigns.
                                    The person or entity or entities with an
                                    equity interest in a Commercial Solar
                                    Energy Facility, including their
                                    respective successors-in-interest and
                                    assigns. The Owner does not mean (i) the
                                    property owner from whom land is leased
                                    for locating a Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Facility (unless the property owner has
                                    an equity interest in a Commercial Solar
                                    Energy Facility); or (ii) any person
OWNER:                              holding a security interest in a
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility solely
                                    to secure an extension of credit, or a
                                    person foreclosing on such security
                                    interest, provided that after
                                    foreclosure, such person seeks to sell a
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility at the
                                    earliestpracticable date. This
                                    definition includes the definition of
                                    Facility Owner as defined in 55 ILCS 5/
                                    5-12020.
                                    A residence that is located on
                                    participating property and that is
PARTICIPATING RESIDENCE:            existing and occupied on the date that
                                    an application for a permit to develop
                                    the Commercial Solar Energy Facility is
                                    filed with the County.
                                    Real property that is the subject of a
                                    written agreement between a facility
                                    owner and the owner of the real property
                                    that provides the facility owner an
                                    easement, option, lease, or license to
                                    use the real property for the purpose of
PARTICIPATING PROPERTY:             constructing a Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Facility or supporting facilities.
                                    "Participating property" also includes
                                    real property that is owned by a
                                    facility owner for the purpose of
                                    constructing a Commercial Solar Energy
                                    Facility or supporting facilities.
                                    A qualified individual who is licensed
                                    as a professional engineer in any state
                                    in the United States. Where a structural
                                    engineer is required to take some action
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER:              under terms of this division, a
                                    Professional Engineer may serve as the
                                    structural engineer if he or she has the
                                    appropriate structural engineering
                                    certification.
                                    Real property that is subject to a
                                    permanent conservation right consistent
                                    with the Real Property Conservation
PROTECTED LANDS:                    Rights Act or registered or designated
                                    as a nature preserve, buffer, or land
                                    and water reserve under the Illinois
                                    Natural Areas Preservation Act.
                                    Land owned in fee title by County, state
                                    or federal agencies and managed
                                    specifically for conservation purposes,
                                    including but not limited to County,
                                    state and federal parks, state and
                                    federal wildlife management areas, state
                                    scientific and natural areas, and
                                    federal wildlife refuges and waterfowl
                                    protection areas. Public conservation
PUBLIC CONSERVATION LANDS:          lands do not include private lands upon
                                    which conservation easements have been
                                    sold to government agencies or non-
                                    profit conservation organizations.
                                    Public conservation lands also do not
                                    include private lands for which the
                                    owners have entered into contractual
                                    relationships with government or non-
                                    profit conservation organizations for
                                    conservation purposes.
                                    A petition for a special use approved by
                                    the County Board, after a public
                                    hearing, allowing a particular use at a
                                    specified location subject to compliance
SPECIAL USE:                        with certain specified special
                                    conditions as may be required by the
                                    County Board in accordance with ARTICLE
                                    IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT,
                                    Section 25-4-8: Special Uses.
                                    The apparatus that collects and connects
                                    the electrical collection system of the
SUBSTATION:                         Commercial Solar Energy Facility and
                                    increases the voltage for connection
                                    with the utility's transmission lines.
                                    The transmission lines, substations,
                                    access roads, storage containers, and
SUPPORTING FACILITIES:              equipment associated with the generation
                                    and storage of electricity by the
                                    Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
 
   B.   Applicability: This division governs the siting of Commercial Solar
Energy Facilities and Substations that generate electricity to be sold to
wholesale or retail markets.
   C.   Prohibition: No Commercial Solar Energy Facility or Substation governed
by this division shall be constructed, erected, installed, or located within
the County, unless prior siting approval has been obtained for each individual
Commercial Solar Energy Facility or for a group of Commercial Solar Energy
Facilities under a joint siting application pursuant to this division.
   D.   Special Use Application: To obtain siting approval, the Applicant must
first submit a Special Use application to the County.
      1.   The Special Use application shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
         a.   A Commercial Solar Energy Facility Summary, including, to the
extent available:
            (1)   A general description of the project, including:
               (a)   Its approximate overall name plate generating capacity;
               (b)   The potential equipment manufacturer(s);
               (c)   Type(s) of solar panels, cells and modules;
               (d)   The number of solar panels, cells and modules;
               (e)   The maximum height of the solar panels at full tilt;
               (f)   The number of Substations;
               (g)   A project site plan, project phasing plan and project
construction timeline plan; and
               (h)   The general location of the project; and
            (2)   A description of the Applicant, Owner and Operator, including
their respective business structures;
         b.   The name(s), address(es), and phone number(s) of the Applicant
(s), Owner and Operator, and all property owner(s), if known, and documentation
demonstrating land ownership or legal control of the property;
         c.   A site plan for the Commercial Solar Energy Facility showing the
planned location of solar panels, including legal descriptions for each site,
Participating and Non-participating Residences, Occupied Community Buildings,
parcel boundary lines (including identification of adjoining properties),
setback lines, public access roads and turnout locations, Substation(s),
operations and maintenance buildings, electrical cabling to the Substation(s),
ancillary equipment, third party transmission lines, the location of any
wetlands, flood plain, drainage structures including surface ditches and
subsurface drainage lines, underground mines, scenic and natural areas within
one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed Commercial Solar Energy
Facility, and the layout of all structures within the geographical boundaries
of any applicable setback;
         d.   A proposed Decommissioning Plan for the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility;
         e.   All required studies, reports, certifications, and approvals
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this division;
         f.   An Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) executed
between the Applicant and the Illinois Department of Agriculture;
         g.   The topographic map shall include the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility site and the surrounding area;
         h.   Any other information normally required by the County as part of
its permitting requirements for siting and construction of buildings or other
structures including conformance with Chapter 9 Stormwater Management;
         i.   Waivers from the setback requirements executed by the occupied
community building owners and/or the non-participating property owners bearing
a file stamp from the County Recorder of Deeds Office confirming that the
waiver was recorded against title to the affected real property;
         j.   Results and recommendations from the Illinois Dept. of Natural
Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance Assessment Tool or a
comparable successor tool;
         k.   Results of any United States Fish and Wildlife Service's
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool that is consistent with any applicable United States Fish and
Wildlife Service's solar wildlife guidelines;
         l.   Information demonstrating that the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility will avoid protected lands;
         m.   Any other information requested by the County or the County
consultants that is necessary to evaluate the siting application and operation
of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and to demonstrate that the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility meets each of the regulations in this division, including
the Special Use standards set forth below.
      2.   Material changes to the application are not permitted once the
notice of the public hearing has been published, unless requested or permitted
by the County; and
      3.   The Applicant shall submit twelve (12) copies of the Special Use
application to the County, and at least one (1) copy in electronic format.
   E.   Design And Installation:
      1.   Design Safety Certification:
         a.   Commercial Solar Energy Facilities shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National Standards
Institute ("ANSI"). Applicants shall submit certificates of design compliance
that equipment manufacturers have obtained from Underwriters Laboratories
("UL"), or an equivalent third party. All solar panels, cells and modules;
solar panel mounts and racking, including any helical piles, ground screws,
ballasts, or other anchoring systems shall be new equipment commercially
available; no used or experimental equipment shall be used without the approval
of a variance by the County Board.
         b.   Following the granting of siting approval under this division, a
structural engineer shall certify, as part of the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility Building Permit application process, that the design of the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility is within accepted professional standards, given local
soil, subsurface and climate conditions.
      2.   Electrical Components: All electrical components of the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility shall conform to applicable local, state, and national
codes, and relevant national and international standards (e.g. ANSI and
International Electrical Commission).
      3.   Height: No component of a solar panel, cell or modules may exceed
twenty (20) feet in height above the ground at full tilt.
      4.   Aesthetics and Lighting:
         a.   Vegetative Screening: A vegetative screen shall be provided for
any part of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility that is visible to Non-
participating Residence(s). The landscaping screen shall be located between the
required fencing and the property line of the participating parcel upon which
the facility sits. The vegetative screening shall include a continuous line of
native evergreen foliage and/or native shrubs and/or native trees and/or any
existing wooded area and/or plantings of tall native grasses and other native
flowering plants.
         b.   Lighting: If lighting is provided at the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility, lighting shall be shielded and downcast such that the light does not
spill onto the adjacent parcel(s).
         c.   Intra-project Power and Communication Lines: All power lines used
to collect power and all communication lines shall be buried underground at a
depth in accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement until
same reach the property line or a substation adjacent to the property line.
      5.   Fencing: A fence of at least eight (8) feet and not more than
twenty-five (25) feet in height shall enclose and secure the Commercial Solar
Energy Facility.
      6.   Warnings
         a.   A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage must be
placed at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and Substations.
         b.   Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, plastic
sleeves, reflectors, or tape shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires
and along the guy wires up to a height of fifteen (15) feet from the ground.
      7.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   The Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be sited as follows,
with setback distances measured from the nearest edge of any component of the
facility:
            (1)   Occupied Community Buildings and Dwellings on
Nonparticipating Properties: one hundred fifty (150) feet to the nearest point
on the outside wall of the structure.
            (2)   Boundary Lines of Participating Property: None.
            (3)   Boundary Lines of Nonparticipating Property: fifty (50) feet
to the nearest point on the property line of the nonparticipating property.
            (4)   Public Road Rights-of-Way: fifty (50) feet to the nearest
edge of the public road right-of-way.
         b.   The setback requirements for Nonparticipating properties may be
waived by the written consent of the owner(s) of each affected Nonparticipating
property.
   The Applicant does not need to obtain a variance from the County upon waiver
by the property owner of any of the above setback requirements. Any waiver of
any of the above setback requirements shall run with the land and be recorded
with the Recorder of Deeds of the County.
      8.   Compliance with Additional Regulations: Nothing in this division is
intended to preempt other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
      9.   Use of Public Roads:
         a.   An Applicant proposing to use any County, municipality, township
or village road(s), for the purpose of transporting Commercial Solar Energy
Facility or Substation parts and/or equipment for construction, operation, or
maintenance of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility or Substation(s), shall:
            (1)   Identify all such public roads; and
            (2)   Obtain applicable weight and size permits from relevant
government agencies prior to construction and prior to transportation of any
such equipment or materials.
         b.   To the extent an Applicant must obtain a weight or size permit
from the County, municipality, township or village, the Applicant shall:
            (1)   Conduct a pre-construction baseline survey to determine
existing road conditions for assessing potential future damage;
            (2)   Any proposed public roads that will be used for construction
purposes shall be identified and approved in writing by the respective Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer prior to the granting of the
Special Use. Traffic for construction purposes shall be limited to these roads.
All overweight and/or oversized loads to be transported on public roads may
require a permit from the respective highway authority. Any road damage caused
by the transport of the facility's equipment, the installation, maintenance, or
removal, must be completely repaired to the reasonable satisfaction of the Road
District Commissioner and the County Engineer. The Road District Commissioner
and County Engineer may choose to require either remediation of road repair
upon completion of the Community Solar Energy Facility or are authorized to
collect fees for overweight and/or oversized load permits. Further, financial
assurance in an amount to be fixed by the Road District Commissioner to ensure
the Road District or the County that future repairs are completed to their
reasonable satisfaction shall be provided. Applicant shall submit a draft form
of said financial assurance with application for Special Use;
            (3)   Enter into a road use agreement with the County and each
affected Road District that includes the following provisions, at a minimum:
               (a)   Project layout map;
               (b)   Transportation impact analysis;
               (c)   Pre-construction plans;
               (d)   Project traffic map;
               (e)   Project scope of repairs;
               (f)   Post-construction repairs;
               (g)   Insurance;
               (h)   Financial Security in forms and amounts acceptable to the
County;
      The road use agreement shall require Applicant to be responsible for the
reasonable cost of improving roads used to construct Commercial Solar Energy
Facility and the reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility owner
during construction of the Community Solar Energy Facility so that those roads
are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the completion of
the Commercial Solar Energy Facility construction. Roadways improved in
preparation for and during the construction of the Community Solar Energy
Facility shall be repaired and restored to the improved condition at the
reasonable cost of the developer if the roadways have degraded or were damaged
as a result of construction-related activities.
         c.   All repairs and improvements to public roads and roadway
appurtenances shall be subject to the prior approval of the County before being
made and shall also be subject to inspection and acceptance by the County after
such repairs and improvements are completed. The County's road use agreement,
and any further agreements contemplated therein, regarding the maintenance and
repair of public roads and highways, must be approved by the County Board prior
to the Board's approval of any Commercial Solar Energy Facility Building Permit
application(s) related to the construction of the proposed Commercial Solar
Energy Facility.
      10.   Site Assessment: To ensure that the subsurface conditions of the
site will provide proper support for the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and
soil restoration, the Applicant, at its expense, shall provide soil and
geotechnical boring reports to the Building Officer as part of its Commercial
Solar Energy Facility Building Permit. The Applicant shall follow the
guidelines for Conservation Practices Impact Mitigation submitted by the Kane-
DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District (or equivalent regulatory agency).
Also, the Applicant shall submit grading plans for the proposed Substations for
review and comment by the Kane-DuPage Soil and Water Conservation District
prior to the issuance of any Commercial Solar Energy Facility Building Permit
for the construction of said substations.
      11.   Noise Levels: Noise levels from Commercial Solar Energy Facilities
shall be in compliance with applicable Illinois Pollution Control Board (IPCB)
regulations. The Applicant shall submit manufacturer's sound power level
characteristics and other relevant data regarding noise characteristics
necessary for a competent noise analysis. The Applicant, through the use of a
qualified professional, shall appropriately demonstrate compliance with the
applicable noise requirements in its Special Use application.
      12.   Agricultural Impact Mitigation: Pursuant to 505 ILCS 147/15(a), the
Applicant, at its expense, shall enter into an Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture prior to any public
hearing required before a siting decision on the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility application. All impacted agricultural land, whether impacted during
construction, operation, or decommissioning activities, must, at a minimum, be
remediated by the Applicant pursuant to the terms of the Agricultural Impact
Mitigation Agreement with the Illinois Department of Agriculture. The Applicant
shall submit the executed Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement to the
County as part of the Special Use application.
      13.   As-Built Map and Plans: Within sixty (60) calendar days of
completion of construction of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility, the
Applicant or Operator shall deliver "as-built" maps, site plan and engineering
plans for the Commercial Solar Energy Facility that have been signed and
stamped by a Professional Engineer and a licensed surveyor.
      14.   Engineer's Certificate: The Commercial Solar Energy Facility
engineer's certificate shall be completed by a structural engineer registered
in the State of Illinois or by a Professional Engineer with a certification
from a structural engineer registered in the State of Illinois and shall
certify that the specific soils and subsurface conditions at the site can
support the apparatus, given local soil, subsurface and climate conditions. The
Commercial Solar Energy Facility engineer's certificate shall be a public
record and shall be submitted as part of the Special Use application.
      15.   Conformance with Approved Application and Plans: The Applicant
shall construct and operate the Commercial Solar Energy Facility in substantial
conformance with the construction plans contained in a County- approved
submitted Special Use application(s), conditions placed upon the operation of
the Facility, the Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance, this division
and all applicable state, federal and local laws and regulations.
      16.   Additional Terms and Conditions:
         a.   All technical submissions as defined in the Professional
Engineering Practice Act of 1989 (225 ILCS 325/4(w)) and contained in the
Special Use Permit Application shall be prepared and signed by an Illinois
Professional Engineer (or structural engineer) for the relevant discipline.
         b.   The County may retain a qualified, independent code inspector or
professional engineer both to make appropriate inspections of the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility during and after construction and to consult with the
County to confirm that the construction, substantial repair, replacement,
repowering and/or decommissioning of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility is
performed in compliance with applicable electrical and building and Stormwater
codes. The cost and fees so incurred by the County in retaining said inspector
or engineer shall be promptly reimbursed by the Applicant of the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility.
         c.   The Special Use granted to the Applicant shall bind and inure to
the benefit of the Applicant, its successors-in-interest and assigns. If any
provision in this section, or conditions placed upon the operation of the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility is held invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect any other provision of this section that can be given effect without the
invalid provision and, to this end, the provisions in this section are
severable.
         d.   The Applicant shall provide an executed road use agreement
between the Applicant and the appropriate governing road and highway
jurisdictions or the Illinois Department of Transportation, to the County
showing approved entrances prior to the issuance of any Commercial Solar Energy
Facility Building Permit.
   F.   Operation:
      1.   Maintenance:
         a.   Annual Report. The Applicant must submit, on an annual basis on
the anniversary date of the Special Use application, an operation and
maintenance report to the County. The report shall contain the following
information: (i) a general description of any physical repairs, replacements or
modification(s) to the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and/or its
infrastructure; (ii) complaints pertaining to setbacks, noise, appearance,
safety, lighting and use of any public roads received by the Applicant
concerning the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and the resolution of such
complaints; (iii) calls for emergency services; (iv) status of liability
insurance; and (v) a general summary of service calls to the Commercial Solar
Energy Facility. Failure to provide the annual report shall be considered a
material violation of this division and subject to Article XI (Remedies).
         b.   Re-Certification. Any physical modification to the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility that alters the mechanical load, mechanical load path, or
major electrical components shall require re-certification under Section Vl(A)
(1) of this division. Like-kind replacements and modifications that are made in
the ordinary course of operations, including expected repairs and warranty
items, shall not require re-certification. Prior to making any physical
modification (other than a like-kind replacement or other modifications made in
the ordinary course of operations), the Applicant shall confer with a relevant
third-party certifying entity identified in Design and Safety Certification
section, paragraph 1, of this section to determine whether the physical
modification requires re-certification.
      2.   Coordination with Emergency Responders:
         a.   The Applicant shall submit to the local emergency responders a
copy of the Site Plan, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Standard
Operating Guidelines (SOGs), and any amendments to such documents, for the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility so that the local law enforcement, fire
protection district and rescue units, emergency medical service providers and
emergency management service providers that have jurisdiction over each tower
site may evaluate and coordinate their emergency response plans with the
Applicant of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
         b.   The Applicant, at its expense, shall provide annual training for,
and the necessary equipment to, the Operator and local emergency response
authorities and their personnel so that they can properly respond to a
potential emergency at the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
         c.   The Applicant and the Operator shall cooperate with all local
emergency responders to develop an emergency response plan. The plan shall
include, at a minimum, 24-hour contact information (names, titles, email
addresses, cell phone numbers) for the Applicant and the Operator and at least
three (3) designated Commercial Solar Energy Facility representatives (a
primary representative with two (2) alternate representatives, each of whom are
on-call "24 hours per day / 7 days per week I 365 days per year"). Any change
in the designated Commercial Solar Energy Facility representative or his/her
contact information shall be promptly communicated to the County. The content
of the emergency response plan, including the 24-hour contact information,
shall be reviewed and updated on an annually basis.
         d.   Nothing in this division shall alleviate the need to comply with
all other applicable life safety, fire / emergency laws and regulations.
      3.   Water, Sewer, Materials Handling, Storage and Disposal:
         a.   All solid wastes related to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be removed from the
site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local
laws.
         b.   All hazardous materials related to the construction, operation,
and maintenance of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall be handled,
stored, transported, and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local,
state and federal laws.
         c.   The Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall comply with existing
septic and well regulations as required by the County Health Department and the
State of Illinois Department of Public Health.
      4.   Signage: Signage regulations are to be consistent with ANSI
standards. A reasonably visible warning sign concerning voltage shall be placed
at the base of all pad- mounted transformers and substations, and at all
entrances to the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
      5.   Drainage Systems: The applicant will make application to Kane County
for a Stormwater permit and comply with the Kane County Stormwater Management
Ordinance in accordance with CHAPTER 9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, of the Kane
County Code. The Applicant, at its expense, will repair, in a prompt and timely
manner, all waterways, drainage ditches, agricultural drainage systems, field
tiles, or any other private and public infrastructure improvements damaged
during construction, maintenance and operation phases of the Commercial Solar
Energy Facility in accordance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement.
   G.   Liability Insurance: Commencing with the issuance of a Commercial Solar
Energy Facility Building Permit, the Applicant shall maintain a current general
comprehensive liability policy and automobile liability coverage covering
bodily injury, death and illness, and property damage with limits of at least
Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence and in the aggregate; and,
shall further maintain the above-stated lines of insurance from delivery of the
Notice to Proceed by the Applicant for the Commercial Solar Energy Facility, in
coverage amounts of at least Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000.00) per
occurrence and Twenty Million Dollars ($20,000,000.00) in the aggregate during
the life of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility. The Applicant shall file the
original certificate of insurance upon commencement of project construction
prior to the issuance of a Commercial Solar Energy Facility Building Permit,
corresponding policies and endorsements to be provided within sixty (60) days
of issuance, and at each subsequent renewal, at least annually thereafter.
Applicant shall notify the County of any changes in the insurance coverage.
   H.   Decommissioning And Site Reclamation Plan Required: The Applicant must
formulate a Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan to ensure that the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility is properly decommissioned. The
Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan shall be binding upon the Applicant
and its successors-in-interest and assigns and shall apply to all participating
parcels in the Commercial Solar Energy Facility, irrespective of the owner of
title to such parcels. A signed Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan must
be submitted to the County prior to the granting of the Special Use Permit. The
Applicant shall ensure that the Commercial Solar Energy Facility is properly
decommissioned within twelve (12) months of the end of the Commercial Solar
Energy Facility life. The Applicant shall include removal of all physical
material of the project improvements to a depth of sixty (60) inches beneath
the soil surface and the restoration of the area in accordance with the
Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement.
      1.   A Decommissioning and Site Reclamation Plan shall be prepared by an
independent Illinois Certified Professional Engineer and shall include:
         a.   A description of the methodology and cost to remove all above
ground and below ground Commercial Solar Energy Facility equipment of the
approved Special Use Permit;
         b.   Provisions for the removal of all above ground and below ground
Commercial Solar Energy Facility equipment of the approved Special Use Permit;
         c.   Methodology and cost to restore all areas used for construction,
operation and access to a condition equivalent to the land prior to the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility construction;
         d.   A work schedule and a permit list necessary to accomplish the
required work;
         e.   Methodology to identify and manage any hazardous or special
materials;
         f.   Submission of a draft form of Financial Security to the County in
the form of a surety bond (performance and payment bond), irrevocable letter of
credit or a cash escrow account that names the County as the beneficiary, or
other type of Financial Security that is approved by the County. If an
irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond (performance and payment bond) is
selected, the original of the irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond shall
be held by the County. If a cash escrow is selected, the cash escrow shall be
held and managed by an independent third party (e.g., escrow agent or title
company) on behalf of the County, subject to escrow instructions that
incorporate the applicable decommissioning and repair/replacement/restoration
obligations of this Agreement as executed by the County and the Applicant.
         g.   The amount of Financial Security shall be equal to the total cost
of all decommissioning and restoration work minus the salvage value of the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility equipment. To determine that amount, the
Applicant shall:
            (1)   Obtain bid specifications provided by a professional
structural engineer;
            (2)   Request estimates from construction/demolition companies
capable of completing the decommissioning of the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility; and
            (3)   Certification of the selected estimate by a professional
structural engineer.
      An independent engineer of the County's choosing, and the Building
Officer will review all estimates and make a recommendation to the County Board
for an acceptable estimate. The County reserves the right to pursue other
estimates. All costs to secure the estimates will be funded by the Applicant.
            h.   A provision that the terms of the Decommissioning and Site
Reclamation Plan shall be binding upon the Applicant including any of its
successors-in-interest and assigns;
            i.   Confirmation by affidavit that the obligation to decommission
the Commercial Solar Energy Facility is included in the lease agreement for
every parcel included in the Special Use Permit application. A list of all
landowners should be kept current, and affidavits shall be secured from
Applicant and landowners stating their financial understanding;
            j.   A provision that allows for the County to have the legal right
to transfer applicable Commercial Solar Energy Facility material to salvage
firms;
            k.   Identification of and procedures for the County to access the
Financial Assurances; and
            l.   A provision that the County shall have access to the site,
pursuant to reasonable notice to affect or complete decommissioning. A portion
of the Decommission Security will be required to be held for one (1) year past
the decommissioning to settle any potential disputes.
      2.   Provisions triggering the decommissioning of any portion of the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility:
         a.   If Applicant has not paid landowners an amount owed in accordance
with their lease agreements for a period of six (6) consecutive months.
         b.   The Applicant dissolves or abandons the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility without first transferring the Commercial Solar Energy Facility to a
successor-in-interest or assign.
         c.   If any part of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility falls into
disrepair or creates any other health and safety issue as determined by the
County.
      3.   Provisions for the removal of structures, debris and cabling; both
above and below the soil surface:
         a.   Items required to be removed include but are not limited to:
solar panels, cells and modules; solar panel mounts and racking, including any
helical piles, ground screws, ballasts, or other anchoring systems; solar panel
foundations, if used, to a depth of 60 inches; transformers, inverters, energy
storage facilities, or substations; overhead collection system components;
operations/maintenance buildings, spare parts buildings and substations/
switching gear buildings; access roads; operation/maintenance yard/staging
area; debris and litter; underground cables, fencing, access roads and
culverts. A landowner must sign an agreement if they wish for operations/
maintenance buildings, spare parts buildings and substations/switching gear
buildings; operation/maintenance yard/staging area; access roads or culverts to
remain.
      4.   Provisions for the restoration of soil and vegetation:
         a.   A Kane County Stormwater Management permit is required prior to
beginning any decommissioning work.
         b.   All affected areas shall be inspected, thoroughly cleaned and all
construction related debris shall be removed.
         c.   All affected areas must be remediated pursuant to the terms of
the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement with the Illinois Department of
Agriculture.
         d.   Items required to be restored include but are not limited to:
windbreaks, waterways, site grading, drainage tile systems and topsoil to
former productive levels.
            (1)   In work areas involving decommission from widening access
roads or any other work areas, the topsoil must be first removed, identified
and stored separate from other excavated material for later replacement as
applicable.
            (2)   The sixty (60)-inch below-surface excavation area shall be
filled with clean sub-grade material of similar quality to that in the
immediate surrounding area.
            (3)   All sub-grade material will be compacted to a density similar
to surrounding grade material.
            (4)   All unexcavated areas compacted by equipment used in
decommissioning shall be de-compacted in a manner that adequately restores the
topsoil and sub-grade material to the proper density consistent and compatible
with the surrounding area.
            (5)   Where possible, the topsoil shall be replaced at a minimum of
the original depth and surface contours.
            (6)   Any topsoil deficiency and trench settling shall be mitigated
with imported topsoil that is consistent with the quality of the effected site.
         e.   Items required to be repaired after decommissioning include but
are not limited to: roads, bridges and culverts.
         f.   An independent drainage engineer shall be present to ensure
drainage tiles, waterways, culverts, etc. are repaired as work progresses.
         g.   A soil erosion control plan shall be approved by the County Soil
and Water Conservation District.
         h.   All applicable stormwater management, floodplain and other
surface water rules, regulations and ordinances shall be followed including
CHAPTER 9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, of the Kane County Code.
      5.   Estimating the costs of decommissioning:
         a.   Costs shall include but not be limited to engineering fees, legal
fees, accounting fees, insurance costs, decommissioning and site restoration
minus the salvage value of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
         b.   Adjustments to the financial assurance amount that reflect
changes in the decommissioning costs shall be submitted every five (5) years
after the initial ten (10) years of operation and shall be adjusted for
inflation and other factors. The amount of the Decommission Security shall be
adjusted accordingly within six (6) months of receiving the updated information
as determined by an Illinois professional engineer. Failure to provide
financial assurance as outlined herein shall be considered a cessation of
operation.
      6.   Financial assurance:
         a.   Financial Security shall be phased in and provided to the County
over the first eleven (11) years of the project as follows:
            (1)   On or before the first anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover ten (10) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility as determined in the Decommissioning and Site
Reclamation Plan.
            (2)   On or before the sixth anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover fifty (50) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility as determined in the Decommissioning and Site
Reclamation Plan.
            (3)   On or before the eleventh anniversary of the Commercial
Operation Date, the Applicant shall provide the County with Financial Security
to cover one hundred (100) percent of the estimated costs of decommissioning
the Commercial Solar Energy Facility as determined in the Decommissioning and
Site Reclamation Plan.
         b.   The County shall have immediate access, upon written notice to
the Applicant, to use the Decommission Security if:
               (1)   After abandonment of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility,
the Applicant, upon a reasonable determination by the County Board, fails to
address a health and safety issue in a timely manner; or
               (2)   The Applicant fails to decommission the abandoned
Commercial Solar Energy Facility in accordance with the Decommissioning and
Site Reclamation Plan.
         c.   If possible for the type of Decommission Security provided, the
Applicant shall grant perfected security in the Decommission Security by use of
a control agreement establishing the County as an owner of record pursuant to
the Secured Transit Article of the Uniform Commercial Code, 810 ILCS 9/ et seq.
         d.   The County Board or its escrow agent shall release the
Decommission Security when the Applicant has demonstrated and the County
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or upon written
approval of the County to implement the decommissioning plan. Ten percent (10%)
of the Decommission Security shall be retained one (1) year past the date to
settle any outstanding concerns.
         e.   Any interest accrued on the Decommission Security that is over
and above the total value as determined by the Illinois professional structural
engineer shall go to the Applicant.
         f.   The Applicant shall identify procedures for the County to assess
the financial assurances, particularly if it is determined that there is a
health and/or safety issue with the Commercial Solar Energy Facility and the
principal company fails to adequately respond as reasonably determined by the
County Board.
         g.   The County shall be listed as a debtor in connection with any
proceeding in insolvency or bankruptcy but shall not be responsible for any
claims against the Applicant.
         h.   The Applicant shall agree that the obligations and liabilities
under a Special Use Permit shall be binding upon the Applicant (which, for the
avoidance of doubt, includes its successors-in-interest and assignees) and the
Operator. The Applicant further shall agree that the sale, assignment in fact
or at law, or other transfer of the Applicant's financial interest in the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility shall in no way effect or change the
Applicant's obligation to continue to comply with the terms, covenants and
obligations of a Special Use Permit unless such successor-in-interest or
assignee agrees to assume all obligations of the Special Use Permit, including
but not limited to the decommissioning obligations associated with the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
         i.   The County and its authorized representatives have the right of
entry onto the Commercial Solar Energy Facility premises for the purpose of
inspecting the methods of reclamation or for performing actual reclamation if
necessary.
   I.   Remedies:
      1.   The Applicant's failure to materially comply with any of the
provisions under the Special Use, any conditions imposed on the project, and/
or failure to comply with any law or regulation shall be a default and shall be
grounds for revocation of the Special Use Permit by the County Board.
      2.   Prior to implementation of the applicable County procedures for the
resolution of default(s), the County Board must first provide written notice to
the Applicant and Operator, setting forth the alleged default(s) and provide an
opportunity for the Applicant or the Operator to cure the default(s) within a
thirty (30) calendar day period from the date of the notice. Should the
Applicant commence the cure within that 30-day cure period, and diligently
pursues a cure, then the Applicant shall receive an additional sixty (60) days
to continue to pursue the cure before the County pursues procedures for the
resolution of default. If the default relates to a life safety issue or
interference with local, government public safety (police, fire, emergency
medical services, emergency management services, 911 dispatch) communications,
the Applicant or the Operator shall take all necessary and available commercial
measures to immediately cure the default. If the Applicant or Operator cannot
cure the default(s) or resolve the alleged default(s) within the cure period,
then applicable County ordinance provisions addressing the resolution of such
default(s) shall govern.
   J.   Fee Schedule And Permitting Processes:
      1.   Application Fees:
         a.   Prior to processing any Application for a Commercial Solar Energy
Facility, the Applicant must submit a certified check to the County for the
Application Fee per Chapter 16-1: ZONING ORDINANCE FEE SCHEDULE. These funds
shall be placed in an FDIC insured account and will be used to cover the
county's cost incurred in processing the Application.
         b.   Should the actual costs to the County exceed the submitted
Application Fee, the Applicant shall be responsible for those additional costs
and shall remit additional funds to the County within 15 days of receipt of a
request from the County. No hearings on an Application shall be conducted nor
final decisions rendered on an Application if there are Application fees due to
the County.
         c.   Any unused amounts of the Application Fee shall be refunded to
the Applicant within six months of the County Board rendering a final decision
on the matter, unless any pending litigation, disputes or negotiations
involving the County exist regarding the Commercial Solar Energy Facility, in
which case any amounts owed to the Applicant shall be refunded within six
months of the conclusion of the litigation, disputes or negotiations. An
Applicant may request any unused Application Fee be applied toward the Building
Permit Fees for the Facility.
      2.   Building Permit Fees:
         a.   Prior to the issuance of building permits, the Building Permit
Applicant must deposit a Building Permit Fee per Chapter 6-12: FEE SCHEDULE.
      3.   Stormwater Permit Fees:
         a.   Prior to the issuance of a Stormwater permit, the Permit
Applicant shall pay the fee per the Stormwater Management Fee Schedule for
Unincorporated Kane County.
      4.   All Costs to be Paid by Applicant or Owner:
         a.   In addition to all fees noted above, the Applicant or Owner shall
pay all costs incurred by the County, including but not limited to, those costs
associated with all offices, boards and commissions of the County, and third-
party costs incurred by the County. This includes, but is not limited to, the
direct or indirect costs associated with the hearing, permitting, operations,
inspections, decommissioning, litigation, disputes, and/ or negotiations.
   K.   Review And Consideration Of Special Use Permit Application:
      1.   The Zoning Enforcing Officer shall review the application for
completeness with the requirements of this division in a preliminary
investigation.
      2.   Upon completion of this preliminary investigation, the Zoning
Enforcing Officer shall schedule a date for a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals to be held within forty-five (45) days and in accordance with
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT Section 25-4-8: Special Uses.
   L.   Hearing Facilitator: The County may engage the services of a hearing
facilitator. The hearing facilitator shall be an independent contractor who
shall conduct a hearing in accordance with all applicable rules of the board
and the county but has no adjudicatory responsibility other than ruling on
requests for continuances, procedural matters, admissibility of evidence and
the propriety of any arguments.
      The hearing facilitator shall be an attorney, licensed to practice in the
State of Illinois. The Applicant shall reimburse the county for the fees and
costs charged by the facilitator.
   M.   Hearing Factors: The County Board may approve a Commercial Solar Energy
Facility Special Use Permit application, if it finds the evidence complies with
state and federal law and regulations, and with the standards of this zoning
code including the factors listed in ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 25-4-8: Special Uses.
      1.   Special Use Permit Conditions and Restrictions. The County Board may
stipulate conditions, guarantees and restrictions, upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the Commercial Solar
Energy Facility Project as are deemed necessary for the protection of the
public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements of
this division.
      2.   Revocation.
         a.   In any case where a Special Use has been approved for a
Commercial Solar Energy Facility Project, the Applicant shall apply for a
Commercial Solar Energy Facility Building Permit and a Stormwater Permit from
the County and all other permits required by other government or regulatory
agencies to commence construction, and commence and actively pursue
construction of the Project within thirty-six (36) months from the date of the
granting of the Special Use. If the Applicant fails to apply for a Commercial
Solar Energy Facility Building Permit and a Stormwater Permit from the County
and all other permits required by other government or regulatory agencies prior
to construction and/or fails to commence and actively pursue construction of
the Project within the thirty-six (36) month period, then without further
action by the County Board, the Special Use authorizing the construction and
operation of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility Project shall be
automatically revoked and void. Upon written request supported by evidence that
the Applicant has diligently pursued issuance of all necessary government and
regulatory permits for the Project required to commence construction and that
any delay in commencement of construction of the Project is due to conditions
out of his/her/its control, the County Board, in its sole discretion, may
extend the above thirty-six (36) month period by passage of an ordinance that
amends the Special Use.
         b.   The Special Use shall be subject to revocation if the Applicant
dissolves or ceases to do business, abandons the Commercial Solar Energy
Facility Project or the Commercial Solar Energy Facility ceases to operate for
more than twelve (12) consecutive months for any reason.
         c.   Subject to the provisions of Article XI (Remedies), a Special Use
may be revoked by the County Board if the Commercial Solar Energy Facility
Project is not constructed, installed and/or operated in substantial
conformance with the County-approved Project plans, the regulations of this
division and the stipulated Special Use conditions and restrictions.
      3.   Transferability; Owner or Commercial Solar Energy Facility
Permittee. The Applicant shall provide written notification to the County Board
at least thirty (30) days prior to any change in ownership of a Commercial
Solar Energy Facility. The phrase "change in ownership of a Commercial Solar
Energy Facility" includes any kind of assignment, sale; lease, transfer or
other conveyance of ownership or operating control of the Applicant, the
Commercial Solar Energy Facility or any portion thereof. The Applicant or
successors-in-interest or assignees of the Special Use Permit, as applicable,
shall remain liable for compliance with all conditions, restrictions, and
obligations contained in the Special Use, the provisions of this section and
applicable County, state, and federal laws.
      4.   Modification. Any modification of a Commercial Solar Energy Facility
that alters or changes the essential character or operation of the Commercial
Solar Energy Facility in a way not intended at the time the Special Use was
granted, or as subsequently amended, shall require a new Special Use. The
Applicant or authorized representative, shall apply for an amended Special Use
prior to any modification of the Commercial Solar Energy Facility.
      5.   Special Use Effective Date: The Special Use shall become effective
upon approval of the ordinance by the County Board.
   N.   Interpretation: The provisions of these regulations shall be held to
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public
health, safety and general welfare of Kane County. These regulations are not
intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing
regulations or laws of the Kane County nor conflict with any statutes of the
State of Illinois.
   O.   Severability: If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this
division is for any reason held invalid by any court or competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of
these regulations. (Ord. 23-178, 5-9-2023)
25-5-5: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A RECORDED OR ZONING LOT IN RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS:
Except in the case of a planned unit development, not more than one residential
building shall be located on a recorded zoning lot, and not more than two (2)
detached structures accessory to a dwelling shall be located on a recorded or
zoning lot. However, two (2) or more accessory or incidental structures to a
dwelling which are deemed to be of unique historical value as described in the
preservation ordinance 88-99 are permitted. (Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 92-
187, 9-8-1992)
25-5-6: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
Every residential building hereafter erected on a lot or parcel of land created
subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance shall provide a lot or
parcel of land in accordance with the lot size requirement of the district
within which it is located. (Ord. 78-79, § 5, 6-13-1978; Ord. 79-229, § 2, 12-
11-1979)
25-5-7: EXISTING VACANT SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
In any residential or estate district, a one-family detached dwelling and its
accessory structures may be erected on any vacant legal lot or parcel
subdivided and recorded before December 11, 1979, provided that the lot area,
lot width, and yard requirements are not less than fifty percent (50%) of the
minimums required by this ordinance and that all other applicable zoning,
wastewater disposal, and building ordinance requirements are complied with.
(Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982)
25-5-8: CONTIGUOUS PARCELS:
When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and
dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the requirements of the use
district in which they are located or the above provision, are contiguous and
are held in one ownership, at the time of or subsequent to the adoption of this
ordinance or amendment, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
(Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979)
25-5-9: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
25-5-9-1: TIME OF CONSTRUCTION:
No accessory or incidental building or structure may be constructed on any lot
prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
25-5-9-2: PERCENTAGE OF REQUIRED YARD OCCUPIED:
No detached accessory building or buildings shall occupy more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the area of a required yard for a principal building.
25-5-9-3: ON REVERSED CORNER LOTS:
On a reversed corner lot in a residential district, no accessory building or
portion thereof shall be located within five feet (5') of any part of a rear
lot line which coincides with the side lot line or portion thereof of property
in any residential district.
No accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the required side
yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the required
side yard of a reversed corner lot which is adjacent to the street.
25-5-9-4: SEPARATION BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
Detached accessory buildings or structures shall be located no closer to any
other accessory or principal building than five feet (5').
25-5-9-5: MAXIMUM SIZE OF RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
On lots of two (2) acres or less in size, none of the detached accessory
buildings or structures shall exceed a combined total of nine hundred (900)
square feet in total floor area under roof.
On lots greater than two (2) acres in size but less than five (5) acres in
size, none of the detached buildings or structures shall exceed a combined
total of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet in total floor area
under roof. (Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 95-60,
3-14-1995)
25-5-10: BULK REGULATIONS:
25-5-10-1: CONTINUED CONFORMITY WITH BULK REGULATIONS:
The maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum lot area legally
required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such
building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is
in existence. In the event of a reduction of the size of a parcel due to the
sale of a portion of the property to a government entity for public benefit,
which results in either a loss of a grandfathered status, a size smaller than
the minimum required in the parcel's current zoning district or a parcel
smaller than was approved in the parcel's subdivision, a rezoning would be
required. The zoning enforcing officer shall have the discretion to determine
that in the event an existing home was damaged resulting in a loss more than
fifty percent (50%) of its market value and prior to any rezoning being
granted, that a permit to rebuild could be obtained, subject to all current and
applicable regulations. Rezoning of the parcel would be encouraged, with the
county waiving the rezoning application fee. Furthermore, no legally required
yards, other open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall,
by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy
yard, other open space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other
building.
25-5-10-2: DIVISION OF ZONING LOTS:
No lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots and no portion of
any lot shall be sold, unless all lots resulting from each such division or
sale shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning
district in which the property is located.
25-5-10-3: LOCATION OF REQUIRED OPEN SPACE:
All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall
be located on the same lot as such building or dwelling group.
25-5-10-4: REQUIRED YARDS, EXISTING BUILDINGS:
No yards, now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective
date of this ordinance, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced
if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this ordinance for
equivalent new construction.
25-5-10-5: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS:
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the
required yards specified:
   A.   In All Yards: Decks and patios not over three feet (3') above the
average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-
over deck, patio or porch; steps four feet (4') or less above grade which are
necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from
a street or alley; chimneys projecting twenty four inches (24") or less into
the yard; approved freestanding signs; arbors and trellises; flagpoles; window
unit air conditioners projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into the
required yard; overhanging eaves, gutters and awnings projecting three feet
(3') or less into the yard.
   B.   In Front Yards: One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or
less into the yards.
   C.   In Rear Yards: Open off street parking spaces; balconies; breezeways
and open porches; one-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less into
the yard.
Permitted obstructions and detached accessory structures shall not, in the
aggregate, occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of any required yard.
(Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
25-5-11: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use is classified as a special use under this ordinance, and exists as
a special use at the date of the adoption of this ordinance, it shall be
considered to be a legal special use. (Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979)
25-5-12: REGULATIONS ALONG LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS:
Along all limited access highways, the setback of all buildings and structures
shall be not less than fifty feet (50') from the existing or recorded proposed
right of way line. (Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979)
25-5-13: PUBLIC USE AIRPORTS, RESTRICTED LANDING FIELDS, PRIVATE LANDING STRIPS
AND HELIPORTS:
The provisions of this ordinance are in addition to the rules and regulations
of the Illinois department of transportation, division of aeronautics, which
rules and regulations are the minimum standards for purposes of this ordinance.
In the event of conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and the rules
and regulations of the Illinois department of transportation, division of
aeronautics, the more restrictive of the two (2) shall prevail.
The definitions of the words and phrases used herein shall be the same as the
definitions of like words and phrases contained in the rules and regulations of
the Illinois department of transportation, division of aeronautics, unless
otherwise defined herein.
Restricted landing fields, private landing strips and heliports, as defined in
the provisions of this ordinance are included in the term "restricted landing
areas" as used in the rules and regulations of the Illinois department of
transportation, division of aeronautics, and also within that term as it is
used in this section.
Public use airports as defined in the provisions of this ordinance are included
in the term "commercial airports" as used in the rules and regulations of the
Illinois department of transportation, division of aeronautics.
Public use airports, restricted landing fields, private landing strips and
heliports shall be subject to the regulations and restrictions in section 25-5-
12 of this chapter and applicable succeeding sections of this ordinance and
subsequent amendments thereto.
25-5-13-1: RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION:
No public use airport, restricted landing field, private landing strip,
heliport, or any other facility designated as a restricted landing area of any
kind in the rules and regulations of the department of transportation, division
of aeronautics, or any part thereof, shall be located:
   A.   Within one and one-half (11/2) miles of any incorporated city or
village or any unincorporated area within any circle drawn from any point on
the subject property with a radius of two thousand feet (2,000') that contains
more than two hundred (200) dwelling units.
   B.   Within five (5) miles of the boundary of any public use airport as
defined herein.
   C.   In a location which is inconsistent with the plans, policies, and
ordinances of the county which are now and may from time to time be in effect.
25-5-13-2: DISTANCE BETWEEN RESTRICTED LANDING AREAS:
The minimum distance between restricted landing areas shall be not less than
three (3) miles measured from the nearest points of the landing strips, and
when approach planes are located in one extended straight line, the distance
shall be not less than four (4) miles.
25-5-13-3: DISTANCE FROM HIGHWAY OR RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY:
Runways shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any highway,
street or railroad right of way if the runway is perpendicular to such right of
way and shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of such right of
way if the landing strip is parallel with such right of way.
25-5-13-4: OBSTRUCTIONS:
Any obstructions, such as power lines, trees and buildings, shall be cleared
from the landing area by a five percent (5%) approach plane or five feet (5')
in height to every one hundred feet (100') distance measured from the level of
the runway.
25-5-13-5: DISTANCE BETWEEN PROPERTY LINES AND BLAST AREAS:
No run up area or blast area shall be located within a distance of two hundred
feet (200') from any residence or property line except a residence or property
line within the boundaries of an A-1 or A-2 district or a residence adjacent to
and owned by the state licensee of a private landing strip.
25-5-13-6: DUSTLESS SURFACE:
Every land area used by any aircraft under its own power shall be provided with
a dustless surface, as defined herein. (Ord. 80-37, § 3, 3-13-1980)
25-5-14: DEVELOPMENT OF AIR RIGHTS:
The development of air rights above land located in any zoning district and
utilized for public or private use, shall be permitted subject to all the
requirements of the zoning district within which such development is located.
However, plans for all such air rights development shall be submitted to the
zoning enforcing officer for recommendations as to the appropriateness of the
development in regard to the location of structures, traffic control, placement
of utilities, and all other matters related to the physical development of said
air rights. Such recommendations shall be forwarded to, and shall be subject to
the approval of, the county board. (Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979)
25-5-15: INTERPRETATION OF USE LISTS:
The enforcing officer may allow land uses which, though not contained by name
in a zoning district list of permitted or special uses, are deemed to be
similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed uses. However, such
nonlisted uses shall not be approved until the application for such use has
been reviewed by the county development department staff and a favorable report
has been received by the enforcing officer. The nonlisted uses which are
approved shall be added to the appropriate use list at the time of periodic
updating and revision. (Ord. 79-229, § 3, 12-11-1979)
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
SECTION:
25-6-1: Purpose
25-6-2: Authority To Continue Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, And Uses
25-6-3: Restrictions On Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, And Uses
25-6-3-1: Repairs And Alterations
25-6-3-2: Relocation Of Building Or Structure
25-6-3-3: Restoration Of Damaged Building Or Structure
25-6-3-4: Discontinuance Of A Nonconforming Use
25-6-3-5: Expansion Of Nonconforming Use
25-6-3-6: Change Of Nonconforming Use
25-6-4: Elimination Of Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
25-6-5: Elimination Of Nonconforming Uses
25-6-5-1: Termination Of Use In Residential And Farming Districts
25-6-5-2: Termination Of Use In Business Districts
25-6-5-3: Termination Of Use In Industrial Districts
25-6-5-4: Nonconforming Use Of Land Discontinued
25-6-6: Performance And Protective Standards For Nonconforming Uses
25-6-7: Restrictions On Nonconforming Airports, Restricted Landing Areas And
Heliports
25-6-8: Records
25-6-1: PURPOSE:
This ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate
area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. It is
necessary and consistent with the establishment of those districts that those
nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses which substantially and adversely
affect the orderly development and taxable value of other property in the
district not be permitted to continue without restriction.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures, and uses and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses
shall be permitted to continue.
25-6-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES:
Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed lawfully at the
time of the adoption of this ordinance and which remains nonconforming, and any
such building, structure, or use which shall become nonconforming upon the
adoption of this ordinance, or of any subsequent amendments thereto, may be
continued subject to the regulations which follow.
25-6-3: RESTRICTIONS ON NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES:
Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located may be continued, subject to
the provisions of this section 25-6-3.
25-6-3-1: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
So long as a building, structure, advertising sign, or business sign is used or
is eligible for use in a nonconforming manner, only ordinary repairs and
maintenance, including replacement of roof covering and veneering of outer
walls, shall be permitted. In no case shall such repairs include structural
alterations, or other work which will extend appreciably the normal life of the
building, structure, advertising sign, or business sign.
For the purpose of this section, repairs shall include the replacement of
storage tanks where the safety of operation of the installation requires such
replacement, and other replacements of, or substitutions for, machinery or
equipment not involving structural alterations to the building or structure,
except as hereinabove provided.
25-6-3-2: RELOCATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
location on the same or any other lot unless every portion of such building or
structure which is moved, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is to be located.
25-6-3-3: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
Any building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use which may be destroyed
or damaged by fire or otherwise which requires reconstruction or repairs which
are valued at fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value of the building
before it was damaged or replaced, shall not be repaired or rebuilt, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected and used upon any land devoted
to a nonconforming use, except in conformity with the regulations of this
ordinance.
25-6-3-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE:
If the nonconforming use of a building, structure, or premises is discontinued
for a continuous period of six (6) months, it shall not be renewed, and any
subsequent use of the buildings, structure, or premises shall conform to the
use regulations of the district in which such building, structure, or premises
is located.
25-6-3-5: EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   Building Or Structure: A nonconforming use occupying a part of a
building or structure may be extended only throughout that part of the building
or structure originally designed for such use, but in no case shall an addition
be made which will provide for an expansion of the nonconforming use. A use
customarily incidental to a residence shall not expand beyond an area that is
clearly incidental to the amount used for residence. A nonconforming use of
land shall not be expanded beyond the area actually so used at the time of the
passage of this ordinance, or at the time, of a later amendment creating the
nonconformity.
   B.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be expanded
or extended beyond the area it occupies.
25-6-3-6: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   A.   Building Or Structure: A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or higher classification, provided the provisions
of subsection B of this section relating to expansion are complied with, or
nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use. In neither case, however,
shall a change in use again be made to one of lower classification.
   B.   Land: The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or
structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be changed
to any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which the land
is located. (Ord. 88-62, 5-10-1988; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997)
25-6-4: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
In any district, any building or structure, all or substantially all of which
is designed or intended for a use allowed only in a less restricted district,
and any nonconforming sign in any zoning district, shall be removed or shall be
altered, remodeled or converted for a permitted use within six (6) months after
the amortization period of such building or structure, which is hereby
established and set forth below:
   A.   Full fair cash value of buildings or structures of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or less as appears on the books of the assessor at the time
of enforcement proceedings.
Three (3) years from the effective date of this ordinance.
   B.   Full fair cash value of buildings or structures of five thousand one
dollars ($5,001.00) to twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) as appears on the
books of the assessor at the time of enforcement proceedings.
Six (6) years from the effective date of this ordinance.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any building
or structure having a full fair cash value in excess of twelve thousand dollars
($12,000.00) as appears on the books of the assessor at the time of enforcement
proceedings.
25-6-5: ELIMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
This section is intended to gradually eliminate inappropriate uses of buildings
or structures designed or intended for uses allowed within the district in
which it is located, but is not intended to eliminate any use not permitted in
the district if such use is appropriate to the design or intent of such
building or structure.
25-6-5-1: TERMINATION OF USE IN RESIDENTIAL AND FARMING DISTRICTS:
In all residential and farming districts, any use of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted
only in a residential or farming district, but is being used for a use
permitted only in a business or an industrial district, shall be terminated
within five (5) years of the effective date of this ordinance.
25-6-5-2: TERMINATION OF USE IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
In all business districts, any use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in
a business district, but is being used for a use permitted only in a
residential or an industrial district, shall be terminated within ten (10)
years of the effective date of this ordinance.
25-6-5-3: TERMINATION OF USE IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
In all industrial districts, any use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in
an industrial district, but is being used for a use permitted only in a
residential or a business district, shall be terminated within fifteen (15)
years of the effective date of this ordinance.
25-6-5-4: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND DISCONTINUED:
The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease three (3) years
after March 9, 1976, in each of the following cases:
   A.   Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with such
use.
   B.   When the only buildings or structures or other physical improvements
are accessory or incidental to such use.
   C.   A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming use
of building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the
nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.
   D.   Improvements under ground or substantially at ground level, which
comprise all or substantially all of the improvements employed in a
nonconforming use of land, and which have a full fair cash value of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or less, as it appears on books of the assessor at
the time of enforcement proceedings, shall be deemed a nonconforming structure
and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this article.
The provisions of this section 25-6-5 shall not be applicable to any
nonconforming use associated with any building or structure, a substantial
portion of which is designed or intended for such a nonconforming use
regardless of the district in which such building or structure is located.
(Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982)
25-6-6: PERFORMANCE AND PROTECTIVE STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING USES:
All nonconforming uses shall conform to the performance and protective
standards, including, but not limited to, screening, noise levels, air
pollution and vibration levels, within a period of one year after the effective
date of this ordinance.
25-6-7: RESTRICTIONS ON NONCONFORMING AIRPORTS, RESTRICTED LANDING AREAS AND
HELIPORTS:
Any airport, restricted landing area, or heliport lawfully in existence prior
to the passage date hereof, which does not conform to the applicable provisions
of sections 25-5-13 and 25-8-1-2, and article XIII of this chapter shall be
deemed nonconforming, but shall be allowed to continue subject to the
provisions of section 25-6-3 of this chapter and this section.
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 25-5-13-1A and B of this chapter,
no public use airport, restricted landing field, private landing strip or any
other area designated as a restricted landing area by the Illinois department
of transportation, division of aeronautics shall be rendered nonconforming by
municipal annexation or unincorporated residential development subsequent to
the passage date hereof.
   A.   Certificate Of Nonconforming Aviation Use:
      1.   The state certificate holder of any restricted landing field,
private landing strip or heliport which does not conform with the provisions of
this section regulating aviation uses shall apply for a "certificate of
nonconforming aviation use" within sixty (60) days of the enactment date
hereof.
      2.   Such application shall be made to the zoning enforcement officer,
shall be verified by affidavit and shall describe in detail or provide:
         a.   The specific uses made of the premises;
         b.   The number of aircraft based thereon;
         c.   Whether the aircraft so based are in hangar facilities or tie
down facilities; and
         d.   The time such use has continued.
      3.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall
automatically suspend the nonconforming use until such time as there is
compliance with the provisions of this section.
      4.   Upon compliance with the terms of this section a certificate of
nonconforming aviation use shall issue.
   B.   Increased Intensity Or Volume Of Nonconforming Airport Use: A
nonconforming use as restricted landing area shall not be intensified by
increasing the number of aircraft based at such restricted landing area. The
number of aircraft to be housed in hangars lawfully under construction at the
enactment date hereof shall be included in the number of aircraft based at a
nonconforming restricted landing area for purposes of this subsection. (Ord.
80-37, § 4, 3-13-1980)
25-6-8: RECORDS:
The zoning enforcing officer shall make and keep a record, including
photographs, of all buildings, structures and land uses which do not conform to
the use regulations of the districts in which they are located.
ARTICLE VII. ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
25-7-1: Classification
25-7-1-1: Farming Districts
25-7-1-2: Residential Districts
25-7-1-3: Business Districts
25-7-1-4: Industrial Districts
25-7-1-5: Special District
25-7-1-6: Airport Districts
25-7-2: Zoning Maps
25-7-3: Additional Areas
25-7-4: Boundaries Of Districts
25-7-5: Restrictions Applying In All Districts
25-7-5-1: Minimum Width Of Yard Along Adjoining Property Lines
25-7-5-2: Minimum Setback Of Buildings And Structures From Road Or Street
25-7-5-3: Minimum Setback For Fences And Hedges At Intersections
25-7-1: CLASSIFICATION:
For the purpose of this chapter, all the land in Kane County lying outside the
limits of cities, villages and incorporated towns is hereby divided and
classified into the following districts.
25-7-1-1: FARMING DISTRICTS:
!!! F district - farming
F1 district - rural residential
F2 district - agricultural related sales, service, processing, research,
warehouse and marketing
25-7-1-2: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
!!! E1 district - estate
E2 district - estate
E2-A district - estate
E3 district - estate
R1 district - one-family residential
R2 district - one-family residential
R3 district - one-family residential
R4 district - one-family residential
R5 district - two-family residential
R6 district - two-family residential
R7 district - two-family residential
R8 district - two-family residential
R9 district - multiple-family
25-7-1-3: BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
!!! RB district - restricted business
B1 district - business
B2 district - business
B3 district - business
B4 district - business
B5 district - business
B6 district - business
25-7-1-4: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
!!! LI district - light industry
I district - industry
25-7-1-5: SPECIAL DISTRICT:
!!! PUD district - planned unit development
25-7-1-6: AIRPORT DISTRICTS:
!!! A-1 airport district - restricted landing field
A-2 airport district - public use airport
(Ord. 79-229, § 4, 12-11-1979; Ord. 80-37, § 5, 3-13-1980; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-
1982)
25-7-2: ZONING MAPS:
Such land and the classification thereof shall be as shown on maps designated
the "zoning maps of Kane County, Illinois". These maps shall be filed as part
of the ordinance codified herein in both digitized electronic and printed copy
format with the county "clerk" on September 10, 2003. The maps are ordered by
township and section number. These zoning maps, and all notations, colors,
dimensions, references and symbols shown thereon, pertaining to such districts,
shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein. Such
maps, or other copies thereof or showing the districts or other classifications
created and approved as amended from time to time as provided in this chapter,
shall be available for public reference in the office of the clerk and the
county zoning enforcing officer and shall be annually updated and filed at the
clerk's office. The maps shall be maintained in digitized electronic format in
the office of the county zoning enforcing officer. Any ordinance granting a map
amendment shall be similarly signed, dated, filed and made available for public
reference. (Ord. 03-277, 9-9-2003)
25-7-3: ADDITIONAL AREAS:
Any addition to the area regulated by this article as shown on the zoning maps,
resulting from disconnection by municipalities or otherwise, shall be
automatically placed in the F district - farming until otherwise classified by
amendment. Within these districts, no building, structure or land shall be
used, nor shall any building or structure be erected, moved, enlarged, or the
structural members thereof be altered for any use other than those as permitted
in such F district - farming and in conformance with the other provisions of
this article. Any use customarily incidental or accessory to a permitted use is
also permitted unless otherwise restricted or prohibited.
If any territory is disconnected from a municipality pursuant to the provisions
of section 7-3-1, 7-3-4 or 7-3-6 of the Illinois municipal code, as amended, 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-3-1, 7-3-4 and 7-3-6, or is included within the
boundaries of a municipality which has been dissolved pursuant to division 6 of
article 7 of the Illinois municipal code, as amended, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/7-6-1 et seq., then upon the entry of a final order of disconnection
or dissolution, or passage of an ordinance of disconnection, as the case may
be, such territory shall be zoned and the zoning map of the county shall be
amended to reflect the zoning classification, including as applicable, any
special uses that applied to the disconnected territory or to the territory of
the dissolved municipality immediately prior to the disconnection or
dissolution, unless the county zoning classification or special uses applicable
immediately prior to the incorporation are more restrictive than the
municipally approved land use, in which case the more restrictive provision
shall apply. Such zoning shall not preclude any party from applying for any
further zoning relief or amendment subject to the other provisions of this
chapter. This amendatory ordinance shall apply to any property disconnected
after December 1, 2007, and to any property incorporated into a municipality
which is dissolved subsequent to July 1, 2008. (Ord. 79-229, § 6, 12-11-1979;
Ord. 08-07, 1-8-2008; Ord. 08-251, 8-12-2008)
25-7-4: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts
as shown on the zoning maps, the following rule shall apply:
District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways,
streets, alleys, or boundary lines of sections, quarter sections, tracts or
lots or such lines extended unless otherwise indicated.
25-7-5: RESTRICTIONS APPLYING IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The restrictions applying to all uses in all districts are as follows.
25-7-5-1: MINIMUM WIDTH OF YARD ALONG ADJOINING PROPERTY LINES:
No part of a main building or structure in any district shall be located nearer
than ten feet (10') to an adjoining property line, or zone line, except as
follows:
   A.   In the case of a lot or lots with a total of fifty feet (50') or less
in width, officially on record at the time of the passage of the ordinance
codified herein or subsequently officially approved by the development
committee of the county board of Kane County, Illinois, in common ownership and
located in an R or F district, the minimum width of yard shall be five feet
(5').
   B.   In the case of a lot or lots with a total of fifty feet (50') or less
in width, officially on record at the time of the passage of this ordinance or
subsequently officially approved by the development committee of the county
board of Kane County, Illinois, in common ownership and located in a B1, B2,
B3, B4, B5, B6, or I district, no side yard is required.
   C.   Within seventy five feet (75') of the front property line of all lots
and/or lands, in any district, the minimum width of yard of all buildings shall
be the same as that provided for the main building. On that portion of all lots
and/or lands lying not less than seventy five feet (75') from the front
property line of said lots or lands, the minimum width of yard of accessory
buildings shall be not less than three feet (3'). The minimum distance between
a main building and such accessory building shall be not less than five feet
(5').
   D.   In business or industrial districts adjacent to railroad rights of way,
the yard widths for loading platforms only shall conform to the clearances for
such platforms as established by public regulatory agencies.
   E.   Pumping stations and other utility structures may be constructed on
recorded plat easements for that purpose, provided a side yard of not less than
three feet (3') is allowed from said structure to the easement lines and
provided any structure constructed on any lot immediately adjoining such
easement shall be not less than three feet (3') from such easement boundary
lines. Provided, further, that this provision shall not be in conflict with
subsection C of this section, with regard to property lines other than those
contained in the recorded easement area.
The minimum yard space required for one building or structure shall not again
be considered as yard space for another adjoining building or structure. No lot
area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces
shall be smaller than prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of
population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area
regulations herein established for the district in which such building is
located.
25-7-5-2: MINIMUM SETBACK OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES FROM ROAD OR STREET:
Except as provided in subsections A through G of this section, no building,
structure (other than fences and walls), sign or billboard, shall be erected,
structurally altered or placed so any part thereof, disregarding steps and
unroofed porches, is nearer than thirty five feet (35') to the road right of
way line; provided, however, that if forty percent (40%) or more of the
frontage on the same side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets in
recorded subdivisions containing three (3) or more lots is improved with
buildings that have observed a front setback of greater or less distance from
the existing or proposed road right of way line, and the variation of depth
setback of such buildings is not more than fifteen feet (15'), then the average
of the front setbacks of such buildings shall establish the front setback depth
for the entire frontage. In no case, however, shall a front setback of more
than fifty feet (50') be required.
Provided, further, that buildings existing at the time of this amendatory
ordinance and which may have a setback depth of less than thirty five feet
(35'), but which do have a setback depth of twenty feet (20') or more, and
buildings which may hereafter be erected or placed in such a manner as to
comply with an established average setback depth of less than thirty five feet
(35'), but which setback depth is twenty feet (20') or more may have such
alterations or additions made thereto as will not have a setback depth of less
than that of the building to which alterations or additions may be made.
Exceptions:
   A.   Advertising signs and billboards, when attached to a building, which
said building is located at less than the required minimum distance from the
right of way line of any public street or highway, and only connected with
products sold in the business then being conducted on the premises, may be
permitted at not less than the distance of said building from the right of way
line of any public street or highway.
   B.   Along all full access controlled highways, the minimum setback for
advertising signs and billboards not connected with products sold in the
business then being conducted on the premises and not advertising for sale the
premises upon which they are displayed, shall be three hundred feet (300') from
the right of way line except as provided in subsection A of this section.
   C.   A canopy of awning not supported from the ground by posts or pillars
set at any distance from a building proper and not projecting over four feet
(4') from building proper may be permitted, provided such canopy or awning does
not come closer than three feet (3') from any adjoining property line, or
closer than twenty feet (20') from any adjoining public or private street or
highway right of way line.
   D.   Telephone booths as provided for in estate districts and the
residential districts.
   E.   In LI district, the setback from right of way line shall be fifty feet
(50').
   F.   Light poles and standards for the lighting of the business areas, such
as gasoline service stations and parking lots may be placed immediately outside
the right of way line, providing no portion of said pole or standard or any
bracket or any part attached thereto extends over the right of way line, and
providing that the lights so supported are directed on to the business area and
not toward the road or neighboring property in such fashion as would constitute
a nuisance or a traffic hazard and provided the requirements of section 25-14-
1-6 of this chapter are met.
   G.   Along all limited access roads, the setback of all buildings and
structures shall be not less than fifty feet (50') from the existing or
proposed road or street right of way line, except public informational sign
permitted under subsection 25-8-1-1Q of this chapter, shall be not less than
five feet (5') from existing road or street right of way line.
In the case of a corner lot officially on record at the time of passage of this
ordinance, or subsequently officially approved by the development committee of
the county board of Kane County, Illinois, this requirement shall not reduce
the building area to less than twenty five feet (25') by eighty feet (80'),
except that the minimum setback from the property lines of said lot, adjoining
any public or private street or highway or right of way, shall in no case be
less than the side yard for said lot, as provided in section 25-7-5-1 of this
chapter.
25-7-5-3: MINIMUM SETBACK FOR FENCES AND HEDGES AT INTERSECTIONS:
Within one hundred feet (100') of the centerline of any intersecting road,
street or railroad at grade, no fence or hedge which cannot be viewed through
or over from a three foot (3') height above the traveled roadway shall be
constructed, planted or allowed to grow nearer to the road or street centerline
than the dimensions set forth in section 25-7-5-2 of this chapter.
No fence equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes or any similar device, or
any electrically charged fence, sufficient to cause shock, shall be erected,
placed or maintained on or within any lot used for residential purposes. (Ord.
78-79, § 6, 6-13-1978; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 88-62, 5-10-1988; Ord. 93-
338, 12-14-1993; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002)
ARTICLE VIII. FARMING DISTRICT
SECTION:
25-8-1: F District - Farming
25-8-1-1: Permitted Uses
25-8-1-2: Special Uses
25-8-1-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-8-2: F1 District - Rural Residential
25-8-2-1: Purpose
25-8-2-2: Permitted Uses
25-8-2-3: Conditions For Rezoning
25-8-2-4: Lot Size
25-8-2-5: Width And Frontage Of Lot On Right-Of-Way
25-8-2-6: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-8-3: F2 District - Agricultural Related Sales, Service, Processing,
Research, Warehouse And Marketing; Special Uses
25-8-3-1: Permitted Uses
25-8-3-2: Special Uses
25-8-3-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-8-1: F DISTRICT - FARMING:
25-8-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the F District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1 District except for subsections 25-9-5-
1A and P of this chapter. However single- family residential uses are permitted
provided:
      1.   The one-family residential use was an existing residential structure
on December 11, 1979; provided, that the size of the zoning lot may not be
reduced after December 11, 1979, unless done in compliance with this ordinance;
      2.   The land on which the one-family residential use is proposed is a
parcel of land recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds prior to December 11,
1979, whether the recording is by a deed or deeds, or by a contract to purchase
or memorandum of purchase on which there is a detailed legal description;
provided the parcel contains a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
and is at least seventy five feet (75') in width; provided further that all
other zoning, wastewater disposal and building ordinance requirements are
complied with;
      3.   The residence is located on a parcel of not less than fifteen (15)
acres in area which parcel has been recorded with the Kane County Recorder
between December 11, 1979, and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon (CDT), September 8,
1992; or
      4.   The residence is located on a parcel of not less than forty (40)
acres in an area recorded with the Kane County Recorder and with two hundred
fifty feet (250') of frontage on a public right- of-way and the principal use
of said zoning lot is "agricultural" as defined in this ordinance.
   B.   Agriculture as defined herein (see article III of this chapter), except
that neither animals nor poultry may be housed, stabled, kenneled or yarded
closer than one hundred feet (100') from any residence other than that of the
owner or user of the property. Roosters, pea-fowl and guinea fowl may not be
kept on properties less than five (5) acres in size. Sale of seed shall also be
permitted.
   C.   Carnivals and circuses (temporary) operating not longer than ten (10)
days, and not including the sale of beer or alcoholic liquors.
   D.   Hunting, fishing, fish and game preserves.
   E.   Governmental and judicial centers.
   F.   Picnic grounds, groves and temporary refreshment and amusement stands.
   G.   Farmstand stand (one portable) primarily for the display and sale of
only food and agriculture products which are produced on the premises,
provided: that the use be established with the County, that the structure meet
setback requirements, and that any required permits be issued.
      1.   This shall not include the cultivation, processing, infusing,
dispensing or transporting of cannabis as defined by the Illinois Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      2.   Agritourism, Limited, as defined herein, on lots not less than two
(2) acres, provided that adequate parking space be provided for the motor
vehicles of customers off the highway right of way.
   H.   Pigeon lofts and poultry farms as herein defined on tracts of land five
(5) acres or greater in size.
   I.   Pipelines, electric substations, or transformer stations, telephone
repeater stations and automatic exchanges, radio stations and towers, etc. (see
sections 25-5-4-3 and 25-5-4-5 of this chapter) but shall not include
electrical generation plants, "peaker" plants, and ancillary transmission and
distribution facilities and solar utility as defined herein (see definition in
article III of this chapter).
   J.   Sign, one, not larger than twenty (20) square feet in area, pertaining
to the sale, lease, or identification of the premises upon which it is located
or the sale of farm products produced thereon.
   K.   Sign, one, temporary and seasonal, not larger than two (2) square feet,
which directs attention to and identifies different varieties of seeds and
plants used in the production of food for animal and human use or identifies
special conservation practices. Such sign must conform to established setback
provisions and may only be displayed during the period between June 1 and
December 1 of any given year.
   L.   Stables, boarding, as defined herein.
   M.   Stables, private, as defined herein.
   N.   Truck gardening, nurseries, greenhouses, mushroom barns and apiaries.
   O.   Waterways and such hydraulic power plants and terminals as may be
erected by the County, State or Federal government or public utilities for the
use of the public.
   P.   Weighing stations operated by the State of Illinois.
   Q.   Forest preserve uses and activities at the Kane County Events Center,
located at the corner of Kirk Road and Cherry Lane in Geneva Township,
Illinois, related to educational, cultural, recreational, and sporting events,
including public informational signs accessory to the use, provided said
informational signs are not more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in
display area per side and thirty feet (30') in height and are located on public
property owned by the Forest Preserve District of Kane County. Furthermore, the
size and setback of the public informational signs shall be reviewed by the
Kane County Division of Transportation and a determination made that said signs
do not interfere with any anticipated public highway improvements and do not
create a hazard to public highway safety.
   R.   Portable concrete plants, only for Kane County public road improvement
projects, and approved by the Kane County Board, located on or immediately
adjacent to the County public road right-of-way, and for a specified time
period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
   S.   Country clubs, provided the country club use was existing prior to
March 9, 1976.
   T.   Migrant labor camps as defined in section 25-3-1 of this chapter and
that are licensed by the State of Illinois Department of Public Health and
comply with the Migrant Labor Camp Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 935,
and have established use with the Kane County Development Department in
accordance with section 25-4-3 of this chapter. The residence must comply with
subsection A of this section.
   U.   Identification signs, deemed by the Kane County Board to be of interest
to the general public, of an area not to exceed six (6) square feet at the
property line, which identify farmland that has been preserved through the
Agricultural Conservation Easement Program. The location at the property line
of these signs shall be reviewed by the Kane County Division of Transportation
and a determination made that said signs do not interfere with any anticipated
public highway improvements and do not create a hazard to public highway
safety. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021; Ord. 22-355, 10-11-
2022)
25-8-1-2: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Special uses allowed in the R1 District are allowed in the F District.
   B.   Private landing strips, as defined herein, subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   Shall be located and be of such area, runway length and design as
prescribed by the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics and the provisions of section 25-5-13 of this chapter;
      2.   Shall be used in connection with a use permitted in this district;
      3.   Shall base no more than two (2) airplanes; and
      4.   Shall not be used by "itinerant aircraft" as defined herein except
in cases of emergency.
   C.   Asphalt plants, provided the principal ingredient is gravel mined on
the premises where the plant is located, and operated from an active, licensed
mining operation. Upon the exhaustion of the substance being mined for the
aggregate, all mixing apparatus and equipment and other buildings and
structures accessory thereto shall be removed from the premises.
   D.   Bins, warehouses and other facilities for the storage of surplus grain
by the federal government, or any of its duly designated agencies.
   E.   Boat marinas and boat liveries, as herein defined.
E.5. Burial grounds, private, for family members only. This is the only
district in which this use shall be permitted.
   F.   Cemeteries for human beings, including therein mausoleums and/or
crematory.
   G.   Commercial swimming pools and beaches.
   H.   Commercial tennis courts.
H.5. Commercial TV and radio towers.
   I.   Country clubs.
   J.   Fairgrounds.
   K.   "Garbage disposal", as defined herein, shall be conducted in accordance
with the Kane County sanitary landfill control ordinance and in accordance with
all other applicable ordinances and resolutions of the county of Kane.
   L.   Golf courses, public, semipublic and private, including ancillary uses
normally provided, such as restaurants, including the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages, pro shops, swimming pools and tennis courts, but not
including continually operating driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
   M.   Government military reservations.
   N.   Health and recreation clubs, as defined herein, and provided that a
detailed plat of the proposed club and all proposed improvements shall be
submitted to the zoning board for approval or amendment at the public hearing.
Such plat, when approved by the county board, shall become a part of this
ordinance and development of the site shall be in strict accordance with said
plat.
   O.   Kennels, as defined herein.
   P.   Mining of topsoil, earth, clay, gravel, peat, sand and stone, and
structures incidental to loading the same, also processing, screening and
washing yards and plants of a quasi-temporary nature which are commonly removed
when the available deposits are worked out, but not including plants, building
and yards for the manufacture of clay or concrete products. If such mining
operations are conducted upon a lot, piece, parcel or tract of land by the
owner thereof for the purpose of improving said lot, piece, parcel or tract of
land, and the owner thereof shall file with and to the satisfaction of the
enforcing officer his affidavit that the foregoing conditions are applicable,
such mining operations may be conducted without a hearing before the zoning
board, without approval from the county board, provided the area involved does
not exceed two (2) acres. Restrictions relative to the mining of topsoil,
earth, clay, gravel, peat, sand, and stone set forth in article XV of this
chapter and the Kane County soil erosion and sediment control ordinance are
applicable to all mining operations.
   Q.   Monasteries, nunneries, religious retreats, nursing and convalescent
homes, assisted living facilities, boarding schools and orphanages.
   R.   Penal institutions.
   S.   Pet cemeteries and crematory facilities for animals.
   T.   Polo fields.
   U.   Pony riding tracks.
   V.   Practice pistol and rifle ranges, skeet or trapshooting.
   W.   Recreational camps, as defined herein, and provided that a detailed
plat of the proposed camp and all proposed improvements shall be submitted to
the zoning board for approval or amendment at the public hearing. Such plat,
when approved by the county board, shall become a part of this ordinance and
development of the site shall be in strict accordance with said plat.
   X.   Repair of farm machinery and sales of feed and seed; provided, that
these activities are accessory to the primary activity of farming, but not
including sales of farm machinery.
   Y.   Sawmill operations.
   Z.   Sewage treatment works, publicly and/or privately owned.
   AA.   Stables, public, as defined herein.
   BB.   The sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in conjunction with
a permitted use or another special use.
   CC.   In order to utilize land, lots, buildings or structures, which might
remain unused or unoccupied by uses otherwise permitted in this district, an
"interim special use" may be established in accordance with the requirements
set forth in section
25-4-8 of this chapter. In addition to the standards set forth in subsections
25-4-8-2A through F of this chapter, the interim special use must be compatible
with the character and intensity of other structures and uses permitted in this
district. In its recommendation to the County Board, in addition to the
standards set forth in subsections
25-4-8-2A through F of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also
find that the proposed interim special use would be compatible with other uses
permitted in this district. An interim special use shall be authorized for a
limited period of time only, not to exceed five (5) years.
   DD.   Other uses similar to those permitted herein as special uses.
   EE.   In submitting a petition for any of the above special uses, a detailed
plat of all improvements shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
approval or amendment at the public hearing. Such plat, when approved by the
County Board, shall become a part of this ordinance and development of the site
shall be in accordance with said plat.
   FF.   Minor variations in the development of the approved plat may be
authorized by the Development Committee.
   GG.   Farmstand stand (one) for the display and sale of a minimum of one (1)
product which is produced on the premises, plus, a maximum of ten (10) farm
food and agriculture products not grown on the site, subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   Such permit shall require compliance with subsection
25-8-1-1G of this section
25-8-1.
      2.   At the time the establishment of use permit is applied for, the
applicant shall submit a plot plan and sketch portraying an open air structure,
in detail, showing the construction of said structure for approval for the
display and retail sale of the farm products.
      3.   The application for such permit shall list the types of produce to
be sold, or offered for sale, which are grown or are to be grown on said parcel
and shall also list the types of produce proposed to be imported for sale.
      4.   Such special use, when granted, shall apply only to the original
applicant.
      5.   Tasting or sampling shall be allowed with permission from the Kane
County Health Department.
      6.   This shall not include the cultivation, processing, infusing,
dispensing or transporting of cannabis as defined by the Illinois Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   HH.   Concrete mixing plants, provided the principal ingredient is gravel
mined on the premises where the plant is located, and operated from an active,
licensed mining operation. Upon the exhaustion of the substance being mined for
the aggregate, all mixing apparatus and equipment and other buildings and
structures accessory thereto shall be removed from the premises.
   II.   Solar utility, as defined herein.
   JJ.   Adult-use cannabis craft growers and cultivation centers. (Ord. 19-
421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021; Ord. 22-355, 10-11-2022)
25-8-1-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 District are prohibited in the F District, except
solar utility as defined herein (see definition in article III of this
chapter), which is a special use. (Ord. 78-79, § 9, 6-13-1978; Ord. 79-229, §§
7, 9, 12-11-1979; Ord. 80-37, §§ 6, 7, 3-13-1980; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord.
92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 92-214, 10-13-1992; Ord. 93-338, 12-14-1993; Ord. 94-79,
4-12-1994; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord. 07-299, 9-11-
2007; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014; Ord. 17-189, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017; Ord. 18-
460, 12-11-2018, eff. retroactive to 11-13-2018)
25-8-2: F1 DISTRICT - RURAL RESIDENTIAL:
25-8-2-1: PURPOSE:
The Kane County Board has established and adopted as a long range goal, the
preservation of prime agricultural land and has implemented this long range
goal through the adoption of a Comprehensive Plan and a zoning ordinance.
However, the County Board is aware that some of the land indicated as
agriculture in the Comprehensive Plan and zoned for agriculture will not be
utilized as such because of soil productivity, vegetation, topography, manmade
barriers, etc. The Rural Residential District is intended only for single-
family residences and only for those areas indicated in the Comprehensive Plan
for agriculture and for those areas therein shown to be unsuitable for such
use.
25-8-2-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
   A.   Agricultural uses, as defined herein. Neither animals nor poultry may
be housed, stabled, or yarded closer than one hundred feet (100') from any
residence other than that of the owner or user of the property; roosters, pea-
fowl and guinea fowl may not be kept on properties less than five (5) acres in
size.
   B.   One-family dwellings.
   C.   Accessory uses to one-family dwellings.
   D.   Signs permitted and as regulated in subsection
25-9-5-1B of this chapter.
   E.   Farmstand (one portable) primarily for the display and sale of
agriculture or food products which are produced on the premises, provided that
the use be established with the County, that the structure meet setback
requirements, and that any required permits be issued. (Ord. 22-355, 10-11-
2022)
25-8-2-3: CONDITIONS FOR REZONING:
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend a rezoning to this zone
district classification unless the applicant shall present clear and convincing
evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals that the property sought to be rezoned
is not suitable for agricultural use.
The Zoning Board of Appeals in determining suitability of property for
agricultural use shall make findings of fact with respect to the following:
   A.   Existence of nonprime farmland based on the Kane County soil survey and
the important farmlands map, prepared by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service and other applicable sources;
   B.   Topography;
   C.   Manmade and physical features which may serve as barriers;
   D.   Vegetative cover;
   E.   Parcel size;
   F.   Adjacent land uses.
25-8-2-4: LOT SIZE:
Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a
tract of land having an area of not less than one acre nor more than forty (40)
acres. The exact amount of acreage for each lot shall be determined in each
individual case by the County Board after receipt of recommendations from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In determining the specific lot size to be required,
the County Board and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration
(and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings of fact with respect
thereto) the following factors in each individual case:
   A.   Existing topography and proposed topographical changes;
   B.   Suitability of the subject property for subsurface sanitary disposal
system;
   C.   Soil types and soil characteristics;
   D.   Existing conditions and proposed changes with respect to drainage of
surface and subsurface waters;
   E.   Existing and proposed vegetation and ground cover;
   F.   Suitability of access, traffic conditions and congestion;
   G.   Diminishing property values in the area or injury to the use and
enjoyment of other property;
   H.   Such other conditions and factors as to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
the County Board shall appear relevant in each individual case.
25-8-2-5: WIDTH AND FRONTAGE OF LOT ON RIGHT-OF-WAY:
Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A proportion of two and
one-half to one (21/2:1) shall normally be considered as a desirable maximum
for lot widths of one hundred feet (100') or more. Side lot lines shall be
substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
25-8-2-6: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 District are prohibited in the F1 District. (Ord. 82-
66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord. 17-189, 7-11-
2017, eff. 7-11-2017)
25-8-3: F2 DISTRICT - AGRICULTURAL RELATED SALES, SERVICE, PROCESSING,
RESEARCH, WAREHOUSE AND MARKETING; SPECIAL USES:
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide for the proper location
and regulation of agriculturally related sales, services, processing, research,
warehousing and marketing activities and other related uses that are dependent
upon, or closely allied to, the agricultural industry.
Any use established in the F2 District hereafter shall be operated in such a
manner as to comply with the applicable performance standards as set forth in
section
25-11-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-8-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
All uses in this district are special uses and must be approved in accordance
with procedures and requirements of section
25-4-8, "Special Uses", of this chapter. (Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-8-3-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the F2 District:
   A.   Agriculturally related research and facilities;
   B.   Contract sorting and grading services for grains, fruits, vegetables
and other agricultural products;
   C.   Shelling, drying, baling and threshing of agricultural crops;
   D.   Horticultural services;
   E.   Preparation of feeds for animals and fowl;
   F.   Livestock sales facilities, including auctions;
   G.   Grain elevators and bulk storage of feed grains;
   H.   Fertilizer production, sales, storage, mixing and distribution;
   I.   Repair of farm machinery, implements and related farming equipment;
   J.    Adult-use cannabis craft growers, cultivation centers, infusers, and
processors.
   K.   Adult-use cannabis transporters, if in combination with a craft grower,
cultivation center, infuser and/or processor.
   L.   In order to utilize land, lots, buildings or structures, which might
remain unused or unoccupied by uses otherwise permitted in this district, an
"interim special use" may be established in accordance with the requirements
set forth in section
25-4-8 of this chapter. In addition to the standards set forth in subsections
25-4-8-2A through F of this chapter, the interim special must be compatible
with the character and intensity of other structures and uses permitted in this
district. In its recommendation to the County Board, in addition to the
standards set forth in subsections
25-4-8-2A through F of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also
find that the proposed interim special use would be compatible with other uses
permitted in this district. An interim special use shall be authorized for a
limited period of time only, not to exceed five (5) years;
   M.   Interim use for a limited period of not more than five (5) years
specifically for the cultivation of controlled substances licensed by the State
of Illinois.
   N.   Agritourism, Intensive, as defined herein. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019;
Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021; Ord. 22-355, 10-11-2022)
25-8-3-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Residences and apartments are prohibited, except those required for watchman or
attendant whose continual presence on the premises is necessary. In this
connection, trailers or mobile homes shall not be permitted. (Ord. 14-200, 7-8-
2014)
ARTICLE IX. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
25-9-1: E1 District; Estate
25-9-1-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-1-2: Special Uses
25-9-1-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-2: E2 District; Estate
25-9-2-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-2-2: Special Uses
25-9-2-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-3: E2-A District; Estate
25-9-3-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-3-2: Special Uses
25-9-3-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-4: E3 District; Estate
25-9-4-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-4-2: Special Uses
25-9-4-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-5: R1 District; One-Family Residential
25-9-5-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-5-2: Special Uses
25-9-5-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-6: R2 District; One-Family Residential
25-9-6-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-6-2: Special Uses
25-9-6-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-7: R3 District; One-Family Residential
25-9-7-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-7-2: Special Uses
25-9-7-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-8: R4 District; One-Family Residential
25-9-8-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-8-2: Special Uses
25-9-8-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-9: R5 District; Two-Family Residential
25-9-9-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-9-2: Special Uses
25-9-9-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-10: R6 District; Two-Family Residential
25-9-10-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-10-2: Special Uses
25-9-10-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-11: R7 District; Two-Family Residential
25-9-11-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-11-2: Special Uses
25-9-11-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-12: R8 District; Two-Family Residential
25-9-12-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-12-2: Special Uses
25-9-12-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-13: R9 District; Multiple-Family
25-9-13-1: Permitted Uses
25-9-13-2: Density
25-9-13-3: Special Uses
25-9-13-4: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-9-1: E1 DISTRICT; ESTATE:
25-9-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the E1 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Single-family residence, each one on a building lot or tract of not
less than two hundred fifty feet (250') of width at the recorded setback line
and four (4) acres in area not including any portion of any public or private
highway, street or alley.
   B.   Churches.
   C.   Public and private parks, playgrounds and forest preserves, excluding
commercial enterprises therein, provided that the zoning board of appeals may,
upon written application made therefor, grant temporary seasonal permits,
terminable by said zoning board at such time or times as may be determined by
it, for the selling and dispensing of food, refreshments and nonalcoholic
beverages in certain designated areas, and as shall be compatible with the
general purposes of the classification of this district. No right or privilege
to continue the selling or dispensing of any such products beyond the period of
time designated by the Zoning Board or beyond the time when such right or
privilege is terminated by it shall accrue by reason of the issuance of any
such permit.
   D.   Public and community waterworks, police stations and fire stations.
   E.   Public and private nursery schools, grade schools and high schools
incorporated and operated not for profit.
   F.   Storage of gasoline for private, domestic use, in underground tanks,
installation approved by the State Fire Marshal, provided said storage tank is:
      1.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from side and rear lot lines,
the setback to meet requirements as provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter;
      2.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from any well;
      3.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from any septic system; and
      4.   Not less than ten feet (10') from any building, and, further,
provided that the location of any pump used in connection therewith be in
accordance with the above requirements.
   G.   Agriculture, which in this district shall mean the cultivation of the
soil principally for the production of food products, but shall not include the
following:
      1.   The feeding or other disposal of community or collected garbage.
      2.   The raising or dealing in poultry, or any animals for business or
commercial purposes, except as incidental to a bona fide general farming
operation. Said animals or poultry shall not be housed, stabled, kenneled or
yarded closer than one hundred feet (100') from any residence other than that
of the owner or user of the property. Roosters, pea-fowl and guinea fowl may
not be kept on property less than five (5) acres in size.
   H.   One sign not over six (6) square feet in area pertaining only to the
sale, lease or identification of the premises upon which it is displayed, which
may be illuminated by such lighting as, in the opinion of the enforcing
officer, shall not constitute a traffic hazard, or a nuisance to neighboring
property, except that a single temporary sign, not over three (3) square feet
in area, advertising the premises upon which it is displayed, for sale or
lease, may be permitted without a permit and must be removed when the premises
are sold or leased. One sign for the purpose of identifying the premises upon
which it is displayed or the occupants thereof, located outside the public
right-of-way, may be erected or installed without a permit, and such signs
shall conform to the following size limitations:
      1.   Upon premises having two hundred feet (200') or less of frontage on
the public right-of-way, a sign not more than one square foot in area; and
      2.   Upon premises having more than two hundred feet (200') of frontage
on the public right-of-way, a sign not more than three (3) square feet in area.
   I.   Telephone booths and pedestal mounted phones for use by the public.
Said booths or pedestal mounted phones may be permitted at less than the
required distance from the right-of-way line of public or private right-of-way
as provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter; provided, however, that if such booth or pedestal
mounted phone is installed near an intersection of two (2) streets or rights-
of-way, the minimum setback from one of such intersecting right-of-way lines
shall be twenty feet (20'), and provided also that no part of any such booth or
pedestal mounted phone shall be permitted on any such right-of-way, unless
approved by the proper highway authority.
   J.   Dogs and cats, as pets, are permitted, but not more than three (3) of
each over four (4) months of age, in any dwelling unit.
   K.   Filling and leveling of holes, pits and low land requiring not more
than five hundred (500) cubic yards of fill, with nonodorous and noncombustible
material, free from any garbage and food wastes and in compliance with the Kane
County erosion and sedimentation control ordinance.
   L.   Waiting stations for bus passengers. Said stations may be permitted at
less than required setback distance from centerline of public or private right-
of-way as provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter; provided, however, that if such station is
constructed near an intersection of two (2) streets or rights-of- way, the
required setback as set forth in said section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter shall be observed from one of such intersecting
streets or rights-of-way, and provided also that no part of any such station
shall be permitted on any such right-of-way, except a railroad right-of-way in
use by a railroad. Upon discontinuance of the use of any such structure as a
waiting station for bus passengers, such structure must be removed within
thirty (30) days from such discontinuance.
   M.   In connection with subdivision developments, a single temporary office
building and off street parking area shall be permitted on such development for
a period not to exceed six (6) years. In this connection, a single sign or
double faced sign on a common support or structure, not exceeding one hundred
(100) square feet in area for each sign face, shall be permitted on the
premises being developed, for a period not to exceed six (6) years. Such use,
structures and signs shall require permits as set forth herein.
If a temporary office, in connection with a subdivision development, is located
within a "model home", it shall be permitted in the area for a period not to
exceed six (6) years.
   N.   Lights for illuminating entrance driveways may be installed outside the
public right-of-way as, in the opinion of the enforcing officer, shall not
constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring property.
   O.   Farmstand (one portable) primarily for the display and sale of
agriculture or food products which are produced on the premises, provided that
the use be established with the County, that the structure meet setback
requirements, and that any required permits be issued. (Ord. 22-355, 10-11-
2022)
25-9-1-2: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Community buildings and social and recreational centers of a community
nature incorporated and operated not for profit.
   B.   Golf courses and country clubs incorporated and operated not for
profit.
   C.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
25-9-1-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The following uses are prohibited in E1 Estate Districts:
   A.   The storage or keeping of a truck or other commercial vehicle in excess
of three-quarter (3/4) ton or the storage or keeping of commercial equipment
and supplies.
   B.   The storage or keeping of more than one truck or other commercial
vehicle or the storage or keeping of commercial equipment and supplies in
connection with each family dwelling unit within or without any building
located on the premises.
   C.   Garages or other accessory buildings shall not be permitted in this
district except as accessory to a residential use.
   D.   Storage of boats, recreational vehicles and recreational trailers of
any kind closer than required setback line and required side yard width.
   E.   Mobile homes as defined herein. Storage of unoccupied mobile homes and/
or conversion of mobile homes to another use. Occupied travel trailers or
recreational vehicles. (Ord. 79-229, § 7, 12-11-1979; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982;
Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 98-45, 4-14-1998; Ord. 17-
189, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017)
25-9-2: E2 DISTRICT; ESTATE:
25-9-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the E2 District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Any use permitted in the E1 District.
   B.   Single-family residence, each one on a building lot or tract of not
less than two hundred feet (200') in width at the recorded setback line and two
and one-half (21/2) acres in area not including any portion of any public or
private highway, street or alley.
25-9-2-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the E1 District are allowed in the E2 District.
25-9-2-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The uses expressly prohibited in the E1 District are expressly prohibited
herein. (Ord. 79-229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-3: E2-A DISTRICT; ESTATE:
25-9-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the E2-A District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Any use permitted in the E1 District and the E2 District.
   B.   Single-family residence, each one on a building lot or tract of not
less than one hundred sixty five feet (165') in width at the recorded setback
line and two (2) acres in area not including any portion of any public or
private highway, street or alley.
25-9-3-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the E1 District are allowed in the E2-A District.
25-9-3-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The uses expressly prohibited in the E1 District are expressly prohibited
herein. (Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982)
25-9-4: E3 DISTRICT; ESTATE:
25-9-4-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the E3 District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Any use permitted in the E1 District, E2 District and E2-A District.
   B.   Single-family residence, each one on a building lot or tract of not
less than one hundred thirty two feet (132') of width at the recorded setback
line and one and one-fourth (11/4) acres in area not including any portion of
any public or private highway, street or alley.
25-9-4-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the E1 District are allowed in the E3 District.
25-9-4-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The uses expressly prohibited in the E1 District are expressly prohibited
herein. (Ord. 77-46, § 2, 4-12-1977; Ord. 79-229, § 7, 12-11-1979; Ord. 82-66,
5-11-1982)
25-9-5: R1 DISTRICT; ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-5-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R1 District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   One-family residence:
      1.   The building lot must be not less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125') in width at the recorded building setback line and the lot area shall be
not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. Said dimensions and lot area
requirement shall not include any portion of any public or private highway,
street, or alley.
      2.   If the zoning lot is part of an approved recorded subdivision which
met County zoning standards at the time of recording (on or after December 15,
1937), a one-family detached dwelling unit would be permitted provided that all
other applicable zoning, wastewater disposal, stormwater ordinance, and
building ordinance requirements are complied with.
   B.   The following uses shall be permitted as incidental or accessory to
one-family residences:
      1.   Displaying of one sign not over six (6) square feet in area
pertaining only to the sale, lease, or identification of the premises upon
which it is displayed, which may be illuminated by such lighting as, in the
opinion of the enforcing officer, shall not constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance to the neighboring property.
A single temporary sign not over three (3) square feet in area, advertising the
premises upon which it is displayed, for sale or lease, may be permitted
without a permit and must be removed when the premises are sold or leased. One
sign for the purpose of identifying the premises upon which it is displayed or
the occupants thereof, located outside the public right-of-way, may be erected
and installed without a permit, and such signs shall conform to the following
size limitations:
         a.   Upon premises having two hundred feet (200') or less of frontage
on the public right-of-way, a sign not more than one square foot in area; and
         b.   Upon premises having more than two hundred feet (200') of
frontage on the public right-of-way, a sign not more than three (3) square feet
in area.
      2.   Home occupations, as defined herein.
   C.   Agriculture, which in this district shall mean the cultivation of soil
principally for the production of food products, but shall not include:
      1.   The feeding or other disposal of community or collected garbage.
      2.   The sale or distribution, for profit, of any food products.
      3.   The raising of poultry, rabbits and other small animals
commercially.
The raising of poultry, rabbits and other small animals for private use shall
be permitted on tracts of land of one acre or more provided said poultry and
animals are housed and yarded no closer than one hundred feet (100') from any
residence other than that of the owner or user of the property. Roosters, pea-
fowl and guinea fowl may not be kept on property less than five (5) acres in
size.
   D.   Churches and libraries.
   E.   Dogs and cats, as pets, are permitted, but not more than three (3) of
each, over four (4) months of age, in any dwelling unit.
   F.   Filling and leveling of holes, pits and lowland requiring not more than
two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards of fill, with nonodorous and noncombustible
material, free from any garbage and food wastes.
   G.   Forest preserves and picnic grounds, but not including business
facilities.
   H.   Garage sales, limited to two (2) sales per year.
   I.   Lights for illuminating entrance driveways may be installed outside the
public right-of-way as, in the opinion of the enforcing officer, shall not
constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring property.
   J.   Public and community waterworks, police stations and fire stations.
   K.   Public and private parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and swimming
pools.
   L.   Railroad and bus passenger stations.
   M.   Railroad right-of-way and tracks, but not including industrial yards
and team tracks.
   N.   Schools and colleges (either public or religious), not operated for
profit.
   O.   Storage of gasoline for private, domestic use, in underground tanks;
installation approved by the State Fire Marshal, provided said storage tank is:
      1.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from side and rear lot lines,
the setback to meet requirements as provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter,
      2.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from any well,
      3.   Not less than twenty five feet (25') from any septic system, and
      4.   Not less than ten feet (10') from any building and further provided
that the location of any pump used in connection therewith be in accordance
with the above requirements.
   P.   In connection with subdivision developments, a single temporary office
building and off street parking area shall be permitted on such development for
a period not to exceed six (6) years. In this connection, a single sign or
double faced sign on a common support or structure, not exceeding one hundred
(100) square feet in area for each sign face shall be permitted on the premises
being developed, for a period not to exceed six (6) years. Such use, structures
and signs shall require permits as set forth herein.
If a temporary office, in connection with a subdivision development, is located
within a "model home", it shall be permitted in the area for a period not to
exceed six (6) years.
   Q.   Telephone booths, as defined herein, for use by the public. Said booths
may be permitted at less than the required distance from the centerline of
public or private right-of-way as provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter, however, that if such booth is installed near an
intersection of two (2) streets or rights- of-way, the minimum setback from one
of such intersecting right- of-way lines shall be twenty feet (20'), and
provided also, that no part of any such booth shall be permitted on any such
right- of-way unless approved by the proper highway authority.
   R.   Waiting stations for bus passengers may be permitted at less than
required setback distance from centerline of public or private right-of-way as
provided in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter; provided, however, that if such station is
constructed near an intersection of two (2) streets or rights-of-way, the
required setback as set forth in section
25-7-5-2 of this chapter shall be observed from one of such intersecting
streets or rights-of-way and provided also that no part of any such station
shall be permitted on any such right-of-way, except a railroad right-of-way in
use by a railroad. Upon discontinuance of the use of any such structure as a
waiting station for bus passengers, such structure must be removed within
thirty (30) days from such discontinuance.
25-9-5-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the R1 District, subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   Clubs and fraternal lodge halls, not for profit, but not including
those whose chief activity is rendering services customarily provided as a
business, or whose activities may endanger life or property or constitute a
public nuisance.
   B.   Community buildings and social and recreational centers of a community
nature.
   C.   Hospitals, general, for human beings. This may include power plants,
residence for nurses, and similar facilities.
   D.   Kennels, private, not for profit, for "pets" as defined herein on
tracts of land not less than one acre and where permitted said animals shall
not be housed, kenneled or yarded closer than one hundred feet (100') from any
residence other than that of the owner or user of property.
   E.   Museums as defined herein.
   F.   Nursery schools/preschools and/or childcare centers as defined herein.
   G.   Parking areas to be used in connection with an existing business in an
adjoining Business District. No buildings or structures, except necessary
lighting, shall be permitted in such areas.
   H.   Stray and abandoned animal homes (State licensed).
   I.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
25-9-5-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The following uses are prohibited in R1 Residential Districts:
   A.   Storing of lumber or other building materials and/or equipment, not in
connection with an authorized building project in progress on the immediate
premises.
   B.   Mobile homes as defined herein. Storage of unoccupied mobile homes and/
or conversion of mobile homes to another use. Occupied travel trailers or
recreational vehicles.
   C.   The storage or parking of one or more trucks or other commercial
vehicles in excess of three-quarter (3/4) ton, or the storage or keeping of
commercial equipment and supplies.
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Garages or other accessory buildings shall not be permitted in this
district except as accessory to a residential use.
   F.   Storage of boats, recreational vehicles and trailers of any kind closer
than required setback lines.
   G.   Private electrical generation plants, "peaker" plants, ancillary
transmission and distribution facilities other than solar accessory as defined
herein (see definition in article III of this chapter). (Ord. 78-79, § 7, 6-13-
1978; Ord. 79-229, § 7, 12-11-1979; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-
1992; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 98-45, 4-14-1998; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord.
08-07, 1-8-2008; Ord. 17-189, 7-11-2017, eff. 7-11-2017; Ord. 18-460, 12-11-
2018, eff. retroactive to 11-13-2018)
25-9-6: R2 DISTRICT; ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R2 District, the following uses are permitted:
   Any use permitted in the R1 District shall be permitted in the R2 District
except that the building lot for one-family residences in the R2 District shall
be not less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') in width at the recorded
building setback line and the lot area shall be not less than thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet. Said dimensions and lot area requirements shall not
include any portion of any public or private highway, street, or alley.
25-9-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R2 district.
25-9-6-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R2 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-7: R3 DISTRICT; ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R3 district, the following uses are permitted:
   Any use permitted in the R2 district shall be permitted in the R3 district
except that the building lot for one-family residences in the R3 district shall
be not less than one hundred feet (100') in width at the recorded building
setback line and the lot area shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. Said dimensions and lot area requirements shall not include any
portion of any public or private highway, street, or alley.
25-9-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R3 district.
25-9-7-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R3 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-8: R4 DISTRICT; ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-8-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R4 district, the following uses are permitted:
   Any use permitted in the R3 district shall be permitted in the R4 district
except that the building lot for one-family residences in the R4 district shall
be not less than seventy five feet (75') in width at the recorded building
setback line and the lot area shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet. Said dimensions and lot area requirements shall not include any
portion of any public or private highway, street, or alley.
25-9-8-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R4 district.
25-9-8-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R4 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-9: R5 DISTRICT; TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-9-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R5 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Permitted; Exceptions: Any use permitted in an R4 district shall be
permitted in the R5 district, except home occupations. The building lot for
one-family residences in the R5 district shall be not less than one hundred
fifty feet (150') in width at the recorded building setback line and the lot
area shall be not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet. Said
dimensions and lot area requirements shall not include any portion of any
public or private highway, street, or alley.
   B.   Two-Family Residence: The building lot shall be not less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') in width at recorded building setback line and the
lot area shall be not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet.
25-9-9-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R5 district.
25-9-9-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R5 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-10: R6 DISTRICT; TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-10-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R6 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Permitted; Exceptions: Any use permitted in an R5 district except that
the building lot for one-family residences in the R6 district shall be not less
than one hundred forty feet (140') in width at the recorded building setback
line and the lot area shall be not less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet. Said dimensions and lot area requirements shall not include any portion
of any public or private highway, street, or alley.
   B.   Two-Family Residence: The building lot shall be not less than one
hundred forty feet (140') in width at the recorded building setback line and
the lot area shall be not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
25-9-10-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R6 district.
25-9-10-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R6 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-11: R7 DISTRICT; TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-11-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R7 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Permitted; Exceptions: Any use permitted in an R6 district except that
the building lot for one-family residences in the R7 district shall be not less
than one hundred twenty five feet (125') in width at the recorded building
setback line and the lot area shall be not less than twenty five thousand
(25,000) square feet. Said dimensions and lot area requirements shall not
include any portion of any public or private highway, street, or alley.
   B.   Two-Family Residence: The building lot shall be not less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') in width at the recorded building setback line
and the lot area shall be not less than twenty five thousand (25,000) square
feet.
25-9-11-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R7 district.
25-9-11-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R7 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-12: R8 DISTRICT; TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL:
25-9-12-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R8 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Permitted; Exceptions: Any use permitted in an R7 district except that
the building lot for one-family residences in the R8 district shall be not less
than one hundred feet (100') in width at the recorded building setback line and
the lot area shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Said
dimensions and lot area requirements shall not include any portion of any
public or private highway, street, or alley.
   B.   Two-Family Residence: The building lot shall be not less than one
hundred feet (100') in width at the recorded building setback line and the lot
area shall be not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
25-9-12-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R8 district.
25-9-12-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in the R1 district are prohibited in the R8 district. (Ord. 79-
229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
25-9-13: R9 DISTRICT; MULTIPLE-FAMILY:
25-9-13-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the R9 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses permitted in the R1 district except subsections 25-9-5-1A, B2,
J and N of this chapter.
   B.   Residential apartment buildings and multiple dwellings for not less
than three (3) families, provided:
      1.   The height of the building shall not be more than three (3) stories
above the floor level of the lowest apartment. Such lowest apartment shall be
construed to mean either that apartment, any part of which is below the lowest
finished grade of the ground adjacent to the building, or if no apartment is
below said finished grade, then the apartment nearest said finished grade.
      2.   The maximum building height shall not exceed forty feet (40') above
the lowest finished grade of the ground adjacent to the building.
      3.   The building plot is improved with an approved community water
supply and an approved community sewerage disposal system as defined herein.
   C.   Also provided, further, that the following use will be permitted as
incidental or accessory to the residential use:
Displaying of one sign not over six (6) square feet in area pertaining only to
the sale, lease, or identification of the premises upon which it is displayed,
which may be illuminated by such lighting as, in the opinion of the enforcing
officer, shall not constitute a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring
property.
25-9-13-2: DENSITY:
   A.   There shall in no case be more than eight (8) dwelling units per acre,
not including any portion of any public or private highway, street or alley.
   B.   Where buildings for less than eight (8) dwelling units are to be
constructed, the area for each dwelling unit shall not be less than the
proportion of eight (8) units per acre.
25-9-13-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the R1 district are allowed in the R9 district.
25-9-13-4: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses expressly prohibited in the R1 district shall be prohibited in the R9
district. (Ord. 79-229, § 7, 12-11-1979)
ARTICLE X. BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
25-10-1: RB District - Restricted Business
25-10-1-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-1-2: Special Uses
25-10-2: B1 District - Business
25-10-2-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-2-2: Special Uses
25-10-2-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-10-3: B2 District - Business
25-10-3-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-3-2: Special Uses
25-10-3-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-10-4: B3 District - Business
25-10-4-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-4-2: Special Uses
25-10-4-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-10-5: B4 District - Business
25-10-5-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-5-2: Special Uses
25-10-5-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-10-6: B5 District - Business
25-10-6-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-6-2: Special Uses
25-10-7: B6 District - Business
25-10-7-1: Permitted Uses
25-10-7-2: Special Uses
25-10-1: RB DISTRICT - RESTRICTED BUSINESS:
25-10-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the RB district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Banks.
   B.   Delicatessens (not including consumption of food or beverages on the
premises).
   C.   Medical clinics for human beings.
   D.   Personal service shops such as shoe repair, beauty parlors,
barbershops, dry cleaning receiving stations. Cleaning must be done elsewhere.
   E.   Postal substations.
   F.   Prescription drugstores (not including serving of any food or
beverages). This shall not include the dispensing of cannabis as defined by the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   G.   Retail sale of foods, drugs, wearing apparel, hardware, furniture,
household goods and supplies, office equipment and supplies, camping and
recreational equipment (not self-propelled), garden supplies and other similar
products, goods and merchandise are permitted so long as the aforesaid goods
and/or merchandise is sold from a permanent structure. Temporary seasonal sales
may be permitted for a period not to exceed six (6) months without erecting a
structure providing a temporary use permit is obtained from the zoning
enforcing officer. In the case of temporary food sales, a temporary food
service license must be obtained from the Kane County environmental health
department. This shall not include the dispensing of cannabis as defined by the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   H.   "Mixed uses", as defined herein.
   I.   Business and professional offices.
   J.   Personal service shops such as shoe repair, beauty parlors,
barbershops, and similar services.
   K.   Business signs defined herein not to exceed eight (8) square feet in
display area per side. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-10-1-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses compatible with other uses permitted in this district may be
considered in the manner prescribed, as outlined in section
25-4-8 of this chapter.
   A.   Adult-use cannabis dispensers. (Ord. 08-07, 1-8-2008; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-
2014; Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-10-2: B1 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B1 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and R4 districts (except
subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter).
   B.   Business signs as defined herein not to exceed thirty two (32) square
feet in display area per side and twenty feet (20') in height. Business signs
lawfully in place prior to May 10, 1988, may be continued subject to the
regulations for nonconforming buildings, structures and uses set forth in
article VI of this chapter.
   C.   Apartments in a building used principally for a business use permitted
herein except those uses permitted in subsections A, B, G, and L of this
section, and provided:
      1.   That any such apartment located on the first floor of such building
shall be located only in the rear twenty five percent (25%) of said building.
      2.   That the lot area per apartment is not less than one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet, exclusive of required business and residential
parking.
   D.   Bakeries (retail), print shops, laundry and dry cleaning receiving
stations. Cleaning must be done elsewhere.
   E.   Banks.
   F.   Business and professional offices.
   G.   Coin operated amusement devices, as defined herein, provided that said
coin operated devices shall be licensed, operated, and located pursuant to "an
ordinance requiring a license for and imposing a tax on the operation of coin
operated amusement devices", as amended. This shall not include "arcades", as
defined herein.
   H.   Commercial swimming pools and beaches.
   I.   Dental laboratories.
   J.   Garage buildings for the repair, servicing, storage, sale or rental of
new or used motor vehicles and vehicle parts, but not including "auto wrecking
yards" as herein defined, and not including open air lots for parking or
display for sale or rental of motor vehicles.
   K.   Hotels and motels.
   L.   Laundry and cleaning facilities provided for the public by coin
operated or attended machines having a single load capacity of not more than
twenty (20) pounds and using noninflammable liquids.
   M.   Motor vehicle parking lots not including truck storage or truck
terminals.
   N.   Personal service shops such as shoe repair, beauty parlors,
barbershops, and similar services.
   O.   Pet shops, not including boarding of animals.
   P.   Plumbing shops (retail).
   Q.   Post offices.
   R.   Private music, dancing, business and vocational schools and colleges.
   S.   Retail sale of foods, drugs, wearing apparel, hardware, furniture,
household goods and supplies, office equipment and supplies, camping and
recreational equipment (not self-propelled), garden supplies and other similar
products, goods and merchandise is permitted so long as the aforesaid goods
and/or merchandise is sold from a permanent structure. Temporary seasonal sales
may be permitted for a period not to exceed six (6) months without erecting a
structure providing a temporary use permit is obtained from the zoning
enforcing officer. In the case of temporary food sales, a temporary food
service license must be obtained from the Kane County environmental health
department. This shall not include the dispensing of cannabis as defined by the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   T.   Rooming houses, or boarding houses, or combinations thereof, including
one apartment accessory to the operation thereof.
   U.   Serving of meals and nonalcoholic drinks, but not including drive-in
establishments as defined in section
25-3-1  of this chapter.
   V.   Theaters, indoor.
   W.   Undertaking establishments.
   X.   Upholstery shops.
   Y.   Farmers markets. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021; Ord.
22-355, 10-11-2022)
25-10-2-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in a B1 district, subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   The retail sale of packaged beer and alcoholic liquors, but not for
consumption on the premises. However, in any application for a rezoning of any
property to B1 district-business, if in the same application for such rezoning
a request is made for authority to sell packaged beer and alcoholic liquors at
retail, but not for consumption on the premises, then at the same hearing under
such application the zoning board may consider such request for such retail
sale, and make recommendations to the county board, without the necessity of a
further hearing on the matter. Except as otherwise specifically provided, this
is the only district in which this use is permitted.
   B.   Car and truck wash.
   C.   Commercial TV and radio towers.
   D.   Gasoline stations, including marine, provided the plans and
construction of storage tanks and gasoline pumps conform to the laws and
regulations of the state and have the approval of the state division of fire
prevention.
   E.   Outdoor theaters, and other drive-in establishments as defined in
section
25-3-1 of this chapter.
   F.   Advertising signs as defined herein not to exceed ninety six (96)
square feet in display area per side and forty feet (40') in height.
Advertising signs lawfully in place prior to May 10, 1988, may be continued
subject to the regulations for nonconforming buildings, structures and uses set
forth in article VI of this chapter.
   G.   Adult-use cannabis dispensers. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224,
4-13-2021)
25-10-2-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Trailer coaches or mobile homes, as herein defined. (Ord. 78-79, §§ 10-12, 6-
13-1978; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 83-15, 1-11-1983; Ord. 88-62, 5-10-1988;
Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014)
25-10-3: B2 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-3-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B2 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3 and R4 (except subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter), F and B1 districts.
   B.   Carnival grounds and equipment.
   C.   Dance halls and rollerskating rinks.
   D.   Practice golf driving tees, merry-go-rounds, bowling alleys, pool
halls, and other commercial places of amusement.
   E.   Shooting galleries and ranges in a fully enclosed building.
   F.   Racetracks, this is the only district in which this use is permitted.
25-10-3-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the B2 district, subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   "Adult business", as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter, excluding adults only nightclubs. A separate special
use must be acquired for each adult business. Except as otherwise specifically
provided, this is the only district in which this special use is permitted.
   B.   "Arcade", as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter, provided said "arcade" shall be licensed, operated, and
located pursuant to "an ordinance requiring a license for and imposing a tax on
the operation of coin operated amusement devices" as amended.
25-10-3-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in B1 district are prohibited in B2 district. (Ord. 78-79, §
13, 6-13-1978; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982; Ord. 83-15, 1-11-1983; Ord. 97-46, 2-11-
1997)
25-10-4: B3 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-4-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B3 district, the following uses are permitted, subject to the
performance standards as set forth in section
25-11-1-5 of this chapter:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and R4 (except subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter), and F, B1 and B2 districts.
   B.   Reserved.
   C.   Bottling plants.
   D.   Cemetery monument works.
   E.   Cheese factories.
   F.   Creameries.
   G.   Dry cleaning establishments.
   H.   Ice cream manufacturing.
   I.   Laundries.
   J.   Milk collection depots.
   K.   Printing plants, including the printing and processing of wallpaper.
   L.   Hospitals for the treatment of animals.
   M.   Wholesale establishments and their facilities (receiving, storing, and
distributing).
   N.   Yards for the storage and repair of maintenance and operating equipment
of public agencies and public utilities.
   O.   Tourist courts and motor lodges, as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter. This is the only district in which this use is
permitted.
25-10-4-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the B3 district, subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   Auction sales buildings and/or yards.
   B.   Blacksmith shops.
   C.   Body and paint shops.
   D.   Reserved.
   E.   Bulk storage of gasoline, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive
liquids or fuel gases, under pressure, for retail sales and distribution,
provided the location, plans and construction shall conform to the laws and
regulations of the state and have approval of the state division of fire
prevention.
   F.   Grain elevators or warehouses.
   G.   Light manufacturing within fully enclosed buildings:
      1.   If not detrimental to health or to neighboring property.
      2.   If not hazardous to life or property.
      3.   In any application for a rezoning of any property to B3 district-
business, if in the same application for such rezoning, a request is made for
authority to carry on light manufacturing hereunder, then, at the same hearing,
under such application, the zoning board may consider such request for such
light manufacturing and make recommendation to the county board, without the
necessity of a further hearing on the matter.
   H.   Meat processing, including smoking, but not including slaughtering of
animals.
   I.   Open air lots for the parking and display for sale or rental of motor
vehicles in self-propelling and self-operative condition and for parking or
display for sale of trailer coaches.
   J.   Processing of poultry not produced on the premises. However, in any
application for a rezoning of any property to B3 district- business, if in the
same application for rezoning, a request is made for authority to process
poultry hereunder, then, at the same hearing, under such application the zoning
board of appeals may consider such request for such poultry processing and make
recommendation to the county board without the necessity of further hearing in
the matter.
   K.   Retail sheet metal shops.
   L.   Railroad freight stations, service tracks, truck terminals and other
receiving, storage and distribution facilities commonly required by light
industry.
   M.   Stock shipping yards.
   N.   Yards and buildings for the storage of coal, wood, lumber and building
materials, poultry and livestock feed and supplies, farm implements and
equipment, including commercial elevators and warehouses.
   O.   Yards and buildings for the storage of equipment and materials if not
hazardous to life and neighboring property.
   P.   Adult-use cannabis dispensers. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224,
4-13-2021)
25-10-4-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The following uses are prohibited in the B3 business district:
   A.   Any establishment serving beer or alcoholic liquor or selling them at
retail.
   B.   Manufacture or storage of ammunition, dynamite, nitroglycerin or other
high explosives in such manner or quantity as to be hazardous to persons and
property beyond the premises.
   C.   Auto wrecking yards as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter.
   D.   Dance halls and rollerskating rinks.
   E.   Trailer coaches or mobile homes as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 78-79, §§ 14-16, 6-13-1978; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-
1982; Ord. 08-07, 1-8-2008; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014)
25-10-5: B4 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-5-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B4 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and R4 (except subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter), and F and B1 districts.
   B.   Taverns, bars, nightclubs, restaurants, motels and bowling alleys,
serving beer or alcoholic liquors or any establishments serving or selling beer
or alcoholic liquors at retail to the general public. These uses shall not
include an "adult business" as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter.
25-10-5-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the B4 district, subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   "Adults only nightclub", as defined herein. Except as otherwise
specifically provided, this is the only district in which this special use is
permitted. Adults only nightclubs which were legally established and operated
continuously prior to the effective date hereof shall be permitted as
nonconforming uses in accordance with article VI of this chapter, as amended.
   B.   Adult-use cannabis dispensers. (Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-10-5-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
Uses prohibited in B1 district are prohibited in B4 district. (Ord. 97-46, 2-
11-1997)
25-10-6: B5 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-6-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B5 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and R4 (except subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter), and F, B1, B2, and B3 districts.
   B.   Trailer parks as defined in section
25-3-1 of this chapter.
   C.   All trailer parks shall conform to the standards and regulations of the
Kane County trailer coach and mobile home park ordinance.
25-10-6-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be considered in the manner prescribed, as outlined in section
25-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, 4-9-1968)
25-10-7: B6 DISTRICT - BUSINESS:
25-10-7-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the B6 district, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   The uses as permitted in the R1, R2, R3, and R4 (except subsections
25-9-5-1A and J of this chapter), and F, B1, B2, and B3 districts.
   B.   Trailer parks accommodating only independent trailer coaches as defined
in the Kane County trailer coach and mobile home ordinance.
   C.   All trailer parks shall conform to the standards and regulations of the
Kane County trailer coach and mobile home ordinance.
25-10-7-2: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses may be considered in the manner prescribed, as outlined in section
25-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 68-25, 4-9-1968)
ARTICLE XI. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
25-11-1: LI District - Light Industry
25-11-1-1: Permitted Uses
25-11-1-2: Special Uses
25-11-1-3: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-11-1-4: Special Restrictions
25-11-1-5: Performance Standards
25-11-2: I District - Industry
25-11-2-1: Permitted Uses
25-11-2-2: Special Uses
25-11-1: LI DISTRICT - LIGHT INDUSTRY:
The light industry district is intended to provide an environment suitable for
industrial activities that do not create appreciable nuisances or hazards, or
that require a pleasant, hazard and nuisance free environment. Any use
established in a light industry district hereafter shall be operated in such a
manner as to comply with the applicable performance standards as hereinafter
set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter,
odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, glare and heat, or radiation
hazards; and no use already established on the effective date hereof shall be
so altered or modified as to conflict with such applicable performance
standards. Upon request of the zoning enforcing officer, certification from an
approved testing laboratory indicating compliance with the applicable
performance standards shall accompany application for a building permit, or a
change of use.
25-11-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
Only manufacturing, assembling, processing, storage in connection with such
uses and related utility services and research and development shall be
permitted in the LI district, and such uses shall show compliance with the
applicable performance standards and other applicable federal, state and county
codes, ordinances and regulations.
25-11-1-2: SPECIAL USES:
Because permitted uses in the LI district are determined by compliance with
applicable performance standards, there shall be no special uses except for as
follows:
   A.   Adult-use cannabis craft growers, cultivation centers, infusers, and
processors.
   B.   Adult-use cannabis transporters, if in combination with a craft grower,
cultivation center, infuser and/or processor. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord.
21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-11-1-3: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
In the LI district, residences and apartments are prohibited, except those
required for watchmen or attendants whose continual presence on the premises is
necessary. In this connection, trailers or mobile homes shall not be permitted.
25-11-1-4: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Setbacks: Along the outer perimeter of an LI district adjacent to an
estate, residential, or farming district, no building, structure or land within
one hundred feet (100') shall be used in connection with the operation of any
establishment including parking except that railroad sidings may extend over
this area. No parking shall be permitted in the perimeter setback areas. These
perimeter and setback areas shall be landscaped. Side and rear yards shall be
no less than twenty five feet (25'). The outer perimeter, adjacent to all other
districts shall have a fifty foot (50') minimum clear zone, including side
yards within the LI district, except as provided in subsection 25-7-5-1D of
this chapter. There shall also be a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from
all internal streets within the LI district.
   B.   Building Height: A maximum height of two (2) stories or forty feet
(40') above the average surrounding ground level shall be allowed for all
principal and accessory buildings. This maximum height may be exceeded, but for
each additional story or part thereof the maximum lot coverage shall be
decreased by five percent (5%). Towers, stacks, chimneys and flagstaffs shall
be permitted to rise twenty five feet (25') above the structure of which they
are an integral part.
   C.   Screening: All activities and operations shall be within completely
enclosed buildings, or may be out of doors if completely screened by an eight
foot (8') high solid wall, solid fence, or a landscape planting at least ten
feet (10') in width.
   D.   Off Street Loading: Truck loading and unloading facilities shall be
provided in sufficient quantity and be so located that all vehicles
transporting materials to and from buildings shall be entirely within the
property lines during loading and unloading operations.
25-11-1-5: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Noise: Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of sound level meter and shall include continuous noise and those
noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter
with a variation of not more than plus or minus two (±2) decibels. Noise
incapable of being so measured shall be measured with the impact noise meter
manufactured by the general radio company, or its equivalent, and shall comply
with the applicable performance standards for noise.
At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound
pressure level of any individual operation or plant (other than background
noises produced by sources not under control of this ordinance, such as
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the
decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in the following table:
MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL
(Decibels)
Octave Band           Along Residential, Estate Or Along Business And Industry
(Frequency Cycles Per Farming District Boundaries  District Boundaries
Second)
Octave Band           Along Residential, Estate Or Along Business And Industry
(Frequency Cycles Per Farming District Boundaries  District Boundaries
Second)
    0 to 75       72                           79
    75 to 150     67                           74
    150 to 300    59                           66
    300 to 600    52                           59
    600 to 1,200  46                           53
    1,200 to 2,40040                           47
    2,400 to 4,80034                           41
    Above 4,800   32                           39
 
   B.   Vibration: No industrial operation or activity (except those not under
the direct control of the manufacturer) shall cause at any time ground
transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration shall
be measured at any point along a residential district boundary with a three (3)
component measuring instrument approved by the county zoning enforcing officer
and shall be expressed as displacement in inches.
 
Frequency, Cycles Per Second Maximum Permitted Displacement Along Estate,
                             Residential Or Farming District Boundaries
    0 to 10              .0006
    10 to 20             .0004
    20 and over          .0001
 
   C.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke or particulate
matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare shall henceforth be unlawful.
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart published
by the U.S. bureau of mines shall be employed. The emission of smoke or
particulate matter of density greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart, or in
quantity of more than eight (8) smoke units per hour per stack, is prohibited
at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
During one 1-hour period in each twenty four (24) hour day, and only during
that length of time, each stack may exceed these limits when blowing soot or
cleaning fires. Smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 density or greater shall then be
permitted for not more than three (3) minutes per period.
Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by wind from such various sources
as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like within lot boundaries, shall be
kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or other
acceptable means.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre of
lot area during any one hour.
   D.   Toxic Or Noxious Matter: No use for any period of time shall discharge
across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter
in such concentration as to be a nuisance or detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
   E.   Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such concentrations as to be
readily detectable at any point along the boundaries of the property or in such
concentrations as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond such boundaries is
prohibited.
   F.   Fire:
      1.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
      2.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free to active burning to intense burning is permitted
provided the following conditions are met:
         a.   Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls and handled in accordance with the standards and
regulations of the county of Kane and the National Fire Protection Association.
         b.   All such buildings shall be set back at least forty feet (40')
from all lot lines, or in lieu thereof shall be protected throughout by an
automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards
and regulations of the county of Kane and the National Fire Protection
Association.
      3.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or
materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors under ordinary weather
temperatures, shall be permitted in accordance with the following limitations,
exclusive of storage in underground tanks and exclusive of storage of finished
products in original sealed containers:
         a.   Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
manufactured within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls and handled in accordance with the standards and
regulations of the county of Kane and the National Fire Protection Association.
         b.   All such buildings shall be set back at least forty feet (40')
from all lot lines or in lieu thereof shall be protected throughout by an
automatic fire extinguishing system installed in accordance with the standards
and regulations of the county of Kane and the National Fire Protection
Association.
         c.   The storage of flammable liquids in excess of the following
quantities shall not be permitted:
 
Closed Cup Flashpoint                    Quantity (Gallons)
Less than 24°F                          1,000
24°F to less than 105°F                10,000
105°F to less than 187°F               50,000
Total of all flammable liquids permitted 50,000
 
      4.   Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or
products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in an LI district.
   G.   Glare-Heat-Flash: Any operation producing intense glare, heat or flash
shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such manner as not
to create a nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
   H.   Radiation:
      1.   Airborne radioactive materials shall not exceed at any point on or
beyond the lot line the lowest concentration permitted for the general
population by applicable federal and state laws and regulations in effect.
      2.   No activity involving radiation hazards shall be permitted which
cause to any individual who may be continuously at any point on or beyond the
lot line, radiation in excess of the smallest amount permitted in the
applicable federal and state laws and regulations. (Ord. 78-79, § 17, 6-13-
1978; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014)
25-11-2: I DISTRICT - INDUSTRY:
25-11-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the I district any use is permitted except the following:
   A.   Residences and apartments, except those required for watchmen or
attendants whose continual presence on the premises is necessary. In this
connection, trailers or mobile homes shall not be permitted.
   B.   Taverns, roadhouses, refreshment stands, restaurants and other retail
establishments selling or serving, or both selling and serving, alcoholic
liquors or beer at retail.
   C.   Dance halls and rollerskating rinks.
   D.   Garbage disposal.
   E.   Mining of topsoil, earth, clay, gravel, peat, sand and stone, unless
approved as provided in subsection
25-8-1-2P of this chapter.
   F.   Storing or disposal of junk, motor vehicles not in a self- propelling,
self-operative condition, or motor vehicle parts, outside of any fully enclosed
building, except that such use may be permitted within an area that is
completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least
eight feet (8') in height. Said vehicles or parts thereof, or junk, shall not
be stored to a height greater than that of the enclosing wall or fence. Setback
requirements for such walls or fences shall be in accordance with section
25-7-5-3 of this chapter. Such use shall require the approval of the county
board as a special use after a duly advertised public hearing before the zoning
board.
   G.   Wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles, unless conducted in
accordance with subsection F of this section.
   H.   Any manufactory, industry, process or use that is detrimental to
health, or to neighboring property, by reason of the emission of odor, dust,
gas, smoke, noise, vibration or glare, or which is hazardous to life or
property.
   I.   Tourist courts, motels or trailer parks.
   J.   Racetracks.
   K.   Advertising signs, billboards, and business signs exceeding the limits
set in subsections
25-10-2-1B and
25-10-2-2F of this chapter.
   L.   Asphalt plants.
   M.   Adult-use cannabis business establishments. (Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019;
Ord. 21-224, 4-13-2021)
25-11-2-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following special uses may be allowed in the I district subject to the
provisions of section
25-4-8 of this chapter:
   A.   Adult-use cannabis craft growers, cultivation centers, infusers, and
processors.
   B.   Adult-use cannabis transporters, if in combination with a craft grower,
cultivation center, infuser and/or processor. (Ord. 88-62, 5-10-1988; Ord. 02-
168, 6-11-2002; Ord. 14-200, 7-8-2014; Ord. 19-421, 12-10-2019; Ord. 21-224, 4-
13-2021)
ARTICLE XII. PLANNED UNIT DISTRICT
SECTION:
25-12-1: PUD District - Planned Unit Development
25-12-1-1: Application Of Regulations
25-12-1-2: Procedure For Approval
25-12-1-3: Conditions Of Approval
25-12-1-4: Uses Expressly Prohibited
25-12-1: PUD DISTRICT - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The planned unit development (PUD) provision is designed to permit and
encourage attractive site development made possible by good site planning in
accordance with an overall design. The intent is to allow the designer freedom
to arrange land use and physical features into an internally harmonious design
compatible with the surrounding area.
The planned unit development approach upholds overall standards of development
intensity and at the same time permits variable design and intensity within the
site.
25-12-1-1: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The regular provisions of this ordinance shall govern with respect to planned
unit development except as expressly indicated from time to time in this
section.
The PUD district may be used for a planned unit development wherein individual
uses and structures may be exempted wholly or in part from the specific
district classifications, building locations, height, bulk, setback, lot area,
lot width, and open space requirements of this ordinance provided the proposal:
   A.   Meets the procedural specifications and satisfies the criteria for
approval set forth in chapter 19, article IV of this code.
   B.   Meets the conditions of approval in subsection
25-12-1-3 of this chapter; and
   C.   Promotes the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare
and conserves the values of property.
25-12-1-2: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
Application for approval of a planned unit development shall be presented to
the development committee of the county board of Kane County in accordance with
the procedural requirements set forth in the Kane County subdivision
regulations.
Following action by the development committee, and the Kane County regional
planning commission, application shall be made to the Kane County zoning board
of appeals for rezoning to PUD district for the area included within said plan.
25-12-1-3: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
Approval of a planned unit development plan shall be made only on the condition
that the entire site be under the legal control of the applicant who shall be
the owner of record.
The approved planned unit development plan shall be part of the ordinance
granting PUD classification to the site and shall serve as the land use
regulation within the development.
Upon the passage of said ordinance granting PUD classification, final platting,
subdividing or further rezoning shall not be necessary within the planned unit
to complete the development of the unit in accordance with the approved planned
unit plan.
Prior to any conveyance of any part of the planned unit less than the whole,
the owner shall subdivide the area in compliance with the provisions of the
Illinois plat act, chapter 109 and shall further comply with the provisions of
the subdivision regulations of Kane County.
In the event that any conveyance or transfer is made by whatever nature or
manner which involves less than the entire planned unit in violation of the
provisions herein contained, no further building permits shall be issued and
all use and occupancy permits issued during the period the property was
classified, PUD district shall terminate until such time as the violation shall
be corrected.
25-12-1-4: USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED:
The following uses are prohibited in the PUD planned unit development district,
unless specifically approved in the ordinance granting the PUD zoning:
   A.   "Agriculture", as defined herein. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-240,
9-9-1997; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
ARTICLE XIII. AIRPORT DISTRICTS
SECTION:
25-13-1: A-1 Airport District - Restricted Landing Field
25-13-1-1: Permitted Uses
25-13-1-2: Special Uses
25-13-1-3: Uses Specifically Prohibited
25-13-2: A-2 Airport District - Public Use Airport
25-13-2-1: Permitted Uses
25-13-2-2: Special Uses
25-13-1: A-1 AIRPORT DISTRICT - RESTRICTED LANDING FIELD:
25-13-1-1: PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Only restricted landing fields, as defined herein, basing ten (10)
airplanes, or less, shall be permitted in the A-1 District subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   Such field shall be located and be of such area, runway length, and
design as prescribed by the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics and the provisions of section
25-5-13 of this chapter.
      2.   No airplanes exceeding twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight shall be based, operated or landed on or take off from a
restricted landing field.
   B.   Single-family residences as permitted in the E3, R1 and PUD Districts.
   C.   Glider runways.
   D.   Private balloon ports licensed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Division of Aeronautics.
   E.   "Agriculture" as defined herein (see article III of this chapter),
except that neither animals nor poultry may be housed, stabled, kenneled or
yarded closer than one hundred feet (100') from any residence other than that
of the owner or user of property.
25-13-1-2: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Restricted landing fields, as defined herein, basing a number of
airplanes greater than that permitted by section
25-13-1-1 of this section
25-13-1, to a maximum of forty five (45) based airplanes unless otherwise
specified in the ordinance granting a special use under this section, provided:
      1.   Such field shall be located and be of such area, runway length and
design as prescribed by the Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics, and the provisions of section
25-5-13 of this chapter; and
      2.   No aircraft exceeding twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight shall be based, operated or landed on or take off from a
restricted landing field.
   B.   Fuel storage and sales facilities to be used in connection with the
restricted landing fields. Use of such facilities shall be limited to "based
aircraft" as defined herein and other aircraft in cases of emergency.
   C.   Heliports, as defined herein, subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Shall be located and be of such landing area and design as
prescribed by the applicable rules and regulations of the Illinois Department
of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics and the provisions of section
25-5-13 of this chapter; and
      2.   Shall base no more than one helicopter unless otherwise specified in
the ordinance granting the special use.
   D.   Commercial balloon ports licensed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, Division of Aeronautics.
   E.   Solar utility, as defined herein.
25-13-1-3: USES SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITED:
   A.   Itinerant student instruction.
   B.   Airshows or exhibitions.
   C.   Use of based aircraft to carry cargo or passengers for hire.
   D.   Rental of aircraft. (Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-1980; Ord. 82-66, 5-11-1982;
Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 18-460, 12-11-2018, eff. retroactive to 11-13-2018)
25-13-2: A-2 AIRPORT DISTRICT - PUBLIC USE AIRPORT:
25-13-2-1: PERMITTED USES:
In the A-2 District, the following uses are permitted:
   A.   Public use airports provided:
      1.   Such airport shall comply with the provisions of section
25-5-13 of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the Illinois
Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics; and
      2.   Shall be controlled, operated and maintained by a local public
entity or airport authority, authorized by the State of Illinois to operate and
maintain an airport.
   B.   Fuel storage and sales facilities to be used in connection with any
other permitted use in this district.
25-13-2-2: SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Solar utility, as defined herein. (Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-1980; Ord. 18-
460, 12-11-2018, eff. retroactive to 11-13-2018)
ARTICLE XIV. OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
25-14-1: Purpose
25-14-1-1: General Requirements
25-14-1-2: Parking Setback And Landscaping Requirements
25-14-1-3: Septic System Separation Distance
25-14-1-4: Stormwater Detention
25-14-1-5: Soil Erosion And Sediment Control
25-14-1-6: Lighting
25-14-1-7: Specific Requirements
25-14-1: PURPOSE:
Motor vehicle parking space shall be provided off the street or highway right
of way for each housekeeping unit in residential uses hereafter established,
and, in case of other uses hereafter established or expanded for employees, for
patrons or customers not served in their motor vehicles, and for customers
served in their motor vehicles, in such proportion as to assure free and
uninterrupted movement of traffic on the public streets or highways.
25-14-1-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location: All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established after the effective date of this ordinance shall be
located on the same zoning lot within one hundred feet (100') of the building
or use served, except that parking spaces to serve business or industrial
buildings or uses may be located within five hundred feet (500') of such use if
said spaces are located in a business or industrial district.
Buildings or uses existing on the effective date of this ordinance which are
subsequently altered or enlarged so as to require the provision of parking
spaces under this ordinance, may be served by parking facilities located on
land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served is located,
provided such facilities are within five hundred feet (500') walking distance
of a main entrance to the use served. Owners of property, nonconforming as to
parking, who elect to provide parking and become conforming may locate such
parking on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use is
located, as allowed in this section.
   B.   Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, such facilities shall be in the same
possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory. Such possession may be either by deed or long
term lease, the term of such lease to be determined by the board of appeals;
and such deed or lease shall be filed with the enforcing officer. The deed or
lease shall require such owner or his or her heirs and assigns to maintain the
required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served or of
the deed or lease, whichever shall terminate sooner.
   C.   Size: Except for parallel parking spaces, each required off street
parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least eighteen
feet (18') in length, exclusive of access or drives or aisles, ramps, columns,
or office or work areas. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of at least
seven feet and one-half inch (7'1/2"). For parallel parking, the length of the
parking space shall be increased to twenty two feet (22'). Required handicapped
spaces shall be at least sixteen feet (16') in width in accordance with the
Illinois accessibility code standards.
   D.   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway at least twenty four feet (24') wide for ninety degree
(90°) parking. Angular and parallel parking designs may allow a narrower aisle
width in accordance with nationally recognized design standards. All off street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement. In any event, all driveways shall conform to all applicable driveway
specifications adopted by Kane County.
   E.   Collective Provision: Off street parking facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements governing location of accessory
parking spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no
parking space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than
one use, unless otherwise authorized by the board of appeals.
   F.   Computation: When determination of the number of off street parking
spaces required by this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, while a fraction
of one-half (1/2) or more, shall be counted as one parking space. Parking
spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of
employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
   G.   Utilization: Required accessory off street parking facilities provided
for uses listed in section 25-14-1-7 of this chapter shall be determined for
parking of passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants, or employees of such
uses.
25-14-1-2: PARKING SETBACK AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, "landscaping" shall be
defined as living plant material, preferably indigenous to this area, or
nonliving durable materials such as earth berms, fences, timbers, or rocks,
purposely installed or preserved for functional or aesthetic reasons.
   B.   Parking Within Buildings And Structures: Enclosed buildings, carports,
or other structures containing off street parking shall comply with the front,
rear and side yard setback requirements for such structures as contained in
this chapter.
   C.   Yards And Screening Adjoining Streets: With the exception of single-
family and two-family dwellings, off street parking spaces and access drives
shall not be located within a twenty foot (20') required yard adjoining a
public road right of way, except that an access drive generally perpendicular
to such right of way may traverse such yard. Screening shall be provided within
such yard, by means of landscaping and/or earth berms, so as to screen a
minimum of fifty percent (50%), measured horizontally, of the parking lot
adjoining said yard, as viewed from the public street. Except, within one
hundred feet (100') of the centerline of any intersecting road, street or
railroad at grade, no screening may be over three feet (3') in height so as not
to interfere with the site distance at the intersection.
   D.   Parking Adjacent To Residential Districts: Open off street parking
spaces and access drives adjoining a lot zoned for a residential use shall be
separated from such lot by a yard not less than five feet (5') in depth.
Screening consisting of earth berms, landscaping, and/or fencing shall be
provided and maintained so as to protect the privacy of adjoining residential
lots. Such screening shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in height above the
adjacent parking lot pavement grade.
   E.   General Landscaping Requirement: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of a
lot containing off street parking facilities shall be landscaped. Required
yards for parking facilities adjoining a residential lot shall not be counted
as landscaped area for purposes of calculating this requirement.
   F.   Tree Planting Required: A minimum of two (2) native trees shall be
planted or preserved for each ten (10) parking spaces in an open off street
parking facility. Such trees shall be located at the perimeter of the paved
area, or in landscape islands within the perimeter.
   G.   Landscape Maintenance: All landscaping required herein shall be
properly watered, trimmed, and otherwise maintained in good health. Any dead,
unhealthy or missing plants shall be replaced within six (6) months of
notification by the county development department. Such maintenance and
replacement shall be provided in perpetuity for all parking areas permitted
under this chapter.
   H.   Landscape Design: All landscape areas adjacent to parking lots and
within parking lot islands shall be protected from vehicles by anchored
concrete bumpers, concrete curbing, or similar barriers.
25-14-1-3: SEPTIC SYSTEM SEPARATION DISTANCE:
Refer to the Kane County septic ordinance regarding the construction and
installation of a parking lot in relationship to its location to the septic
system.
25-14-1-4: STORMWATER DETENTION:
When off street parking facilities are used for stormwater detention, the
provisions of
chapter 9, article IV of this code, including the technical standards
associated therewith shall be adhered to.
25-14-1-5: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
All off street parking facilities shall be constructed with adequate soil
erosion and sediment control measures. The provisions that shall be followed
are contained in
chapter 9, article II of this code, including the technical standards
associated therewith.
25-14-1-6: LIGHTING:
Lighting installed for the purpose of illuminating off street parking
facilities shall be designed so that it does not produce direct illumination,
cause glare or excessive light onto surrounding public and private property.
The applicant shall prepare a plan for submittal to the county for review
showing locations of lighting standards, height of poles, type of fixtures,
type of lamps and wattage and photometric maps and computations. Spillover
lighting onto adjacent property shall not exceed 0.5 lumens per square foot.
25-14-1-7: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
Parking requirements shall be in conformity with the following schedule:
Use Number Of Parking Spaces
Use                                      Number Of Parking Spaces
                                         Spaces shall be provided in adequate
Airports, railroad passenger stations,   number as determined by the zoning
bus depots or passenger terminal         enforcing officer, to serve persons
facilities (special use)                 employed or residing on the premises
                                         as well as the visiting public
                                         1 space for each 4 seats
                                          
Auditoriums including places of assembly Provide space for buses used in
for churches, Sunday schools, high       connection with activities of the
schools, colleges or universities        institution. Loading and unloading of
                                         passengers shall take place upon the
                                         premises
Automobile service stations, automobile   
laundries:
 Automobile laundries                   20 spaces for each wash rack, plus 1
                                         additional space for each 4 employees
 Service stations                       1 space for each employee, plus 10
                                         spaces for each service stall
Banks, business and professional          
offices:
 Banks:                                 1 space for each 300 square feet of
                                         floor area
                                         3 parking spaces per teller window,
 Drive-in banks                         plus a minimum of 4 waiting spaces for
                                         each teller window
 Business and professional offices      1 space for each 400 square feet of
                                         floor area
                                         Spaces equal in number to the spaces
Bed and breakfast establishment          required for a single-family dwelling,
                                         plus 1 additional space for each
                                         guestroom
                                         3 spaces for each alley, plus
Bowling alleys                           additional space as may be required
                                         for affiliated use as restaurants and
                                         the like
Clubs and lodges:                         
                                         1 space for each lodging room, plus
 With sleeping facilities               spaces equal in number to 50 percent
                                         of the capacity in persons
 Without sleeping facilities            Parking spaces equal in number to 50
                                         percent of the capacity in persons
                                         1 space for each employee, plus 1
Colleges, universities and business,     space for each 3 students, based on
professional and trade schools           the maximum number of students
                                         attending classes on the premises at
                                         any 1 time during any 24 hour period
Convention halls, dance halls, skating   Spaces equal in number to 50 percent
rinks, assembly halls and exhibition     of the capacity in persons
halls
Dwellings:                                
 One-family dwellings                   2 spaces for each unit
 Two-family dwellings                   2 spaces for each unit
 Multiple-dwellings and apartments      2 spaces for each unit
Establishments handling the sale and     1 space for each 100 square feet of
consumption on the premises of alcoholic floor area
beverages, food or refreshments
Fraternities (sororities and             1 space for each 5 active members,
dormitories)                             plus 1 space for the manager
Furniture and appliance stores, motor
vehicle sales, wholesale stores,
household equipment or furniture repair  1 space for each 600 square feet of
shops, or machinery sales (individual    floor area
stores or groups of stores in 1
building)
Health centers, government operated      3 spaces to be provided for each staff
                                         and visiting doctor
                                         1 space for each 2 plus 1 space for
Hospitals                                each 2 employees, other than doctors,
                                         plus 1 space for each doctor on the
                                         staff
Hotels and motels                        1 space for each dwelling unit and 1
                                         space for each lodging room
Libraries and museums                    1 space for each 1,000 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
Lodging houses                           1 space for each lodging room plus 1
                                         space for the owner or manager
Manufacturing and industrial use;        1 space for each 2 employees, as
research and testing laboratories;       related to the working period when the
laundry and dry cleaning plants;         maximum number of employees are
printing, binding, publishing and        employed on the premises plus 1 space
issuing of newspapers, periodicals,      for each vehicle used in the conduct
books and other reading matter;          of the enterprise. The requirement may
telephone exchanges; warehouse and       be reduced to 1 space for each 2
storage buildings; engraving shops;      employees if a company participates in
assembly of materials and products; and  a ride sharing/car pooling program
other similar uses
                                         3 spaces for each examining or
Medical or dental clinics                treatment room, plus 1 space for each
                                         doctor and employee
                                         When 2 or more uses are located on the
                                         same zoning lot or within the same
                                         building, spaces equal in number to
                                         the sum of the separate requirements
Mixed uses                               for each such use shall be provided.
                                         No parking space or portion thereof
                                         shall serve as a required space for
                                         more than 1 use unless otherwise
                                         authorized by the zoning board of
                                         appeals
                                         6 spaces for each room used as a
Mortuaries or funeral parlors            chapel or parlor, plus 1 space for
                                         each funeral vehicle, plus 1 space for
                                         each employee
                                         1 space for each 4 beds plus 1 space
Nursing homes, rest homes, sanatoriums   for each 2 employees, other than
                                         doctors, plus 1 space for each doctor
                                         on the staff
Public administration buildings          1 space for each 500 square feet of
                                         floor area
                                         1 space for each 3 employees, plus
Public utility, public service uses      spaces adequate in number, as
                                         determined by the zoning enforcing
                                         officer, to serve the visiting public
                                         1 space for each 2 employees, plus
Recreation buildings, community centers  spaces adequate in number, as
                                         determined by the zoning enforcing
                                         officer, to serve the visiting public
Retail stores and service shops          1 space for each 300 square feet in
(individual or in groups) under 1 roof   floor area
Schools, elementary, junior high, public 1 space for each employee, plus spaces
or private, high schools                 adequate in number as determined by
                                         the zoning enforcing officer
Stadia, sports arenas, auditoriums and   Spaces equal in number to 50 percent
gymnasiums (other than incidental to a   of the capacity in persons using same
school)
Theaters:                                 
 Indoor                                 1 space for each 3 seats
                                         1 waiting space outside the theater
 Outdoor                                enclosure and off the street or
                                         highway for each 3 spaces within the
                                         enclosure
 
(Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-1980; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord.
98-45, 4-14-1998; Ord. 08-07, 1-8-2008)
ARTICLE XV. RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MINING OF TOPSOIL, EARTH,
CLAY, GRAVEL, PEAT, SAND AND STONE
SECTION:
25-15-1: Purpose
25-15-1-1: Mining Operation License Required
25-15-1-2: Application For License
25-15-1-3: Term Of License; Renewal
25-15-1-4: Mining Operation Requirements
25-15-1-5: Setback Requirements
25-15-1-6: Bond
25-15-1-7: Exceptions
25-15-1-8: Revocation Of License
25-15-1-9: Penalty
25-15-1: PURPOSE:
It is declared to be the policy of the county to provide for the reclamation of
lands disturbed by mining in order to encourage productive use thereof,
including, but not limited to, the planting of forests; the seeding of grasses
and legumes for grazing purposes; the planting of crops for harvest; the
enhancement of wildlife and aquatic resources; the establishment of
recreational, home and industrial sites; and for the conservation, development,
management and appropriate use of all the natural resources of such areas for
compatible multiple purposes; to aid in maintaining or improving the tax base;
and protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the people, as well as
the natural beauty and aesthetic values, in the affected areas of the county.
25-15-1-1: MINING OPERATION LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter engage in the mining of
topsoil, earth, clay, gravel, sand, stone or other minerals on any land within
the county of Kane, located outside the boundaries of any city, village or
incorporated town without first obtaining from the county a mining operations
license in such form and in such manner as shall hereinafter be provided.
   B.   No mining operations license shall be issued or be renewed, pursuant to
this ordinance unless the mining proposed to be conducted is a permitted use of
the applicable land under the provisions of the county zoning ordinance, as
amended.
25-15-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to commence the mining and
processing of topsoil, earth, clay, gravel, sand, stone or other minerals shall
make written application for such license to the zoning enforcing officer of
the county. Application for such license shall be made upon a form furnished by
the zoning enforcing officer, which form shall contain a description of the
tract, or tracts, of land and the number of acres thereof to be mined by the
applicant and which description shall include the section, town, range and
county in which the land is located and shall otherwise describe the land and
that portion thereof to be mined with sufficient certainty so that it may be
located and distinguished from other lands, and a statement that the applicant
has the right and power by legal estate owned to mine and reclaim that land so
described. Such application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   A bond meeting the requirements hereinafter set forth in this
ordinance.
      2.   A detailed map of the land drawn at a scale of one inch equals one
hundred feet (1":100') showing at least the following specifics:
         a.   Existing topographical features at two foot (2') contour
intervals, up to and including seven percent (7%) grade. Greater than seven
percent (7%) grade would require five foot (5') contours.
         b.   Location of watercourses and drainage systems.
         c.   Outline of area to be excavated.
         d.   The proposed location of sorting, grading, crushing, recycling
and similar equipment necessary to the operation and initial distribution of
the excavated products.
         e.   The proposed location of any buildings, scale house, equipment
storage areas, and equipment repair sheds or areas.
         f.   The proposed location, in detail, of all stockpiles such as, but
not limited to, overburden, topsoil and mined, processed and recycled material.
      3.   A detailed reclamation and landscape plan and map drawn at a scale
of one inch equals one hundred feet (1":100') designating which parts of the
land shall be reclaimed for forest, pasture, crop, horticultural, home site,
recreational, industrial or other uses including food, shelter and ground cover
for wildlife, and shall show the same by appropriate designation on the
reclamation and landscape plan. The reclamation and landscape plan and map
shall specify progress and completion dates of the reclamation and landscape
plan; provided, however, the reclamation is to be completed prior to the
expiration of three (3) years after the termination of the mining operation on
the land. In the event the operator and the county shall mutually determine
that characteristics of the area concerned have been found to be present during
the conduct of mining, changes may be made in the original reclamation and
landscape plan by mutual consent of the operator and the development committee
of the county board, which change shall preserve, as substantially as possible,
the original reclamation and landscape plan, and shall also provide for the
previously unknown variables. Contours shall conform to requirements of
development proposed, but not less than required for existing original
topography.
      4.   A written statement containing an explanation of the character of
the site to be mined and of the character of the surrounding territory, an
explanation of the reclamation plan and an explanation of the schedule of
development.
      5.   In satisfaction of the requirements of subsections A2, A3 and A4 of
this section, applicant shall be permitted to submit the forms, including the
reclamation plan and reclamation map, delivered by him to the proper department
of the state, in his application for a permit under an act of the general
assembly entitled: "the surface-mined land conservation and reclamation act".
25-15-1-3: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL:
   A.   Each license issued hereunder shall be effective for a period of five
(5) years from and after the date of the issuance thereof, provided the
requirements of operation and reclamation, as are set forth under the operators
permit and application, shall be met. An examination of the premises shall be
made by the zoning enforcement officer of the county at intervals of not more
than each six (6) months during the term of operation.
   B.   Each license shall be renewable for successive five (5) year terms upon
written application therefor to the zoning enforcing officer, accompanied by a
bond, meeting the requirements hereinafter set forth in this ordinance and a
sworn statement detailing compliance with the progress requirements for the
completion of the approved reclamation and landscape plan and a satisfactory
inspection record over the previous five (5) year period.
25-15-1-4: MINING OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each person, firm or corporation to whom a mining operation license is
issued may engage in mining upon the lands described in the license, subject to
the following regulations:
      1.   The mining operations shall be conducted in compliance with the laws
of the state and federal government, especially as related to safety standards,
and ordinances and resolutions of the county of Kane, as amended from time to
time, and in compliance with and furtherance of the approved reclamation plan
for the affected land.
      2.   Clearing of the mining site shall include the moving of existing
trees and shrubs to such locations as will provide screening as hereinafter
provided whenever possible or as will conform to the plan for ultimate use of
the property as shown on the reclamation plan to be submitted.
      3.   Maximum depth of excavation shall not be below existing groundwater,
except in such cases where the reclamation plan indicates that a lake or lakes
will be part of the final use of the land or where such plan indicates that
adequate fill from overburden is to be used to refill such excavation for
conformance to the approved reclamation plan.
      4.   Adequate planting including native species and/or fencing shall be
provided along all public roads adjacent to the property involved, sufficient
to screen the operation from public view, as shown on approved reclamation and
landscape plan and as approved by the county board in granting a special use.
      5.   Not more than one entrance and one exit from a highway or road shall
be provided to the area of operation. Such entrance shall be subject to
approval by the department of highways having jurisdiction and shall,
preferably be located along a secondary road, and shall be located as to avoid
the routing of vehicles to and from the mining operation over streets that
primarily serve abutting residential development. If required, by the highway
department having jurisdiction, acceleration and deceleration strips shall be
provided on either side of such entrance and exit, of not less than one hundred
feet (100') in length each, and shall be paved of such material as shall be
required by the highway department having jurisdiction. Furthermore, a paved
road from the entrance and exit, a distance not less than three hundred feet
(300') from the right of way line into the area of operation shall be provided
in order to minimize the deposit of dirt and gravel from trucks onto the public
highway. Such pavement shall be in accordance with the specifications of the
county highway department. Entrances and exits shall be provided with the gates
to be securely locked during hours of inoperation.
      6.   Trucks used in hauling materials from the site of excavation shall
be loaded in such a manner as to prevent spillage onto the public highway.
Hours of arrival and departure of transport vehicles shall be from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. from April 1 until November 1. The
rest of the year the arrival and departure of transport vehicles shall be
restricted to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Hours may be
extended during a public emergency during which sand, gravel or limestone is
needed and upon the order of the county sheriff, the county engineer, or the
director of the county development department. The county board member
representing the district in which the mining operation is located shall be
notified as soon as permission is granted for extended hours of operation.
      7.   Overburden shall not be removed in excess of the area to be mined
within one year. Development toward final plan shall be carried on as
excavation progresses. Where ground cover or other planting is indicated on
approved plan, such planting shall be made in areas where excavation is
completed and land is not being used for material storage before further
overburden is removed and in order to ensure development as operations proceed.
      8.   Mining operations, not including maintenance of equipment used in
the mining operation shall be conducted only during the hours from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except during a public emergency during
which sand and gravel is needed and upon order of the county sheriff, the
county engineer or the director of the county development department. The
county board member representing the district in which the mining operation is
located shall be notified as soon as permission is granted for extended hours
of operation.
      9.   No extraction operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
permanently lower the water table of surrounding inhabited properties.
      10.   Where required by the county board in granting a special use for a
mining operation, to promote safety, a fence shall be erected which shall be of
a nature and character to protect the general public from danger.
      11.   Weeds and other unsightly or noxious vegetation shall be cut or
trimmed at least twice a year or as may be necessary to present a reasonably
neat appearance and to prevent seeding on adjoining property.
      12.   Existing trees and ground cover along public road frontage shall be
preserved, maintained, and supplemented for the depth of the required roadside
setback.
      13.   Upon the completion of operations, the land shall be left in a
condition so that sufficient drainage is provided in order to prevent water
pockets or undue erosion with all grading and drainage such that natural
stormwater leaves the entire property at the original, natural, drainage points
and that the area drainage to any one such point is not increased. In the event
the reclamation plan shall provide for the permanent establishment of a lake,
the grading and drainage may be altered, but not in such a manner as to cause
damage or inconvenience to surrounding or abutting properties.
      14.   Graded or backfilled areas or banks in the cases of excavations
made to water producing depth shall be covered with topsoil to a minimum depth
of six inches (6"). Such topsoil shall have a minimum of twenty five percent
(25%) organic material except that no greater depth of topsoil or percentage of
organic material shall be required than originally existing on property prior
to the commencement of operation.
      15.   Upon replacement of the topsoil, trees, shrubs, legumes, grasses or
ground cover, native species if possible shall be planted in accordance with
the approved landscape, soil erosion control and reclamation plan.
      16.   Whenever production on any property shall have been completed, all
buildings, plants, structures (except fences) and equipment shall be entirely
removed within six (6) months after such completion, unless same are to be used
in connection with the reclamation project proposed or relative to the removal
of stored materials. Any and all stockpiled materials shall be removed in not
more than two (2) years following cessation of production and the area occupied
by such stockpiled material, or materials, shall then be restored as provided
for in the reclamation plan.
      17.   Whenever production on any property involves blasting such
operation shall be in accordance with the Illinois department of mines and
minerals regulations. In addition, these operations shall have a seismograph
located on site available to calibrate ground disturbances in close proximity
to the mining.
      18.   Concrete and asphalt may be stockpiled on the mining site for
recycling purposes only. Recycling of these materials may only be conducted in
conjunction with a licensed mining operation and in accordance with Illinois
environmental protection agency applicable regulations. Concrete and asphalt to
be recycled and its byproducts (such as, but not limited to, reinforcing bar
and wire mesh), must be properly processed and disposed of at a minimum of one
time per year. All activity associated with concrete and asphalt recycling
shall not be conducted closer than two hundred feet (200') from the boundaries
of an adjoining property line. Maximum height of stockpiles shall not exceed
berms as approved on the reclamation map, and/or exceed the height of
excavation below grade.
All recycled materials shall be certified as to origin and potential for
groundwater or surface water contamination. A settling basin shall be provided
for all runoff generated from recycled materials and associated activities. A
minimum one hundred foot (100') separation from any surface waters shall be
provided from recycled materials and associated activities.
25-15-1-5: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in the applicable special use permit,
production, processing and excavation shall not be conducted closer than two
hundred feet (200') to the boundary of any zoning district where such
operations are not permitted, nor shall such production, process or excavation
be conducted closer than one hundred feet (100') from the boundaries of an
adjoining property line, nor shall such production, processing and excavation
be conducted closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to the right of way of
any existing or platted street, road or highway.
25-15-1-6: BOND:
The bond herein required to be filed with the zoning enforcing officer shall be
in such form as the county development committee of the county board shall
prescribe, payable to the county, and conditioned that the principal shall
faithfully perform and complete the reclamation plan approved as herein
provided, and such bond shall be signed by the license applicant as principal.
The penalty of such bond shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) plus such
additional amount as will equal two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each acre
or major portion thereof of land proposed by the principal to be thereafter
mined.
25-15-1-7: EXCEPTIONS:
Any mining operation legally commenced prior to the adoption of this section
shall be exempt from the requirements hereof, except that said operations shall
not be exempt from the requirements pertaining to mining operation license
requirements, the hours of operation, the operation of motor vehicles and
safety regulations.
25-15-1-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Upon failure by the holder of a mining operations license, issued pursuant to
the provisions of this section, to fully comply with the provisions hereof and
when same has been certified by the director of the county environmental
protection department to the county zoning board of appeals, the said board of
appeals shall give notice to said licensee, and the owner of the land (which
notice may be given by mail addressed to their last known address) setting
forth the provision of this section being violated by the licensee, and the
time and place of hearing to be held by said board of appeals to consider the
same; and upon such hearing being held, if said board of appeals shall find
that the provisions of this section have not been complied with by the licensee
the mining operations license may thereupon be suspended or terminated by said
board of appeals.
25-15-1-9: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or company who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of
the provisions of section 25-15-1-4 of this chapter and each subsection
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist
constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-1980; Ord. 90-176, 8-14-
1990; Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 94-79, 4-12-1994)
ARTICLE XVI. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
25-16-1: Plats And Dedications
25-16-2: Effective Date
25-16-3: Setback Resolution
25-16-4: Procedures For Implementation And Enforcement
25-16-5: Appendix A, Instructions
25-16-5-1: Instructions For Filing Request For Rezoning Or Special Use
25-16-5-2: Instructions For Making Application For A Variation
25-16-5-3: Instructions For Making Application For A Ministerial Variance From
The Kane County Zoning Ordinance
25-16-5-4: Procedures For Scheduling Of Zoning Petition Speakers And For Filing
Of Written Protest
25-16-1: PLATS AND DEDICATIONS:
All subdivisions of land shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
subdivision regulations of Kane County, Illinois, as adopted December 11, 1962,
and as amended from time to time. (Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-1980)
25-16-2: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval
as provided by law. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992)
Adopted and approved this 15th day of December, A.D., 1937.
   Marcus W. Damisch
   Chairman of County Board of Supervisors
   Kane County, Illinois
   Charles Lowry
   County Clerk of Kane County, Illinois
Amended:
   June 10, 1941
   March 13, 1946
   September 17, 1947
   December 15, 1948
   March 19, 1952
   March 9, 1954
   June 13, 1955
   December 13, 1955
   September 11, 1957
   October 28, 1957
   September 8, 1959
   December 14, 1960
   April 26, 1962
   June 12, 1962
   September 11, 1963
   December 11, 1963
   April 27, 1965
   December 21, 1965
   February 8, 1966
   January 9, 1968
   March 11, 1969
   April 9, 1969
   June 23, 1969
   June 12, 1972
   September 12, 1972
   December 12, 1972
   February 13, 1973
   June 11, 1973
   November 13, 1973
   March 9, 1976
   April 12, 1977
   June 13, 1978
   October 10, 1978
   December 11, 1979
   March 11, 1980
   January 11, 1983
   May 10, 1988
   August 14, 1990
   March 12, 1992
   September 8, 1992
   April 12, 1994
   March 14, 1995
   February 11, 1997
   August 12, 1997
   September 9, 1997
   April 14, 1998
   March 12, 2002
   June 11, 2002
   September 9, 2003
   September 13, 2005
   January 8, 2008
   August 12, 2008
   May 11, 2010
   October 9, 2012
State of Illinois   )
         ) SS.
County of Kane   )
25-16-3: SETBACK RESOLUTION:
Whereas, the 1933 general assembly adopted an act entitled "an act to authorize
and empower county boards to establish building or setback lines on or along
any road, street, trafficway, drive or parkway outside the corporate limits of
cities, villages and incorporated towns", and
Whereas, the purpose of granting this authority as stated in said act is "to
the end that adequate safety may be secured and the congestion of public roads,
streets, trafficways, drives and parkways may be lessened or avoided".
Therefore, be it resolved by the county board of Kane County, Illinois, that no
building, structure, or concrete, stone or masonry wall (but not including wire
or open wood fences) shall be erected, structurally altered or placed so that
any part thereof is nearer to the established centerline of any adjoining
public street or highway than the distance specified in the county zoning
ordinance or such street or highway, and
Be it further resolved, that the requirements of this resolution shall be
enforced by the enforcing officer of the zoning ordinance and as provided in
the state act relating thereto, and
Be it further resolved, that this resolution shall be in full force and effect
from and after the passage thereof.
(Adopted December 13, 1938)
25-16-4: PROCEDURES FOR IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning department is hereby authorized, with the concurrence of the zoning
board, to promulgate forms and procedures relative to the implementation and
enforcement of this chapter.
Such instructions for procedures shall be attached for informational purposes
as section
25-16-5, "Appendix A, Instructions", of this chapter. (Ord. 80-37, § 7, 3-13-
1980)
25-16-5: APPENDIX A, INSTRUCTIONS:
25-16-5-1: INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILING REQUEST FOR REZONING OR SPECIAL USE:
Request for the rezoning of property, or for certain special uses of property,
as set forth in these instructions must be addressed to the Kane County zoning
board of appeals, 719 S. Batavia Avenue, Geneva, IL 60134, attention of the
zoning enforcing officer in a form prescribed by the Kane County development
and community services department. Certification that all property owners
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property lines of the parcel which
is the subject of the rezoning/special use have been notified must be filed
with the department along with the rezoning or special use application. A
public notice sign or signs are to be obtained from the department. This sign
is to be placed conspicuously on the property which is the subject of the
rezoning or special use at the end of the right of way along a public road,
street, driveway or any other easement of access. The posting of multiple signs
may be required as deemed appropriate by the department. The owner is to
certify the sign was posted at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the
zoning board of appeals meeting. The sign can be removed after the development
committee meeting at which the rezoning or special use request is to be
considered.
The request must set forth the legal description of the property involved. This
description must be accurate, as any rezoning is actually an amendment to the
zoning ordinance itself, and upon adoption by the county board, the maps, which
are a part of the ordinance, are changed to show the reclassification.
A land use opinion must accompany the petition for rezoning or special use.
Application blanks for this purpose may be obtained from the Kane-DuPage soil
and water conservation district office located at 545 Randall Road, St.
Charles, IL 60174.
An endangered species consultation agency action report must accompany any
rezoning or special use request involving land zoned F district - farming.
Application blanks for this purpose may be obtained from the endangered and
threatened species program manager, Illinois department of natural resources,
524 South Second Street, Springfield, IL 62701 - phone: 217-785-8774.
The request should also state what the existing classification of the property
is, under the zoning ordinance, and what classification is desired. Information
regarding the necessary classification for the use desired can be obtained
directly from the zoning ordinance. In the case of a request for certain
special uses, requiring a hearing before the zoning board, and approval by the
county board, it must be determined first, if the zoning classification is
correct and then a request for establishing the particular use desired should
be submitted. If the zoning classification is not correct for the special use
desired, the request for rezoning and for the special use shall be incorporated
in the same petition.
It is necessary that a detailed sketch, showing the location of proposed
buildings and parking areas, be submitted with the petition. This should also
show proposed entrance(s) and exitway(s) to and from the public highway.
Authority for location of such entrance(s) and exitway(s) must be obtained from
the particular highway commissioner having jurisdiction. To promote safety,
these should be kept to a minimum and it is necessary to consult the state
highway department regarding the locations of such entrance(s) and exitway(s)
where said entrance(s) and exitway(s) are located on state highways. If a
township, county, or state road is adjacent to the property involved in the
rezoning or special use request, it may be necessary to dedicate right of way.
To determine this, contact Kane County division of transportation, 41W011
Burlington Road, St. Charles, Illinois. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-240, 9-
9-1997; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-2005; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
25-16-5-2: INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR A VARIATION:
Application for a variation from the zoning ordinance of Kane County must be
addressed to the Kane County Zoning Board Of Appeals, 719 S. Batavia Avenue,
Geneva, IL 60134, attention of the zoning enforcing officer, in a form
prescribed by the Kane County development and community services department.
The application must set forth the legal description of the property involved.
This description should be copied from the deed covering the property and must
be accurate, as it is necessary to locate the property on the zoning maps,
using said description. In addition to the description, the actual variation
desired must also be set forth, with a clear explanation of what is wanted and
why the request is made. This explanation should show why the regular
requirements of the zoning ordinance cannot be met, and must show proof that a
particular hardship would result if a variation were not granted. Such a
hardship must not be self-created.
A sketch of the property involved, drawn to scale, must accompany the
application for a variation. This sketch should show the outline and dimensions
of the property and all the buildings and structures located thereon. The
distances from the buildings to the property line must be measured accurately
and be shown on the sketch. The portion of the building or structure for which
a variation is requested should be clearly shown on the sketch. The name and
address of the applicant must be given. The petition must be signed by the
owner of record of the property. In case the property is under purchase
contract, the owner of record must sign and the contract purchaser should also
sign the petition.
Certification that all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of
property lines of the property on which the variance is sought have been
notified must be filed with the department along with the variation
application. A public notice sign or signs are to be obtained from the
department. This sign is to be placed conspicuously on the property which is
the subject of the variance at the end of the right of way along a public road,
street, driveway or any other easement of access. The owner is to certify the
sign was posted at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the zoning board
of appeals meeting. The sign can be removed after the zoning board of appeals
meeting at which the variance request is to be considered. The form for filing
application is available in the offices of the development and community
services department, building A, 4th floor, government center, Geneva,
Illinois.
An aerial (air photo) showing parcels involved in the variation is required.
These may be obtained from the Sidwell Company, 28W240 North Avenue, West
Chicago, IL 60185.
In submitting an application for a variation, a fee as prescribed in section
25-4-9-1 of this chapter shall accompany same.
Pursuant to the state land trust disclosure act (bill 1508), if property
involved is listed under a "trust", a notarized certification, signed by the
trust officer, giving names, addresses and percentage of interest, of all
beneficiaries, is to be filed with all petitions.
Upon receipt of such an application, certification, air photo and fee, the
zoning enforcing officer contacts the chairman of the zoning board of appeals
for a hearing date. A public notice is then published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county, at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the
hearing.
The applicant or a representative must attend the hearing. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-
1992; Ord. 97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-2005; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
25-16-5-3: INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR A MINISTERIAL VARIANCE FROM
THE KANE COUNTY ZONING ORDINANCE:
An application for ministerial variance from the Kane County zoning ordinance
of ten percent (10%) or less as to location of structures or as bulk
regulations must be addressed to the Kane County Zoning Enforcement Officer,
719 S. Batavia Avenue, Geneva, IL 60134, in a form prescribed by the Kane
County development and community services department.
The application must include the legal description of the property involved.
This description can be copied from the deed covering the property and must be
accurate. In addition, the actual variation desired must be specified with a
clear explanation of what is wanted and why the request is made. This
explanation should show why the regular requirements of the zoning ordinance
cannot be met, and must show proof that a particular hardship would result if a
variation were not granted. Such a hardship must not be self-created.
A sketch of the property involved, drawn to scale, must accompany the
application for a variation. This sketch should show the outline and dimensions
of the property and all the buildings and structures located thereon. The
distances from the buildings to the property line must be measured accurately
and be shown on the sketch. The portion of the building or structure for which
a variation is requested should be clearly shown on the sketch.
The name and address of the applicant must be given. The petition must be
signed by the owner of record of the property. In case the property is under
purchase contract, the owner of record must sign and the contract purchaser
should also sign the petition.
A certified list of property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
property lines which is the subject of the ministerial variance request must be
submitted. A public notice sign is to be obtained from the department. This
sign or signs are to be placed conspicuously on the property which is the
subject of the ministerial variance at the end of the right of way along a
public road, street, driveway or any other easement of access. The owner is to
certify the sign was posted for at least fifteen (15) calendar days, after
which the zoning enforcing officer can decide the variance request.
A form for this purpose is available from the development and community
services department, 719 S. Batavia Avenue, Geneva, IL 60134.
In submitting an application for a ministerial variation, a fee as prescribed
in section 25-4-9-1 of this chapter shall accompany the same.
Pursuant to the state land trust disclosure act (bill 1508), if property
involved is listed under "trust", a notarized certification, signed by the
trust officer, giving names, addresses and percentage of interest, of all
beneficiaries, is to be filed with all petitions. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord.
97-240, 9-9-1997; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-2005; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
25-16-5-4: PROCEDURES FOR SCHEDULING OF ZONING PETITION SPEAKERS AND FOR FILING
OF WRITTEN PROTEST:
   A.   Action By The Zoning Board Of Appeals: Anyone, including
municipalities, desiring to speak on behalf of, or against, any zoning matter
shall register their request to do so by eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. on
the day of the meeting of the county board at which said zoning matter is to be
presented. Registration may be completed electronically on the county's
website, by e-mail, telephone or in writing to the county board office. You are
referred to chapter 2, article II, subsection
2-47B16 of this code for the rules applicable to such speaker(s).
   B.   Recommendations By The Kane County Development Committee: The petition
which is the subject of a public hearing will be considered by the Kane County
development committee at its first scheduled meeting immediately following a
decision of the zoning board of appeals.
The committee may or may not make a recommendation concerning the petition to
the county board. Any recommendation by the committee is not binding on the
county board.
Persons in favor of or in opposition to this petition who wish to speak before
the development committee must signify their intention to do so by signing a
sheet provided for such purpose at the meeting at which such petition is to be
considered. The time allowed to each speaker and the division of time among
speakers will be according to chapter 2, article II, subsection
2-47B16 of this code.
Persons speaking before the county board or the development committee shall
confine their remarks to argument based upon the evidence submitted at the
public hearing. New matters shall not be raised nor will the committee or the
board consider them.
   C.   Written Protests: See section
25-4-7 of this chapter pertaining to written protests in opposition to text or
map amendments and special uses. (Ord. 92-187, 9-8-1992; Ord. 97-214, 8-12-
1997; Ord. 02-81, 3-12-2002; Ord. 05-304, 9-13-2005; Ord. 12-295, 10-9-2012)
ARTICLE XVII. CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 21-225, 4-13-2021)
CHAPTER 26
LIQUOR LICENSES
SECTION:
26-1: Licenses
26-1: LICENSES:
The allowable number of liquor licenses in Kane County is fixed as follows:
Township Class Class Class Class Class Clas Class Class Class
         AR    AP    AW    C     C-1   D    D-1   E     G
Township    Class Class Class Class Class Clas Class Class Class
            AR    AP    AW    C     C-1   D    D-1   E     G
Aurora      1     1     0     1     0     0    0     3     0
Batavia     0     0     0     1     0     0    0     0     0
Big Rock    1     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Blackberry  2     1     0     0     0     0    0     1     3
Burlington  0     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Campton     2     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Dundee      3     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Elgin       0     0     0     0     0     0    0     1     1
Geneva      1     0     0     0     0     0    1     0     0
Hampshire   0     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Kaneville   1     0     0     0     0     0    0     0     0
Plato       0     0     0     0     0     0    0     1     0
Rutland     0     0     0     0     0     0    0     1     0
St. Charles 0     1     0     0     0     0    0     0     1
Sugar Grove 1     1     0     0     0     0    0     0     1
Virgil      1     0     1     0     0     0    0     3     0
 
(Ord. 14-178, 6-10-2014; Ord. 17-85, 3-14-2017; Ord. 18-187, 6-12-2018; Ord.
19-244, 7-9-2019; Ord. 23-190, 5-9-2023)
CHAPTER 27
LAND USE AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR KANE COUNTY
SECTION:
27-1: Adopting The Kane County 2040 Plan
27-1: ADOPTING THE KANE COUNTY 2040 PLAN:
STATE OF ILLINOIS
COUNTY OF KANE
   RESOLUTION NO. 12-117
   ADOPTING THE KANE COUNTY 2040 PLAN
   WHEREAS, 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-14001 and 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 805/1 provide for counties to engage in planning for the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of said region and prepare and adopt land
resource management plans; and
   WHEREAS, the 2040 plan has been prepared by the regional planning commission
pursuant to the authority of the regional planning act 1 , which encourages
"counties to protect the land, air, water, natural resources and environment of
the state and to encourage the use of such resources in a manner which is
socially and economically desirable through the adoption of joint or compatible
local land resource management plans" and furthers "the policy of the state in
land resource management"; and
   WHEREAS, the Kane County 2040 plan has been developed under the direction of
the Kane County regional planning commission with the overarching theme of
"healthy people, healthy living, and healthy communities", and this theme
recognizes and emphasizes the connection between the most important resource in
Kane County - its people - with the opportunities for and barriers to healthy
living created by the built and natural environment, and how together they
shape the overall health of communities; and
   WHEREAS, Kane County has placed the highest priority for improving the
quality of life for all its residents by establishing the quality of Kane
initiative; and
   WHEREAS, the quality of Kane initiative reflects the full integration of
health, transportation and land use for planning and implementation of policies
and programs; and
   WHEREAS, the Kane County board has adopted the fit kids 2020 plan, the 2012-
2016 community health improvement plan, and the 2040 transportation plan with
its three components, the 2040 recommended roadway plan, the 2040 bicycle and
pedestrian plan, and the 2040 transit plan; and
   WHEREAS, the before mentioned plans are all fully integrated and
incorporated into the 2040 plan, which serves as the guiding master plan for
Kane County and its 30 municipalities; and
   WHEREAS, the development of the 2040 plan included participation and review
by the Chicago metropolitan agency for planning, Kane County municipalities,
departments and agencies of the county and state, interest groups and
individual residents and considered comments received at two public forums held
on November 10 and 15, 2011, and a public hearing held on March 7, 2012.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Kane County board that the Kane
County, Illinois, 2040 plan as presented to this meeting be and is hereby
adopted as the official land use and resource management plan for Kane County
pursuant to the provisions of 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-14001 et seq.
and 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 805/1 et seq.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED by the Kane County board that the
Kane County board directs the Kane County development department to prepare
this adopted 2040 plan for publication and distribution to the public and units
of government.
   Passed by the Kane County board on May 8, 2012. (Ord. 2020-02, passed 1-28-
2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 55 ILCS 5/5-14001 et seq.
CHAPTER 28
ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE
ARTICLE I. DEVELOPMENT/ZONING REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES
SECTION:
28-1-1: Definitions; Development/Zoning Regulations And Guidelines
28-1-2: Permitted Locations
28-1-2-1: Level 1 And Level 2 Charging Stations
28-1-2-2: Level 3 (DC Fast) Charging Stations
28-1-2-3: Retail Charging Primary Use
28-1-3: Station Requirements And Design Criteria
28-1-3-1: General Charging Station Requirements For Single-Family Residences,
Multi-Family Residences, Nonresidential Development, And Public Rights Of Way
28-1-4:    Sign Requirements For EV Chargers
28-1-4-1: Sign Brightness
28-1-4-2: Sign Noise
28-1-4-3: Message Content And Readability
28-1-4-4: Signs And Advertising
28-1-1: DEFINITIONS; DEVELOPMENT/ZONING REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES:
AC: Alternating current (electricity).
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: Any housing that is subsidized by the federal
or state government or any housing in which at least twenty percent (20%) of
the dwelling units are subject to covenants or restrictions that require that
the dwelling units to be sold or rented at prices that preserve them as
affordable housing for a period of at least ten (10) years.
BATTERY, BATTERIES: A cell or cells onboard an electric vehicle which is used
for storing and furnishing electrical energy for the purpose of propelling the
vehicle.
BATTERY ELECTRIC VEHICLE (BEV): An electric vehicle with an onboard battery
that operates exclusively on electrical energy from the battery which battery
is charged from an electrical power source (charging station) not onboard the
vehicle.
CHARGING LEVEL: The standardized indicators of electrical force, or voltage at
which an electric vehicle's battery is recharged. Typical electric vehicle
charging levels and specifications are:
   A.   A. Level 1: AC slow battery charging. Voltage is one hundred ten (110)
to one hundred twenty (120) volts supply power, with a power range from 0.88
kilowatts to 1.92 kW and provides three (3) to six (6) range miles per hour
connected. Level 1 EV chargers are supplied with AC and in turn provide AC
power to the EV through a standard connector.
   B.    Level 2: AC medium battery charging. Voltage is between one hundred
twenty (120) volts and two hundred forty (240) volts supply power, with a range
from 3.3 kW to 19.2 kW, and provides sixteen (16) to eighty (80) range miles
per hour connected. Level 2 EV chargers are supplied with AC and in turn
provide AC power to the EV through a standard connector.
   C.    Level 3: Direct Current (DC) is used for refueling BEV’s at various
amperage levels and voltage levels, most commonly 480 VAC, with power outputs
ranging between 25 and 175 kW of power and provides fifty (50) to five hundred
(500) range miles per hour connected. DCFCs convert AC from facility power and
output DC and Volts Direct Current (VDC), which then delivers DC power to the
BEV through a standard connector.
CHARGING STATION: Equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of
electric energy by conductive or inductive means to a battery or other energy
storage device located onboard an electric vehicle. Various types of charging
stations include:
   A.   Accessible Charging Station: A charging station incorporated into or
immediately adjacent to a handicapped parking space as "handicapped parking
space" is defined by the Illinois vehicle code.
   B.   Level 3 Charging Station (Sometimes: DC Fast Charging Station): A
charging station that provides any single phase voltage or current rating
higher than that of level 2, or any 3-phase supply voltage configuration.
   C.   Private Charging Station: A charging station that is: 1) privately
owned and restricted access (e.g., single-family home, executive parking,
designated employee parking, etc.), or 2) publicly owned and restricted (e.g.,
fleet parking with no access to the general public).
   D.   Public Charging Station: A charging station that is: 1) publicly owned
and publicly available (e.g., park and ride, public parking lots, on street
parking, etc.) or 2) privately owned and publicly available (e.g., shopping
center parking, nonreserved parking in multi-family parking lots, etc.).
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT: The conductors, including ungrounded and grounded,
and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings,
devices, power outlets, charging stations or apparatus installed specifically
for the purpose of delivering electrical energy from the charging station to
the electric vehicle.
CHARGING STATION SPACE: A dedicated, marked space that identifies the use
thereof as exclusively for the charging of electric vehicles.
COMBINED CHARGING SYSTEM (CCS): Standard used globally for combined AC and DC
charging.
DC: Direct current (electricity).
ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND/OR MOTORCYCLES: A two-wheel or three-wheel electric
vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy stored in the vehicle's
batteries.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV): A vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from a charging station or other electrical
energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery for propulsion purposes.
"Electric vehicle" includes: a) a battery electric vehicle; b) a plug-in hybrid
electric vehicle; c) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and d) electric scooters
or motorcycles.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE): The equipment that includes the
conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding
conductors, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all
other fittings, devices, power outlets, or apparatus installed specifically for
the purpose of transferring energy between premises wiring and an electric
vehicle.
EV-CAPABLE: A dedicated parking space which is provided with electrical panel
capacity and space to support a minimum 40-ampere, 208/240-volt branch circuit
for each EV parking space, and the installation of raceways, both underground
and surface mounted, to support the EVSE.
EXTENDED-RANGE ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EREV): A vehicle with both an electric motor
and an internal combustion engine (using gasoline, diesel, or other fuel).
EREVs use a combustion engine as a generator to recharge the battery, with no
connection between the engine and the drivetrain. In common use, the term PHEV
is often applied to both PHEVs and EREVs.
HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE (HEV): Vehicle that uses a dual system of electric
propulsion and an internal combustion engine, but the primary source of energy
is derived from fuel that powers an engine (gasoline, diesel, and other fuels)
and the electric portion comes from recovering energy which charges an on-board
battery when the vehicle is decelerating. This stored battery power is used to
increase the fuel efficiency of the vehicle, such as assisting in acceleration.
HEVs do not plug in.
LARGE MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE: A single residential building that accommodates
five (5) families or more.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE (NEV): An electric vehicle with four (4) wheels
that conforms to federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500 which can
from a standstill attain a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour within one mile
but cannot exceed a speed of more than twenty five (25) miles per hour with a
maximum loaded weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds.
NONELECTRIC VEHICLE: A vehicle that does not meet the definition of "electric
vehicle" as provided herein.
NORTH AMERICAN CHARGING STANDARD (NACS): Standard being adopted by most EV
manufacturer and EVSE manufacturers sating in 2025. Same as Tesla charging
standard.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE (PHEV): An electric vehicle that: a) contains
an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive
wheels by an electric motor; and b) charges its battery primarily by connecting
to a charging station or other electrical source not onboard the vehicle; c)
may additionally be able to sustain a battery charge using an onboard internal
combustion driven generator; and d) has the ability to be propelled through the
use of electricity.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A detached single-family residence on a single lot.
SMALL MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE: A single residential building that accommodates
two (2) to four (4) families.
VEHICLE: Has the same meaning as provided in the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes et seq. (Ord. 12-31, 2-14-2012; amd. Ord. 24-183, 5-
14-2024)
28-1-2: PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
28-1-2-1: LEVEL 1 AND LEVEL 2 CHARGING STATIONS:
Level 1 and level 2 charging stations are permitted in every zoning district,
when accessory to the primary permitted use of said district. Charging stations
located at single-family, multiple-family, and mobile home park dwellings shall
be designated as private use only. Installation of level 2 charging stations
shall be subject to building permit approval.
28-1-2-2: LEVEL 3 (DC FAST) CHARGING STATIONS:
Level 3 (DC fast) charging stations are permitted in the RB, B1, B2, B3 and B4,
LI, I, PUD, and A-2 when accessory to the primary permitted use. Installation
thereof shall be subject to building permit approval.
28-1-2-3: RETAIL CHARGING PRIMARY USE:
If the primary use of a parcel is the retail charging of electric vehicle
batteries, then the use shall be considered a gasoline service station for
zoning purposes. Installation of charging stations shall be subject to special
land use approval and located in zoning districts which permit gasoline service
stations. (Ord. 12-31, 2-14-2012; amd. Ord. 24-183, 5-14-2024)
28-1-3: STATION REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN CRITERIA:
28-1-3-1: GENERAL CHARGING STATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES,
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES, NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Charging Station Space Quality And Location Requirements:
      1.   Single-Family, Small Multifamily And Large Multifamily Residences:
It is the intent of the County of Kane to comply with the Electric Vehicle
Charging Act (765 ILCS 1085/1 et seq.). In accordance with the Electric Vehicle
Charging Act, the following provisions apply to newly constructed single-family
residences, small multifamily residences, and large multifamily residences that
have parking spaces and are constructed after January 1, 2024:
         a.   Single-Family Residences And Small Multifamily Residences: A new
single-family residence or small multifamily residence shall have at least one
EV-capable parking space for each residential unit that has dedicated parking.
A new single-family residence or small multifamily residence that qualifies as
an affordable housing development shall have one EV-capable parking space for
each code-required parking space if the owner is issued a building permit after
January 1, 2026.
         b.   Large Multifamily Residences: A new large multifamily residential
building, or a large multifamily residential building being renovated by a
developer converting the property to an Association, shall have one hundred
percent (100%) of its total parking spaces EV-capable. The term "Association"
has the meaning set forth in the Electric Vehicle Charging Act.
      2.   Nonresidential: In order to proactively plan for and accommodate the
anticipated future growth in market demand for electric vehicles, it is
strongly encouraged, but not required, that all new and expanded nonresidential
development parking areas provide the electrical capacity necessary to
accommodate the future hardwire installation of level 2 charging stations. It
is recommended that a typical parking lot (e.g., one thousand (1,000) or less
parking spaces) have a minimum ratio of two percent (2%) of the total parking
spaces prepared for such stations.
EXAMPLE SITE PLAN
"ROUGH-IN" OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3245.png]
 
      3.   Accessible Charging Stations: It is strongly encouraged, but not
required, that a minimum of one accessible charging station be provided on non-
residential properties. Accessible charging stations should be located in close
proximity to the building or facility entrance and shall be connected to a
barrier free accessible route of travel to and from the building or facility.
It is not necessary to designate the accessible charging station exclusively
for the use of disabled persons. Below are two (2) options for providing for
accessible electric vehicle charging stations.
   OFF STREET ACCESSIBLE CHARGING STATION EXAMPLE - OPTION 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3247.png]
 
   OFF STREET ACCESSIBLE CHARGING STATION EXAMPLE - OPTION 2
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3249.png]
   Comment: The illustrations and photos above show two (2) options for
providing accessible charging stations. Option 1 is a likely scenario for
installation in existing parking lots. By using an existing wider end parking
stall or restriping, an accessible charging station may be more cost
effectively installed. Where feasible, a wider clear area around the equipment
(sixty (60) inches) is preferable. Additionally, this location away from the
near building prime parking has a better likelihood of being available for
disabled persons, since the accessible charging station is not exclusively
reserved for disabled persons. Option 2 provides a location that has a shorter
travel distance for disabled persons and can be easily installed in a new
parking lot. This option may allow the installer to provide a wider, more fully
compliant aisle.
   While other options, depending on the specific layout of the new or
reconfigured parking area, are likely, at a minimum, an accessible charging
station must be located within accessible reach of the barrier free access
aisle (minimum forty-four (44) inch width) and the electric vehicle and connect
to a barrier free route of travel. However, because the charging station
facility is not a parking facility, the accessible charging station does not
need to be located immediately adjacent to the building entrances or reserved
exclusively for the use of disabled persons.
   B.   Charging Station Space Location And Design Criteria:
      1.   Where provided, spaces for charging station purposes are required to
include the following:
         a.   Signage: Each charging station space shall be posted with signage
indicating the charging station space is only for use by electric vehicles for
charging purposes. Days and hours of operations shall be included if time
limits or tow away provisions are to be enforced.
         b.   Maintenance: Charging station equipment shall be maintained in
all respects. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on
the charging station equipment for reporting purposes when the equipment is not
functioning or other equipment problems are encountered.
         c.   Accessibility: Where charging station equipment is provided
within a pedestrian circulation area, such as a sidewalk or other accessible
route to a building entrance, the charging station equipment shall be located
so as not to interfere with accessibility requirements of the Illinois
accessibility code or other applicable accessibility standards.
         d.   Lighting: Where charging station equipment is installed, adequate
site lighting shall be provided in accordance with county of Kane ordinances
and regulations.
         e.   Charging Station Equipment: Charging station outlets and
connector devices shall be no less than thirty six inches (36") and no higher
than forty eight inches (48") from the ground or pavement surface where
mounted, and shall contain a retraction device and/or a place to hang permanent
cords and connectors a sufficient and safe distance above the ground or
pavement surface. Equipment mounted on pedestals, lighting posts, bollards, or
other devices shall be designated and located as to not impede pedestrian
travel or create trip hazards on sidewalks.
         f.   Charging Station Equipment Protection: Adequate charging station
equipment protection, such as concrete filled steel bollards, shall be used.
Nonmountable curbing may be used in lieu of bollards, if the charging station
is set back a minimum of twenty four inches (24") from the face of the curb.
         g.   Usage Fees: An owner of a charging station is not prohibited from
collecting a fee for the use of a charging station, in accordance with
applicable state and federal regulations. Fees shall be prominently displayed
on the charging station.
      2.   Those providing charging station spaces should consider the
following:
         a.   Notification: Information on the charging station, identifying
voltage and amperage levels and time of use, fees, or safety information.
         b.   Signage: Installation of directional signs at appropriate
decision points to effectively guide motorists to the charging station space
(s).
         c.   Location (Specific To On Street Parking): Placement of a single
charging station is preferred at the beginning or end stall on a block face.
   C.   Data Collection: To allow for maintenance and notification, the county
of Kane shall require the owners of public charging stations to provide
information on the charging station's geographic location, date of
installation, equipment type and model, and owner contact information.
   FIGURE: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION - ON STREET
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a2897dd4e4de7a16cb1529aa5c1f83d814cc72f3/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2959.gif]
 
Comment: On street charging stations should first be installed at either end of
a row of regular on street parking spaces. Subsequent charging stations should
be installed adjacent to existing charging stations. Several factors that
suggest an end stall as the preferred location include, but are not limited to:
proximity to electrical service, adjacency to existing no parking zone, better
accessibility for all users, higher lighting levels and less clearance and
obstruction issues with existing parking spaces. The charging station equipment
should be installed in a well lit area, on a hard surface, near the front of
the designated space, and have adequate clearance from the face of curb (36
inch) and leave a barrier free sidewalk clearance (36 inch or other applicable
distance). Signage shall be at or near the charging station. All regulatory
signs shall comply with visibility, legibility, size, shape, color and
reflectivity requirements contained within the federal "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices". (Ord. 12-31, 2-14-2012; amd. Ord. 24-183, 5-14-2024)
28-1-4: SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR EV CHARGERS:
28-1-4-1: SIGN BRIGHTNESS:
   A.   No sign shall be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the
vision of a motor vehicle driver or to otherwise interfere with the driver's
operation of a motor vehicle.
   B.   Limit illuminated digital media signs to non-residential (mercantile,
commercial, industrial) or highway business zones.
28-1-4-2: SIGN NOISE:
   A.   Limit audio digital media to non-residential (mercantile, commercial,
industrial) or highway business zones. Audio advertising shall not be allowed
in any zones between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. to seven o’clock (7:
00) A.M.
28-1-4-3: MESSAGE CONTENT AND READABILITY:
   A.   For digital signs on EVSEs readable while driving, limit signs to
minimal graphics and set a maximum number of words per signs.
   B.   Digital signs on EVSEs shall be clear and easy to read without
excessive text, colors, graphics or other features that reduce legibility.
   C.   Messages on EVSEs should fit the character and values of the community
and comply with appearance codes. Static branding on EVSEs related to an EVSE
site owner's business is acceptable in any zones where signage is allowed.
28-1-4-4: SIGNS AND ADVERTISING:
   A.   Advertising messaging on EVSEs not allowed on the property of single-
family dwelling occupancy classified buildings
   B.   Static branding on EVSEs is allowed in all zones.
   C.   Advertising messaging in occupancy classifications R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-
4 should be set at a minimum distance from and minimize any line of sight from
these occupancy classifications and follow zoning codes in Chapter 25.
   D.   Advertising messaging on EVSEs in non-residential districts should
comply with existing zoning rules for similar signage.
   E.   EV space signs may be required to include time limits and hours of
operation, depending on zoning. (Ord. 24-183, 5-14-2024)
ARTICLE II. CHARGING STATION/PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
28-2-1: Definitions; Charging Station/Parking Regulations
28-2-2: Electric Vehicle Charging Station Regulations
28-2-2-1: Charging Stations Spaces; Generally
28-2-2-2: Prohibitions
28-2-2-3: Notice Of Electric Vehicle Charging Station
28-2-2-4: Violations; Penalties
28-2-1: DEFINITIONS; CHARGING STATION/PARKING REGULATIONS:
BATTERY, BATTERIES: A cell or cells onboard an electric vehicle which is used
for storing and furnishing electrical energy for the purpose of propelling the
vehicle.
BATTERY ELECTRIC VEHICLE: An electric vehicle with an onboard battery that
operates exclusively on electrical energy from the battery, which battery is
charged from an external source such as a charging station.
CHARGING STATION: Apparatus that has as its primary purpose the transfer of
electric energy by conductive or inductive means to a battery or other energy
storage device located onboard an electric vehicle.
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT: The conductors, including ungrounded and grounded,
equipment grounding conductors and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment
plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, charging stations or
apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of delivering electric energy
from the charging station to the electric vehicle.
CHARGING STATION SPACE: A dedicated, marked parking space that identifies the
use thereof to be exclusively for the charging of an electric vehicle.
ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND/OR MOTORCYCLES: A two-wheel or three-wheel electric
vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy that is stored in the
vehicle's battery.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE: A vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on
electrical energy from a charging station or other source that is stored in the
vehicle's battery for propulsion purposes. "Electric vehicle" includes: a) a
battery electric vehicle; b) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle; c) a
neighborhood electric vehicle; and d) electric scooters or motorcycles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE: An electric vehicle with four (4) wheels that
conforms to federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500 which can from
a standstill attain a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour (mph) within one mile
but cannot exceed a speed of more than twenty five (25) miles per hour.
NONELECTRIC VEHICLE: A vehicle that does not meet the definition of "electric
vehicle" as provided herein.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE: An electric vehicle that: a) contains an
internal combustion engine and also allows power to be delivered to drive
wheels by an electric motor; and b) charges its battery primarily by connecting
to a charging station or other off board electrical source; c) may additionally
be able to sustain battery charge using an onboard internal combustion driven
generator; and d) has the ability to be propelled through the use of
electricity.
VEHICLE: Has the same meaning as provided in the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes et seq. (Ord. 12-31, 2-14-2012)
28-2-2: ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION REGULATIONS:
28-2-2-1: CHARGING STATIONS SPACES; GENERALLY:
   A.   Charging stations spaces are reserved for use by electric vehicles
only.
   B.   Electric vehicles may park in any parking space otherwise designated
for parking, subject to the restrictions that would apply to any other vehicle
generally.
28-2-2-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Pursuant to section 28-2-2-4 of this chapter, when a sign authorized
under section 28-2-2-3 of this chapter provides notice of a designated charging
station space, no person shall park or stand a nonelectric vehicle therein. Any
nonelectric vehicle parked or standing in a charging station space is subject
to fine and/or impoundment of the offending vehicle.
28-2-2-3: NOTICE OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION:
   A.   Upon adoption of an ordinance by the county of Kane, establishing a
charging station space(s), the Kane County engineer shall cause appropriate
signs and markings to be placed in and around the designated charging station
space(s), indicating prominently thereon the parking regulations therefor. The
signs shall define time limits and hours of operation, as applicable, and shall
state that the parking space is reserved for the charging of electric vehicles
only. Charging station space regulation violators are subject to fine and/or
impoundment of the offending vehicle.
28-2-2-4: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations of any provision of this article shall be punishable as an
ordinance violation. Punishment shall be by a fine not to exceed the fine
prescribed in accordance with chapter 21, article II, sections 21-11 and 21-14
of this code. Each hour such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 12-31, 2-14-2012)
CHAPTER 29
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
ARTICLE I. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
29-1: Title
29-2: Enabling Statute
29-3: Definitions
29-4: Regulations And Standards
29-5: Permitting Requirements
29-6: Permit Fees
29-7: Adjustments Or Relocations Of Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
29-8: Damage To Wireless Telecommunications Facility
29-9: Damage To County Infrastructure Or Property
29-10: Variance Requirements
29-11: Abandonment And Removal
29-12: County Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
29-13: No Implied Warranties
29-14: Hold Harmless Agreement
29-15: Severability
29-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be referred to as the WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-2: ENABLING STATUTE:
The Illinois Legislature has passed Public Act 100-0585, the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (hereinafter "the Act"), enabling Kane County to
adopt rates, fees and terms which comply with the Act for the collocation of
small wireless facilities within the County's right-of-way. All definitions,
terms and conditions set forth in the Act are incorporated herein and made a
part hereof. Since the Kane County Division of Transportation Permit
Regulations and Access Control Regulations does not sufficiently address the
collocation of small wireless facilities, and the Legislature has enacted
specific terms which apply only to small wireless facilities providers who
request to locate small wireless facilities within the County right-of-way, the
County is enacting this article.
Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this article regarding the
siting and installation of wireless telecommunication facilities are more
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other local
laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations, the provisions of this
article shall govern. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-3: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of the terms as set forth in the Kane County Division of
Transportation Permit Regulations and Access Control Regulations shall be
applicable to this article unless otherwise stated. In the event there is a
conflict between this article and the Kane County Division of Transportation
Permit Regulations and Access Control Regulations, this article shall govern.
As used in this article, the terms set forth below shall be defined as follows:
ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE: Means an existing utility pole or other
structure within the County right-of-way which can be used to support an
antenna and which is not owned by the County.
COUNTY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Means poles, streetlights and traffic signals that
are located in the County's right-of-way and which are owned, operated and
maintained by the County.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM: Means a type of wireless telecommunication facility
consisting of a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a
common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a
geographic area.
LANDSCAPE SCREENING: Means the installation, at grade, of plantings, shrubbery,
bushes or other foliage intended to screen ground mounted wireless
telecommunication equipment from public view.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: Means a person licensed in the State of Illinois as a
professional structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the
Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989.
STRUCTURE: Includes alternative antenna structure and County- owned
infrastructure as herein defined, collectively.
TOWER: Means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers.
VARIANCE: Means a grant of relief by the County Engineer or the duly appointed
designee of the County Engineer from specific limitations of this article.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Means any services provided to the general public, including
a particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or
mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: Means a person or entity that provides wireless
telecommunication services available to the public but excludes any person or
entity that provides wireless telecommunication service to or for a private
niche market.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA: Means an antenna that is part of a wireless
telecommunications facility.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT: Means equipment, exclusive of an antenna,
that is part of a wireless telecommunications facility.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: Means an antenna, equipment, and related
improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide publicly accessible
wireless transmission of voice, data, images, or other information including,
but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service,
paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-4: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Wireless telecommunication facilities to be located in the County's
right-of-way shall require a County wireless telecommunications facilities
permit. Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be permitted to be located
in the County's right-of-way as attachments to existing alternative antenna
structures or County-owned infrastructure or as an attachment to a new
alternative antenna structure subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Siting of Telecommunications Facilities: When determining the
location for installation of wireless telecommunications facilities, wireless
service providers are encouraged to take into consideration the surrounding and
adjacent land uses and make every effort to avoid siting wireless
telecommunications facilities at or near properties with high frequency outdoor
usage such as parks, schools, sports and recreation facilities.
      2.   New Alternative Antenna Structures: In the event of receipt of an
application for the installation of a wireless telecommunication facility on a
new alternative antenna structure, the County may require that the proposed
wireless telecommunication facility be collocated on an existing alternative
antenna structure within one hundred feet (100') of the proposed installation.
The applicant will accept said County required collocation if the applicant has
or can obtain the right to use the existing alternate antenna structure on
reasonable terms and conditions as long as the existing alternative antenna
structure does not impose technical limits or unreasonable additional material
costs. The applicant shall provide a written certification describing any
property rights, technical limits or material costs as reasons why the existing
alternative antenna structure does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
      3.   Signage: Identification signage shall be affixed to each wireless
telecommunication facility clearly identifying the wireless services provider,
its emergency and business contact phone numbers and a unique identity number
or code. Safety warning signs or labeling required by law are permitted.
Installation of all other signs on a wireless telecommunication facility shall
be prohibited. Signage size shall be determined by the County Engineer.
      4.   Frequency Interference: The wireless services provider's operation
of the wireless telecommunication facilities in the County's right-of-way shall
not interfere with the frequencies used by the County's public safety or
roadway facility and operations communications, including, but not limited to,
streetlight and traffic signal transmissions. In the event that interference
with said frequencies used by the County's public safety or roadway facility
communications is detected at any time, the wireless services provider is
required to and shall at its own expense, either: a) immediately cease
transmitting/receiving from said wireless telecommunication facility; or b)
reconfigure or filter the interfering antenna system's transmissions or
frequency; or c) remove the entirety of the wireless telecommunication facility
immediately upon notification of said interference. In the event a relocation
is required, the wireless services provider will be required to apply for a new
wireless telecommunication facilities permit under the terms of this article
for the wireless telecommunication facility's relocation.
      5.   Attachment Limitations: No wireless telecommunication antenna or
facility shall be attached to an alternative antenna structure or County-owned
infrastructure unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         a.   Height Requirements: The maximum height of a wireless
telecommunication antenna attached to a structure is limited to ten feet (10')
above the structure on which the wireless telecommunication antenna is
collocated. The height of a new or replacement structure on which wireless
telecommunication facilities are collocated shall be limited to the higher of:
            (1)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing
structure, other than a tower supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the County, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement structure and that
is in the same right-of-way within the boundaries of the County of Kane; or
            (2)   Forty five feet (45') above existing ground level.
         b.   Antenna Size: A wireless telecommunication antenna, including
antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas, shall be located inside
an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an
antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements
could fit in its entirety within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet. Applicant shall provide written proof by way of design drawings and
details at time of application submittal that demonstrates that the volume
limitation has been satisfied.
         c.   Equipment Volume Of Above-Ground Wireless Telecommunication
Facility: The total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and
appurtenances comprising a wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of
the antenna itself, shall not cumulatively exceed twenty five (25) cubic feet
in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment
elements, telecommunication demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services. Applicant shall provide written
proof by way of design drawings and details at time of application submittal
that show the volume limitation has been met.
         d.   Mounting Requirements: The base of the equipment, antenna or
appurtenances of a wireless telecommunication facility collocated on a
structure shall be located no lower than ten feet (10') above grade and at a
location and height that meets the requirements of the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA) and the clearances set forth in the Public Rights-of-Way
Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG) or the subsequent regulations on
accessibility in County right-of-way. Collocation on County-owned
infrastructure shall not interfere with or obscure existing traffic control
devices including signal heads, lighting and signage. For traffic signals or
street lights, no elements of a wireless telecommunication facility shall be
mounted onto the signal mast arm or lighting luminaire arm.
         e.   Landscape Screening: In the event that a wireless
telecommunication facility is proposed to be installed at grade, landscape
screening shall be installed to minimize the visibility of the wireless
telecommunication facility, at the discretion of the County Engineer.
         f.   Wiring And Cabling: Wires and cables connecting the antenna to
the remainder of the wireless transmission facility shall be installed in
accordance with the National Electric Code and National Electrical Safety Code
then in effect at the time of application. In no event shall wiring and cabling
serving the wireless transmission facility interfere with any wiring or cabling
installed by a cable television or video service operator, electric utility or
telephone utility. The applicant shall be required to provide written sign-off
by each cable television or video service operator, electric utility or
telephone utility owner/operator that a proposed collocation will not adversely
impact their existing facilities. Said sign-offs must be provided at the time
of application submittal.
         g.   Grounding: The wireless telecommunication facility shall be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code
then in effect.
         h.   Guy Wires: No guy or other support wires shall be used in
connection with a wireless telecommunication facility within the County's
right-of-way unless the facility is proposed to be attached to an existing
structure that incorporated guy wires prior to the date that an applicant has
submitted an application for a permit.
         i.   Pole Extensions: Extensions to structures utilized for the
purpose of collocating a wireless telecommunication antenna and its related
wireless telecommunication equipment shall be fabricated from material similar
to the existing structure, and shall have a degree of strength capable of
supporting the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and capable of
withstanding wind forces and ice loads, stresses and other negative impacts in
accordance with the structural loading standards as noted below. An extension
to a structure shall be securely attached to the structure in accordance with
applicable engineering standards for the design and attachment of such
extensions.
         j.   Structural Loading: The wireless telecommunication facility,
including the antenna, pole, extension and all related equipment shall be
designed to withstand wind forces and ice loads in accordance with applicable
standards established in chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety Code for
structures, rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and loading
forces on structures, in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) in
TIA/EIA section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel
structures and the applicable industry standard for other existing structures.
The applicant shall provide the County with a structural evaluation of each
specific location affirming that the proposed installation meets or exceeds the
standards described above. The evaluation shall be prepared by a professional
structural engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
         k.   Electrical Disconnect: A wireless telecommunication facility
shall include an electrical service disconnect switch to allow County
personnel, agents and emergency response personnel to shut off power in the
event of an incident or other abnormal condition. The disconnect switch shall
be located a minimum of ten feet (10') away from the wireless telecommunication
facility and accessible to County and emergency response personnel without
restriction. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018; Ord. 19-205, 6-11-2019)
29-5: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applications for the collocation or installation of wireless
telecommunication facilities shall be required to include the following.
      1.   General Permitting Requirements:
         a.   Structural Integrity: A site specific structural integrity
analysis prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in the State
of Illinois.
         b.   Location: An exhibit showing the location where each proposed
wireless telecommunication facility would be installed.
         c.   Visibility: A line-of-sight analysis to ensure that wireless
telecommunications equipment, either pole or ground mounted, does not obscure
or obstruct the safe visibility of/by motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
         d.   Land Uses And Structures: Photographs, taken within six (6)
months of the submittal of the application, of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the land uses and structure(s) on which each proposed
wireless telecommunication facility would be mounted.
         e.   Specifications Of Installation: Specifications and drawings
prepared by a structural engineer for each proposed wireless telecommunication
facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed, with
height and offset dimensions shown as well as volumetrics (cubic feet) of each
of the wireless telecommunication facility components.
         f.   Schedule Of Installation And Completion: A proposed schedule for
the installation and completion of each wireless telecommunication facility
covered by the application.
         g.   Frequency Interference: Certification that the proposed
collocation complies with the frequency interference requirements in subsection
29-4A4 of this article.
         h.   Restoration: Upon completion of the work authorized by permit
under this article, all disturbed or damaged areas of the right of way shall be
restored to a condition equal to or better than that which existed prior to the
work. Said restoration shall include, but is not limited to, repairs to highway
shoulders, ditches, parkways, curbs, and pavement and/or any special
landscaping, hardscaping, or enhanced areas that existed in the right of way
prior to the commencement of the permitted work. The County shall bear no
responsibility for costs associated with any required restoration. The
applicant shall for each permit provide a performance bond in the amount of one
hundred percent(100%) of the engineer's estimate of probable cost for the
restoration. An engineer's estimate of probable cost shall be submitted to the
County for approval prior to the submittal of any performance bond.
         i.   Service Connections: Other related wireless telecommunication
facility improvements including, but not limited to, buried electrical service,
and buried fiber optic or cable connections that are required or used to
service the wireless telecommunication facility and which are installed within
County right-of-way require additional and separate permits. A permit for these
service connections shall be applied for concurrently by the respective utility
provider providing the service or connection.
      2.   County-Owned Infrastructure:
         a.   Pole Attachment Agreement: In addition to the required permit, a
separate pole attachment agreement between the wireless services provider and
the County is required prior to the County authorizing the placement of
wireless telecommunication facilities on County-owned infrastructure.
         b.   Replacement Of County-Owned Infrastructure: If the County
determines that applicable codes or public safety requires the County's
infrastructure to be replaced to support a requested collocation, the County
shall require the wireless services provider to replace the County's
infrastructure at no cost to the County. If the proposed installation requires
replacement of the County's infrastructure, no property rights to the replaced
County-owned infrastructure will accrue to or be conferred on the applicant due
to the applicant's replacement of such infrastructure.
         c.   Make Ready Analysis: When a wireless services provider applies
for a permit to collocate a wireless telecommunication facility on County-owned
infrastructure a Make Ready Analysis prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in the State of Illinois shall be required.
      3.   Alternative Antenna Structure:
         a.   Permission To Use Alternative Antenna Structure: When an
applicant for a wireless telecommunication facility submits an application to
collocate a wireless telecommunication facility on an alternative antenna
structure that is under the ownership or control of an individual or entity
other than the applicant, the applicant shall submit to the County a copy of
the written approval from the owner of the alternative antenna structure, to
mount the wireless telecommunication facility on that alternative antenna
structure. Approval by the alternative antenna structure owner to allow the
installation of a wireless telecommunication facility shall include a guarantee
by the alternative antenna structure owner that it will either remove or cause
to be removed abandoned equipment in accordance with section
29-11 of this article. Written approval by the alternative antenna structure
owner shall also include a determination by the alternative antenna structure
owner that the alternative antenna structure is structurally capable of
supporting the proposed wireless telecommunication facility.  (Ord. 18-282, 8-
14-2018; Ord. 19-205, 6-11-2019)
29-6: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   Permits, Fees, Penalties:
      1.   Required Permits: Permits and permit fees for placement of wireless
telecommunication facilities are required. Except as otherwise provided in this
article, the regulations and the procedures for the application for, approval
of and revocation of such a permit shall be those required in the Kane County
Division of Transportation Permit Regulations and Access Control Regulations
and/or Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. All applications shall
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of these regulations. All
applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable application fee in the amounts as set forth in the following
schedule:
         a.   Single wireless telecommunication facility on an existing
structure: Six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) each facility.
         b.   Multiple wireless telecommunication facilities (maximum 25)
included in a single application to collocate on existing structures: Three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) each facility.
         c.   Wireless telecommunication facility that includes the replacement
or installation of a new structure or tower: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
each facility.
      2.   Annual Recurring Rate: The wireless services provider shall pay to
the County an annual recurring rate for each permitted wireless facility of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or an amount equal to the County's direct
costs, whichever is greater, to collocate telecommunication facilities on
County-owned infrastructure. Initial payment shall be received prior to
issuance of a permit by the County. Thereafter, payment shall be received
annually beginning on the second March 1st following the initial payment.
(Example: If initial payment is on January 1, 2019, the next payment is March
1, 2020, and the third payment is March 1, 2021.)
      3.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this article or
fails to comply with any requirements thereof, or who constructs, alters,
repairs, disconnects, removes any facility within the County highway rights-of-
way in violation of an approved plan or directive of the County Engineer or his
designee, or fails to apply for or obtain a permit issued under the provisions
of this article shall pay those penalties as provided section 9 of ordinance
no. 17-357 Kane County Division of Transportation Permit Regulations and Access
Control Regulations. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-7: ADJUSTMENTS OR RELOCATIONS OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
The wireless services provider shall be responsible for making adjustments,
relocations and/or removal of its facilities within the County right-of-way due
to highway construction, reconstruction or maintenance work within ninety (90)
calendar days of receipt of written notification as directed by the County
Engineer or a duly authorized designee of the County Engineer. If such facility
is not removed or relocated as directed within ninety (90) days of such notice,
the County may remove or cause the removal of such facility through whatever
actions are provided by law for removal and cost recovery therefor. (Ord. 18-
282, 8-14-2018)
29-8: DAMAGE TO WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY:
If a structure or attached wireless telecommunications facility is damaged, the
wireless services telecommunications facility provider shall make the wireless
telecommunications facility equipment safe or otherwise clear the wireless
telecommunications facility equipment from the County right-of-way within one
hour of notification to the wireless services provider or its designee. (Ord.
18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-9: DAMAGE TO COUNTY INFRASTRUCTURE OR PROPERTY:
The wireless services provider shall be financially responsible for any damage
to County infrastructure or property caused by the installation, maintenance,
replacement, use or operation of wireless telecommunication facilities. (Ord.
18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-10: VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Each location of a wireless telecommunication facility within County right-of-
way shall meet all of the requirements of this article. The decision of the
Division of Transportation to deny a permit application may be appealed to the
County Engineer or the authorized County Engineer's designee. The County
Engineer or authorized designee shall hear the request for a variance within
fourteen (14) calendar days following receipt of notice, and the decision shall
be the final action of the County with respect to the request for a variance.
Any request for a variance shall be made in writing to the County c/o the
Division of Transportation, 41W011 Burlington Road, St. Charles, Illinois 60175
within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of a decision by the County.
(Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-11: ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL:
Any wireless telecommunication facility located within the County right-of-way
that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall be
considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall remove same within
ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the County notifying the
owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered
mail, return-receipt-requested, by the County to such owner at the last known
address of such owner. In the case of wireless telecommunication facilities
attached to County-owned infrastructure, if such facility is not removed within
ninety (90) days of such notice, the County may remove or cause the removal of
such facility through the terms of the applicable pole attachment agreement or
through whatever actions are provided by law for removal thereof and cost
recovery therefor. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-12: COUNTY WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
This article shall not apply to wireless telecommunication facilities owned by
the County. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-13: NO IMPLIED WARRANTIES:
No implied or expressed warranty is made, given, granted, conferred or inferred
as to the capability, capacity or suitability of County owned infrastructure to
accept, support, maintain and/or provide for the needs and requirements of the
wireless telecommunication facility installation. Complete responsibility for
assuring that the County owned infrastructure is satisfactory for a wireless
telecommunication facility or its use will be the sole responsibility of the
permit applicant. In the event the permit applicant's selected County-owned
infrastructure is deemed inadequate by the permit applicant or the applicant's
consultant, the County will be under no obligation to augment or create any new
element to accommodate the proposed installation of the wireless
telecommunication facility. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-14: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT:
It is recognized that systems being created by the wireless telecommunication
facilities network require an interconnection and complete coverage for the
systems to function. It is also recognized that unexpected events, weather
conditions, traffic accidents and maintenance and construction operations and
the like can cause damage to roadway facilities and County owned infrastructure
within County right-of-way. Although replacement, reconstruction or re-
installation of County owned infrastructure is typically accomplished in an
efficient, timely and economical manner, there shall be no defined timeframe in
which this repair work shall be completed. In the event such incidents occur
causing damage to County-owned infrastructure which have wireless
telecommunication facilities mounted or otherwise attached thereto and in the
event such accidents or occurrences cause elements of or the complete wireless
telecommunication facility to be incapacitated, rendered inoperable, made
irreparable, or destroyed, the County and its affiliated and associated
departments and divisions, elected and appointed officials, employees, and
agents shall be held harmless and under no obligation to replace, reconstruct
or re-install the roadway facilities or any County owned infrastructure within
a certain time frame or to the same configuration or condition, nor shall there
be any obligation by the County to repair, reconfigure or replace any elements
of the wireless telecommunication facility. Such duties and responsibilities
for the repair, reconfiguration or replacement of the wireless
telecommunication facility shall be the sole responsibility and at the expense
of the wireless services provider. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
29-15: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any portion or section of this article is determined to be
invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall in no manner affect the remaining portions or sections of the
article, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 18-282, 8-14-2018)
CHAPTER 30
LOBBYIST REGISTRATION
SECTION:
30-1: Lobbyist Registration
30-1: LOBBYIST REGISTRATION:
   A.   Registration: Any person who, for compensation or otherwise, undertakes
to lobby, or any person or entity who employs or compensates another person for
the purposes of lobbying, shall register with the Kane County Clerk, unless
that person or entity qualifies for one or more of the exemptions listed under
subsection (C).
   B.   Definitions:
      1.   “Compensation” means any money, thing of value or financial benefits
received or to be received in return for services rendered or to be rendered,
for lobbying or as a consultant.
      2.   “Expenditure” means a payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit,
or gift of money or anything of value, and includes a contract, promise, or
agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make an expenditure for the
ultimate purpose of influencing executive, legislative or administrative
action, other than compensation as defined in (B)(1).
      3.   “Lobby” and “lobbying” means to communicate, including soliciting of
others to communicate with an official as defined in subsection (B)(7) for the
ultimate purpose of influencing any executive, legislative or administrative
action at the county government level. Soliciting of others to communicate
shall not include (i) the making of a grant by an organization recognized as
text exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code made in
accordance with Section 4945 and the regulations thereunder or (ii) a
communication by an organization recognized as tax exempt under Section 501(c)
(3) or 501 (c)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code to the public or a segment
thereof or to its members to communicate with legislators, executives, or
administrators with respect to a proposed action by legislature executive, or
administrator.
      4.   “Influencing” means any communication action, reportable expenditure
or other means used to promote, support, affect, modify, oppose or delay any
County action or to promote goodwill with officials as defined in subsection
(B)(7).
      5.   “Lobbyist” means any natural person who undertakes to lobby County
government as provided in subsection (B)(3).
      6.   “Lobbying entity” means any entity that hires, retains, employs, or
compensates a natural person to lobby State, municipal, county or township
government as provided in subsection (B)(3).
      7.   “Official” means any County board members, countywide elected
officials, and members of any board, commission, authority, or task force
created by local ordinance.
      8.   “Board” means the Kane County Board and any and all of its standing,
ad hoc or special committees or subcommittees.
      9.   “Person” means any individual, entity, firm, partnership, committee,
association, corporation, or any other organization or group of persons.
      10.   “Authorized agent” means the person designated by an entity or
lobbyist registered under this Ordinance as the person responsible for
submission and retention of reports required under this Ordinance.
      11.   “Client” means any person or entity that provides compensation to a
lobbyist to lobby State, municipal, county, or township government as provided
in subsection (B)(3) of this Section.
      12.   “Client registrant” means the client who is required to register
under this Ordinance.
      13.   “Unit of local government” has the meaning ascribed to it in
Section 1 of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution and also includes school
districts and community college districts.
      14.   “County” means County of Kane, Illinois.
      15.   “Consultant” means any natural person or entity who, for
compensation, provides advisory services, including but not limited to,
rendering opinions on or developing strategies for lobbying or influencing, to
a lobbyist or lobbying entity for the ultimate purpose of influencing any
executive, legislative, or administrative action. “Consultant” does not include
(i) an employee of the lobbyist or lobbying entity or (ii) an attorney or law
firm providing legal services, including drafting legislation or advising and
rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and legal effect of
proposed or pending legislation or any executive, legislative, or
administrative action.
      16.   “Executive action” means the proposal, drafting, development,
consideration, amendment, adoption, approval, promulgation, issuance,
modification, rejection or postponement by a county entity of a rule,
regulation, order, decision, determination, contractual arrangement, purchasing
agreement or other quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial action or proceeding.
      17.   “Legislative action” means the development, drafting, introduction,
consideration, modification, adoption, rejection, review, enactment or passage
or defeat any bill, amendment, resolution, ordinance, report, nomination,
administrative rule or other matter by either any county official or county
employee. Legislative action also means the action of any county official or
county employee in the development of the proposal for introduction before the
Board.
      18.   “Administrative action” means the execution or rejection of any
rule, regulation, legislative rule, standard fee, rate, contractual
arrangement, purchasing agreement or other delegated legislative or quasi-
legislative action to be taken or withheld by any county official or county
employee.
   C.   Persons Not Required to Register:
      1.   Persons or entities who, for the purpose of influencing any
executive, legislative or administrative action and who do not make
expenditures that are reportable pursuant to subsection (F) appear without
compensation or promise thereof only as witnesses before a legislative
committee for the purpose of explaining or arguing for or against the passage
of or action upon any legislation, ordinance, or regulation then pending before
the committee, or who seek compensation or promise thereof the approval or veto
of any legislation or ordinance by the County Board.
      2.   A unit of local government, State government, or agencies,
departments, commissions, boards, or task forces thereof.
      3.   An elected or appointed official or an employee of a unit of local
government, who in the scope of his or her public office or employment, seeks
to influence executive, legislative, or administrative action exclusively on
behalf    of that unit of local government.
      4.   Any full-time employee of a bona fide church or religious
organization who represents that organization solely for the purpose of
protecting the right of the members thereof to practice the religious doctrines
of that church or religious organization, or any such bona fide church or
religious organization.
      5.   Persons or entities who own, publish, or are employed by a newspaper
or other regularly published periodical, or who own or are employed by a radio
station, television station, or other bona fide news medium that in the
ordinary course of business disseminates news, editorial or other comment, or
paid advertisements that directly urge the passage or defeat of legislation.
This exemption is not applicable to such an individual insofar as he or she
receives additional compensation or expenses from some source other than the
bona fide news medium for the purpose of influencing executive, legislative, or
administrative action. This exemption does not apply to newspapers and
periodicals owned by or published by trade associations and not-for-profit
corporations engaged primarily in endeavors other than dissemination of news.
      6.   Persons or entities performing professional services in drafting
ordinances or resolutions or in advising clients regarding the construction and
effect of proposed or pending legislation when those professional services are
not otherwise, directly or indirectly, connected with executive, legislative,
or administrative action.
      7.   Persons or entities who are employees of departments, divisions, or
agencies of county government for the purpose of explaining how the executive,
legislative, or administrative action will affect those departments, divisions,
or agencies of county government.
      8.   Employees of county legislators, legislative agencies, and
legislative commission who, in the course of their official duties only, engage
in activities that otherwise qualify as lobbying. Legislators whose activities
are limited to occasional communications with an official of a unit of local
government on behalf of their employer in the ordinary course of their non-
public employment where (1) the primary duties of the employment are not to
influence executive, legislative, or administrative action and (2) the
legislator does not make any expenditures that are reportable pursuant to
Section (F).
      9.   Persons or entities in possession of technical skills and knowledge
of certain areas of executive, legislative, or administrative actions, whose
skills and knowledge would be helpful to officials when considering those
action, whose activities are limited to making occasional appearance for or
communicating on behalf of a registrant, and who do not make expenditures that
are reportable pursuant to subsection (F) even though receiving expense
reimbursement for those occasional appearances.
      10.   Persons or entities that receive no compensation other than
reimbursement for expenses of up to $500 per year while engaged in lobbying,
unless those person make expenditures that are reportable under subsection (F).
      11.   Any attorney or group or firm of attorneys (1) in connection with
the practice of law or (2) in the course of representing a client in relation
to any administrative, judicial, quasi-judicial proceeding or any witness
providing testimony in any administrative, judicial, or quasi-judicial
proceeding and who does not make expenditures that are reportable pursuant
Section (F).
      12.   Any attorney or group or firm of attorneys in the course of
representing a client in an administrative or executive action involving a
contractual or purchasing arrangement and who does not make expenditures that
are reportable pursuant to Section (F).
      13.   Persons or entities who, in the scope of their employment as a
vendor, offer or solicit an official for the purchase of any goods or services
when (1) the solicitation is limited to either an oral inquiry or written
advertisements and informative literature; or (2) the goods and services are
subject to competitive bidding requirements; or (3) the goods and services are
for sale at a cost not exceeding $5,000; and (4) the persons or entities do not
make expenditures that are reportable under Section (F).
      14.   Any witness providing testimony in any administrative, judicial, or
quasi-judicial proceeding.
   D.   Consultant. If, in the course of providing services as a consultant,
the consultant communicates with an official on behalf of the lobbyist or
lobbying entity for the ultimate purpose of influencing any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, or makes an expenditure on behalf of or
benefiting an official, the consultant shall register as a lobbyist within 2
business days of engaging in the communication with the official or making the
expenditure benefiting the official.
   E.   Registration and Disclosure. Every person and every entity required to
register under this Ordinance shall before any services is performed which
requires the person or entity to register, but in any event not later than 2
business days after being employed or retained, file in the Office of Kane
County Clerk a statement containing information with respect to each person or
entity employing, retaining, or benefitting from the services of the natural
person required to register. Every person required to registered under this
ordinance shall annually submit the registration required by this ordinance on
or before each January 31 containing the following information:
      1.   The registrants name, permanent address, e-mail address, if any, fax
number, if any, business telephone number, and temporary address, if the
registrant has a temporary address while lobbying.
      2.   If the registrant is an entity, the information required under
subsection (E)(1) for each natural person associated with the registrant who
will be lobbying, regardless of whether lobbying is a significant part of his
or her duties.
      3.   The name and address of the client or clients employing or retaining
the registrant to perform such services or on whose behalf the registrant
appears. If the client employing or retaining the registrant is a client
registrant, the statement shall also include the name and address of the client
or clients of the client registrant on whose behalf the registrant will be or
anticipates performing services.
      4.   If the registrant employs or retains a sub-registrant, the statement
shall include the name and address of the sub-registrant and identify the
client of the registrant on whose behalf the sub-registrant will be or is
anticipated to be performing services.
      5.   If the registrant retains a consultant, the statement shall include
the name and address of the consultant and identify the client or clients and
each executive, legislative branch agency for which the consultant is to
provide advisory services.
      6.   For those identified under (E)(3), (E)(4) and (E)(5) a brief
description of the executive, legislative, or administrative action in
reference to which such service is to be rendered.
      7.   Each executive and legislative branch agency of the County the
registrant expects to lobby during the registration period.
      8.   Each elected or appointed public office in this State to be held by
the registrant at any time during the registration period.
      9.   A confirmation that the registrant has a sexual harassment policy
and that such policy shall be made available to any individual within 2
business days upon written request (including electronic requests), that any
person may contact the authorized agent of the registrant to report allegations
of sexual harassment.
   F.   Reports. Every person registered under this Ordinance shall file a
report with the Kane County Clerk, under oath before a notary public, reporting
expenditures related to lobbying, including any expenditures made by a
consultant in performing services for the lobbying entity.
      1.   The report shall itemize each individual expenditure or transaction
and shall include the name of the official on whose behalf the expenditure was
made, the name of the client if the expenditure was made on behalf of a client,
the total amount of the expenditure, a description of the expenditure, the date
on which the expenditure occurred and the subject matter of the lobbying
activity, if any.
      2.   Expenditures attributable to lobbying officials shall be listed and
reported according to the following categories:
         a.   Travel and lodging on behalf of others, including, but not
limited to, all travel and living accommodations made for or on behalf of
county.
         b.   Meals, beverages, and other entertainment.
         c.   Gifts (indicating, which, if any, are on the basis of personal
friendship).
         d.   Honoraria.
         e.   Any other thing or service of value not listed under categories
a. through d. setting forth a description of the expenditure.
      3.   Expenditures incurred for hosting receptions, benefits and other
large gatherings held for purposes of goodwill or otherwise to influence
executive, legislative or administrative action to which where there are 25 or
more county officials invited shall be reported listing only the total amount
of the expenditure, the date of the event and the estimated number of officials
in attendance.
      4.   Each individual expenditure required to be reported shall include
all expenses made for or on behalf of county officials and members of the
immediate family of those persons.
      5.   The following items need not be included in the report:
         a.   Reasonable and bona fide expenditures made by the registrant for
personal sustenance, lodging, travel, office expenses and clerical or support
staff.
         b.   Salaries, fees and other compensation paid to the registrant for
purposes of lobbying.
         c.   Any contributions required to be reported under Article 9 of the
Election Code.
         d.   Expenditures made by a registrant on behalf of an official that
are returned or reimburse prior to the deadline for submission of the report.
      6.    Reports under this section must be filed semi-monthly.
      7.   Registrant shall preserve for a period of 2 years all receipts and
records used in preparing reports.
      8.   Registrant who terminates employment or duties which required him to
register under this ordinance shall give the Kane County Clerk, within 30 days
after the date of such termination, written notice of such termination and
shall include therewith a report of the expenditures described herein, covering
the period of time since the filing of his last report to date of termination
of employment. Such notice and report shall be final and relieve such
registrant of further reporting under this Ordinance, unless and until he takes
employment or assumes duties requiring him to again register under this
Ordinance.
   G.   Contingent Fee Prohibited. No person shall retain or employ another to
lobby or provide services as a consultant with respect to any legislative,
executive, or administrative action for compensation contingent in whole or in
part upon the outcome of the action, and no person shall accept any such
employment or render any such service for compensation contingent upon the
outcome of County action.
   H.   Duties of the Clerk. It shall be duty of the Kane County Clerk to
provide appropriate forms for the registration and reporting of information
required by this Ordinance and to keep such registrations and reports on file
in his or her office for three years from the date of filing. The Kane County
Clerk shall also maintain a listing registered lobbyists. Such records and
listings shall be considered public information and open to public inspection
during normal business hours. The Kane County Clerk shall review all forms that
are filed for completeness. The Kane County Clerk shall report all violations
and suspected violations of this Ordinance to the State’s Attorney of Kane
County.
   I.   Venue. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be prosecuted in the
Circuit Court of the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit, Kane County, Illinois, by the
State’s Attorney of Kane County.
   J.   Severability. If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, the decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
   K.   Petition To Member Or Public Official. Nothing in this Ordinance shall
be construed to infringe in any way the right of a citizen to lawfully petition
a County Board member or any other county official as guaranteed by the
constitutions of the United States and the State of Illinois.
   L.   Ethics Training. Any person required to register as a lobbyist under
this Ordinance must complete a program of ethics training provided by the
Secretary of State. Any person registered under this Ordinance must complete
the training program before registration or renewal is deemed complete.
   M.   Harassment and Discrimination Prevention Training. Any person required
to register as a lobbyist under this Ordinance must complete, at least
annually, a harassment and discrimination prevention training program provided
by the Secretary of State. Any person registered under this Ordinance must
complete the training program before registration or renewal is deemed
complete.
   N.   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance,
except for violation of (E)(9) and (M), shall be guilty of a business offense
and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
violation. Any person in violation of any provision of this ordinance is
prohibited for a period of three years from the date of such conviction from
lobbying.
      1.   Any person found guilty for failure to file any report within the
time designated or the reporting of false or incomplete information shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance. Every day that a report or
registration is late shall constitute a separate violation.
      2.   It is a violation of this ordinance to engage in lobbying or to
employ any person for the purpose of lobbying who is not registered with the
Clerk, except upon condition that the person register and the person does in
fact register within 2 business days after being employed or retained for
lobbying services. (Ord. 22-93, 3-8-2022)
